block-time published-time 3.10am GMT

In some good news, Sydney Seaplanes has successfully completed a demonstration of a flight between Sydney and Canberra, landing on Lake Burley Griffin, and our Mike Bowers was there to capture the moment.

Sydney Seaplanes ran a demonstration flight today between Sydney and Canberra, landing on Lake Burley Griffin. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian

The company has applied to open up the route to consumers, hoping to fly three return flights a day between Rose Bay and Lake Burley Griffin.

Sydney Seaplanes after landing on Lake Burley Griffin. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian

They’re still working with the relevant authorities on opening the route up, but hope to have it up and running in the second half of 2021.

Sydney Seaplanes on Lake Burley Griffin. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.13am GMT

block-time published-time 2.59am GMT

First it was toilet paper, now lobsters. Woolworths is introducing limits on its half-priced lobsters after shoppers rushed to snap up the crustaceans at only $20 a pop.

7 News  is reporting Woolworths has sold more WA rock lobsters in the first four days of the half-price promotion than it did during the whole of last year’s Christmas season.

“Since introducing our WA rock lobsters across Australia last week, we’ve seen incredible customer demand,” it said.

Best to snap them up before they’re gone. And if you’re wondering what to do with your new, cheap lobsters, we also have you covered:

Related:  Lobsters are being sold for just $20 each in Australia – here's how to cook one

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.15am GMT

block-time published-time 2.38am GMT

Australia's payroll jobs rise in past fortnight

The Australian Bureau of Statistics has said Australia’s economic recovery has continued, with payroll jobs again rising in the past fortnight.

AAP has the story:

Employment continues to improve across the nation with more than three-quarters of jobs lost during the early stage of the Covid-19 pandemic restored.

The Australian Bureau of Statistics said payroll jobs rose by a further 0.4% across the fortnight to 28 November.

“More than three-quarters of payroll jobs lost to mid-April had been regained by the end of November, however they remained 2% lower than mid-March,” the bureau’s Bjorn Jarvis said.

The figures are a prelude to the official labour force figures due on Thursday.

Economists expect a less spectacular 40,000 increase in the number of people employed during November, after the surprising 178,800 surge in October.

That is expected to keep the unemployment rate at 7%, still shy of the 22-year high of 7.5% seen in June.

Meanwhile, consumer confidence has struck new highs for 2020, which should have retailers rubbing their hands in anticipation of a strong Christmas shopping season.

Retailers hope for a strong Christmas shopping season. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP

The ANZ-Roy Morgan consumer confidence index rose 1.7% in the past week to 111.2 points, with most of the survey’s sub-indices now back or even higher than their pre-pandemic levels.

The “confidence in future economic conditions” index is at an 18-month high.

A separate analysis by Deloitte Access Economics says the retail industry has weathered the pandemic remarkably well, and the Christmas period is looking more positive for retailers than expected.

In its retail forecasts report, it notes the December quarter will be the first with limited Covid restrictions since the second wave hit Victoria.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.53am GMT

block-time published-time 2.21am GMT

The secretary of NSW Department of Education has said 31 government schools on the north coast have been shut due to flooding.

enltrCommunities are still getting hit hard up the NSW North Coast. We now have 31 Government schools not operational because of flood waters and access issues.

— Mark Scott (@mscott) December 15, 2020

The SES has issued evacuation orders for Condong, Tumbulgum and surrounding areas. The evacuation centre is at Wollumbin high school.

enltrMajor flood warning just issued for Bellinger River. From the @BOM_NSW  : “Floodwaters are moving toward Bellingen, arriving this afternoon.” This is the river right now (there is a bridge under there), rain torrential. @abcnews pic.twitter.com/6yZTRhKC4W

— Jake Lapham (@JakeLapham) December 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31am GMT

block-time published-time 2.15am GMT

An enormous whale carcass has washed up on a Surf Coast beach. Authorities urge caution, saying the carcass could attract sharks:

enltrIncredible photos of a massive whale carcass on a Surf Coast beach have emerged as authorities issue a shark warning for nearby beaches. Read more: https://t.co/NPhlhDAV9t pic.twitter.com/FGXZAxc3Bf

— Herald Sun (@theheraldsun) December 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31am GMT

block-time published-time 2.09am GMT

Beaches across the east coast, particularly in northern NSW and southern Queensland, are being battered by strong winds and heavy rain, causing large chunks of the shore line to wash away.

“A year ago, Australians were fighting bushfires, now slabs of our eastern coastline are falling into the ocean,” said Gavan McFadzean, the Australian Conservation Foundation’s climate program manager. “Australians are experiencing climate change right now.”

McFadzean had warned the coming wet summer could bring further coastal erosion.

“The world’s top scientists  warn melting sea ice and glaciers will raise sea levels by 30–60cm by 2100, even if global warming is capped at two degrees. That means a lot more of the coastal damage we’re witnessing right now.”

enltrThe tip of Bribie Island is barely holding on after another morning of rough surf and king tides. Vegetation has held a lot of the land in place, but water is still rushing through to Pumicestone Passage. Report on 7NEWS at 6pm. https://t.co/T9Yp0jMX9G #qldweather #7NEWS pic.twitter.com/80rBhlAMSn

— 7NEWS Brisbane (@7NewsBrisbane) December 15, 2020

It comes as the tip of Bribie Island is barely holding on – only vegetation keeping it connected to the mainland – and as Byron Bay’s pristine beaches are battered by the storms.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.33am GMT

block-time published-time 1.59am GMT

New variant of Covid-19 in England

The World Health Organization is investigating a new Covid-19 variant in England.

The WHO announced the nre variant had emerged in the UK, but said there is no evidence the strain behaves differently to the existing types of the virus.

“We are aware of this genetic variant reported in 1,000 individuals in England,” the WHO’s top emergencies expert Mike Ryan told a news briefing in Geneva. “Authorities are looking at its significance. We have seen many variants, this virus evolves and changes over time.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.49am GMT

block-time published-time 1.42am GMT

The ACT has reported no new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, keeping the territory’s total at 117. There are also no active cases in the ACT.

114 people have recovered from the virus there, and there have been three deaths.

There were also minor changes announced to the ACT’s stage 4 restrictions, with businesses and venues now able to have one person per two square metres of usable space.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.34am GMT

block-time published-time 1.28am GMT

As flood warnings are issued for northern NSW and as storms lash the northern rivers, some images have come through showing what residents are facing today:

enltrFLOODED | Mount St Patrick Primary School in Murwillumbah is under, and the Showgrounds are still completely submerged @nbnnews pic.twitter.com/oTNxUzi6tF

— Georgia Schefe (@GeorgiaSchefe) December 15, 2020

enltrWith heavy rain continuing to fall in Northern NSW, motorists travelling on Waterfall Way, Dorrigo, have been left to find an alternate route as Newell Falls overflows onto the road. There are flood evacuation warnings further North: https://t.co/3pIfxekCAz #NSWstorms #9News pic.twitter.com/5UphyUoGSZ

— 9News Sydney (@9NewsSyd) December 15, 2020

enltrThis is how you order coffee at Chinderah’s Cubby Bakehouse.. the Tweed River has broken its banks and is rising. @sunriseon7 @7NewsSydney @7NewsBrisbane pic.twitter.com/4nIadQW1gJ

— Bianca Stone (@Bianca_Stone) December 14, 2020

enltrFlooding is impacting Tumbulgum in Northern New South Wales. The Tweed River is expected to peak around 2.3 metres - just below the major flood level @10NewsFirstSyd @10NewsFirstQLD pic.twitter.com/NxnhlQN8Ji

— Johnpaul Gonzo (@JohnpaulGonzo) December 14, 2020

enltrTweed River is rising by the minute.. it’s alee ready over the road and we’re yet to reach high tide. @sunriseon7 pic.twitter.com/1Yw3cs5ZUM

— Bianca Stone (@Bianca_Stone) December 14, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.30am GMT

block-time published-time 1.20am GMT

The Reserve Bank’ s minutes of its December meeting are out. The 20-second summary: although the recovery is going better than expected, economic supports should stay in place.

It said: ”Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that the recovery had established reasonable momentum, aided by the lifting of restrictions in Victoria. Expectations for GDP growth in the September and December quarters had been upgraded over the preceding month, and employment had also recovered faster than anticipated. At the same time, members noted that there continued to be a significant amount of spare capacity in the labour market and the economy more generally. The recovery was still expected to be uneven and protracted, with inflation remaining low. Substantial policy support would therefore be required for a considerable period.”

On the labour market, it noted employment had “grown strongly” in October despite tapering of jobkeeper wage subsidies, and the participation rate has also increased.

There were a few words of warning:

“Despite these positive developments, members noted that the unemployment rate had ticked up in recent months and that broader measures of labour underutilisation remained high. Hours worked were around 4% lower than before the pandemic, and many employed workers were still on reduced or zero hours. The recovery in employment and average hours worked for full-time workers had been much more subdued compared with those working part time. Members agreed that, on the whole, there was still a significant amount of spare capacity in the labour market and that this would remain a key policy challenge for some time.

“A further indication of spare capacity in the labour market was low wages growth. Members noted that growth in the wage price index slowed to 0.1% in the September quarter to be just 1.4% in year-ended terms. This was the slowest wages growth in the two-decade history of the series.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.37am GMT

block-time published-time 1.16am GMT

The ACCC is suing the company behind Michel’s Patisserie, Brumby’s Bakery, Donut King and Gloria Jean’s Coffee for allegedly ripping off its franchisees.

The ACCC is seeking fines and “adverse publicity orders” against the Retail Food Group (RFG), which is accused of engaging in unconscionable conduct and making false or misleading representations.

The ACCC will argue that RFG broke the law when it sold or licensed 42 loss-making stores to franchisees between 2015 and 2019.

The company behind Michel’s Patisserie and other brands is being sued by the ACCC. Photograph: GV Images/Alamy

“The prospective franchisees simply had no way of knowing the true financial performance of the stores, and we allege that Retail Food Group took advantage of this when selling or licensing the stores,” ACCC chair Rod Sims said.

In documents issued to new franchisees, RFG claimed it could not estimate earnings for particular franchises.

RFG is also accused of misappropriating funds. Franchises had to pay marketing and advertising fees but the money was diverted to “personnel costs” for executives and employees who were not in marketing roles, according to the ACCC.

In regards to the marketing fund of Michel’s Patisserie, $22m was shifted towards other purposes.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.21am GMT

block-time published-time 12.55am GMT

There have been no new cases reported from South Australia today, with the state reporting no active cases and no patients in hospital.

enltrSouth Australian COVID-19 update 15/12/20. For more information, go to https://t.co/mYnZsG7zGQ  or contact the South Australian COVID-19 Information Line on 1800 253 787. pic.twitter.com/vibCCyhHY5

— SA Health (@SAHealth) December 15, 2020

block-time published-time 12.51am GMT

Cedar Meats did not breach workplace safety laws

Cedar Meats, the site of a major Covid cluster in Victoria, has been found not in breach of workplace safety laws, WorkSafe Victoria has said.

An investigation was launched in May after 88 cases originated at the meatworks during Victoria’s first wave.

Worksafe Victoria CEO Colin Radford  told the Victorian parliament’s Covid committee that the investigation had concluded, with no breaches found.

“That investigation has concluded, and we have not found evidence of any breaches of the Occupational Health and Safety Act,” Radford said.

The Cedar Meats meatworks in the Melbourne suburb of Brooklyn. Photograph: Darrian Traynor/Getty Images

Guardian Australia reported in May  that part of the investigation included whether workers were provided appropriate personal protective equipment, as well as checks on measures to ensure workers maintained physical distancing wherever possible and had access to hygiene products, such as hand sanitiser. Cedar Meats workers were not given the option to stay home from work until Wednesday 29 April. Masks were provided to workers who stayed on only after four cases were identified and the plant was ordered to close.

Radford said there were still 24 investigations still under way into workplaces including aged care, retail and the hotel quarantine program.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.23am GMT

block-time published-time 12.44am GMT

The SES says up to 1,000 properties between Condong and Tumbulgum are in a “high danger area” as the region is ordered to evacuate.

The Tweed River has burst its banks near Tumbulgum and some flooding is reported. Flash-flooding has closed roads and isolated small communities already.

The SES says electricity, phones, internet, water and sewerage could be interrupted, and people in those areas need to closely monitor the weather and road closures.

A flooded road at Tumbulgum on Monday. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

Energy provider Essential Energy says more than 700 homes from Kempsey to the Queensland border are without power and crews are working to restore services, although flooding is restricting access to 120 homes.

“If you remain in the area after this time, you may become trapped and it may be too dangerous for NSW SES to rescue you,” the SES warned.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.48am GMT

block-time published-time 12.31am GMT

Still with Scott Morrison, in Tasmania, being asked about China and the coal ban and the escalating diplomatic and trade war.

Q: When will you speak to the Chinese president man-to-man?(Yes, that happened.)  Morrison doesn’t look that sure about man-to-man: “Whether it is man-to-man, we will have a direct conversation with each other at some point.” e says.

The prime minister thinks there will be some opportunities for that over the course of 2021: “I hope it happens sooner than that, but there is no barrier to that occurring on the Australian side.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36am GMT

block-time published-time 12.23am GMT

The prime minister is in Tasmania unveiling a new energy agreement with Tasmania.

Naturally journalists are asking Scott Morrison  about China and the reports about coal. Morrison says the government is seeking clarification from Beijing but if there’s a ban in place “that would obviously be in breach of WTO rules” and “obviously in breach of our own free trade agreement – so we would hope that is certainly not the case”.

He says Australia has other export markets for coal.

Prime minister Scott Morrison Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian

Asked whether the government has messed up the relationship with Beijing he says he thinks not. Australia has been right to stand up for liberal democratic values and for sovereignty. Control over foreign investment, critical infrastructure and communications were not things countries should cede.

Morrison says Australia was also right to want to understand the causes of the Covid-19 pandemic with the World Health Organization. (That’s not quite how this last point went down but let’s keep rolling.) He says people who accuse him of creating a hash of the Australia-China relationship “might want to nominate which one of Australia’s national sovereign interests... the government should have traded away”.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.29am GMT

block-time published-time 12.19am GMT

Shares in coalminers plunge on China ban reports

Shares in coalminers plunged this morning on reports that China has formalised a ban on Australian coal.

About 11.15am, Whitehaven Coal was down 8.36% and Yancoal was down 10.44%.

Big miner BHP, which makes most of its money from iron ore but owns coalmines, was down 2.27%.

Its rival Rio Tinto, which does not mine any coal, dropped just 0.97%.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.32am GMT

block-time published-time 12.14am GMT

NSW has recorded no new cases of the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, but five new cases were reported in overseas travellers.

enltrWATCH: Dr Jeremy McAnulty provides a #COVID19  update for Tuesday 15 December 2020. pic.twitter.com/R6tAVLIXng

— NSW Health (@NSWHealth) December 15, 2020

In the video above, Dr Jeremy McAnulty noted that testing numbers had dropped slightly, to 5,333, compared with 6,173 in the previous 24 hours.

NSW Health has encouraged people to continue getting tested and to not be complacent in the face of low case numbers.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.17am GMT

block-time published-time 12.05am GMT

Craig McLachlan found not guilty

Actor Craig McLachlan has been found not guilty of indecently assaulting and assaulting four women during a run of the Rocky Horror Show in Australia.

Melbourne magistrate Belinda Wallington threw out all 13 charges.

The Gold Logie winner pleaded not guilty to the seven charges of indecent assault and six of common assault in relation to four women while working on the Melbourne leg of a 2014 stage show.

He was alleged to have touched one woman near her genitals during a live show while he was hidden from the audience but she could be seen, as well as that he forced his tongue into another woman’s mouth during an unscripted kiss, and that he twice kissed another co-star when backstage.

Australian actor Craig McLachlan arrives at his barrister’s office in in Sydney on Friday 6 November. He has been found not guilty of indecent assault. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP

He was also accused of running his hand up the leg of a fourth woman while she was performing.

He maintained his innocence during a contested hearing that began last year.

He completely denied some of the incidents happened, and for those he didn’t contest, he said they were completely consensual or in the spirit of the show. He was apparently given licence to improvise during the show.

The actor has begun defamation action against the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald, the ABC and one of the women over news reports last year that alleged he engaged in sexual misconduct, harassment and indecent assault during the production.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.17am GMT

block-time published-time 11.57pm GMT

Evacuations at Condong, Tumbulgum and surrounds

NSWSES has issued evacuation orders at Condong, Tumbulgum and surrounding areas.

enltrFLOOD EVACUATION ORDER -NSWSES is directing people within Condong, Tumbulgum and surrounding areas to evacuate the high danger area via the Tweed valley Way. Evacuation Centre is at Wollumjbin High School. Continue reading https://t.co/BCnxAe6tsR pic.twitter.com/6DWtNUAO5k

— NSWSES (@NSWSES) December 14, 2020

Floodwaters have begun to close local low-lying roads and the Tweed Valley Way to the north of Tumbulgum.

The SES expects floodwaters to begin inundating the area and has told people that if they remain they may be trapped.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.00am GMT

block-time published-time 11.49pm GMT

Just a little more on the Mokbel case: Victoria’s court of appeal quashed the drug convictions even though he had already served the time on those particular charges.

Mokbel remains behind bars on other drug charges though.

Rowena Orr, lawyer for the commonwealth, said the director would not pursue a retrial.

Greek police with Tony Mokbel after he appeared at Greece’s supreme court in Athens in October 2007. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty Images

“The director has already determined in this matter to not conduct a retrial,” she said. “Given that the applicant has served his sentence, the director has made that determination.”

The convictions were set aside due to the involvement of gangland barrister and police informer Nicola Gobbo, famously known as Lawyer X.

Between September 2005 and March 2006 Gobbo was representing Mokbel in court and acting as a police informant.

Mokbel famously fled to Greece while standing trial as the financier behind the importing operation, and was convicted in his absence in March 2006. He was eventually captured at a coffee shop and extradited to Australia.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.58pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.38pm GMT

The Bureau of Meteorology has updated its flood warning for New South Wales, with warnings now issued for Thora and Bellingen.

enltr??Updated moderate #Flood  Warning issued for #Thora  and #Bellingen.  Moderate flooding is occurring at #Thora.  Floodwaters are moving toward #Bellingen , expected to arrive this afternoon. See https://t.co/jwNlsRHUql  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES.  #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/EkKNiUJZyX

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 14, 2020

Bowraville is near its flooding peak, and Macksville is still expecting its peak later this morning.

enltr?? #Flood  Warning updated for #Nambucca  River. #Browerville  is currently near its peak with minor flooding. #Macksville  is expected to peak later this morning. See https://t.co/2hlmIaHbCy  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES.  #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/clj5I27Imz

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 14, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.31pm GMT

The finance and outgoing trade minister, Simon Birmingham, has addressed reports from Chinese state media  that confirm China is imposing import restrictions on Australian coal.

He tends “not to believe everything... in Chinese state-owned media but we have seen a pattern of disruption in relation to Australian coal” – so there seems no reason not to believe the report.

Birmingham made the case that as well as being discriminatory against Australia, the restrictions will harm China:

Finance and outgoing trade minister Simon Birmingham Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian

“These actions don’t just have impacts in relation to Australia as trade, but ultimately they have flow-on impacts in terms of China shifting from using Australian coal to coal from other producers around the world. That is of detriment in a range of different ways to Chinese production.

Australian coal is around 1.5 times more efficient in terms of energy production than most other competitor nations, including Chinese domestic coal. That means that to get the same level of energy generation, China will end up having to use more coal from other sources and generate more emissions from those sources, which will do anything but help China [to] meet some of the commitments it has made to the world around missions reduction as well.”

Asked about reports the Chinese government had issued a “please explain” on the elevated iron ore price , Birmingham said he was “not aware of any particular businesses that have faced that” because “the reports in that regard relate to industry bodies or associations in China, expressing their concern about the prices”.

Birmingham said the iron ore price was a function of market forces, and merely responded to lower supply and spikes in demand.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.19pm GMT

Queensland records no new local cases of Covid

Queensland has recorded no new local cases of Covid-19, but has one new case acquired overseas.

It brings total cases in Queensland to 1,228, including six deaths.

enltrTuesday, 15 December – coronavirus cases in Queensland: • 0 locally acquired cases, 1 new case acquired overseas • 19 active cases • 1,228 total confirmed cases • 1,398,254 tests Sadly, six Queenslanders with COVID-19 have died. 1,204 patients have recovered. #covid19 pic.twitter.com/5uv7EdfVcZ

— Annastacia Palaszczuk (@AnnastaciaMP) December 14, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.25pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.14pm GMT

Drug kingpin Tony Mokbel has cocaine trafficking conviction quashed

Underworld figure Tony Mokbel has had a cocaine trafficking conviction quashed by the court of appeal, according to multiple reports, in yet another case impacted by the Nicola Gobbo-Lawyer X scandal.

Tony Mokbel Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP

enltr #Breaking  : Drug baron Tony Mokbel has had a conviction for cocaine trafficking quashed by the Court of Appeal over the #LawyerX  legal scandal. CDPP said they would not pursue a re-trial. The COA will reserve their decision whether to order re-trial or acquittal @theheraldsun

— Genevieve Alison (@GenevieveAlison) December 14, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.21pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.12pm GMT

Jill Hennessy, the Victorian attorney general, had a very funny slip-up while responding to a question about the reforms of the court system caused by Covid-19.

She was trying to speak about “video kiosks” which Legal Aid Victoria had been using at regional and rural locations to speak to clients.

Victoria’s attorney general Jill Hennessy Photograph: Scott Barbour/AAP

But she accidentally said “video chaos” – a slip we can surely all appreciate because it’s been (a) quite a year and (b) most of us have spent stupid amounts of time in video meetings.

You perhaps have a favourite 2020 video meeting story. This is undoubtedly mine.

Related:  New Yorker fires Jeffrey Toobin after he reportedly exposed himself on Zoom

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.19pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.01pm GMT

Victoria’s attorney general Jill Hennessy has confirmed the government is still trying to find a special investigator to examine whether crimes were committed by current or former police officers and the gangland lawyer Nicola Gobbo.

The royal commission into police informants made the recommendation last month  to appoint the investigator.

Former gangland lawyer Nicola Gobbo Photograph: SUPPLIED/PR IMAGE

Hennessy said the government was making sure they appointed a suitably qualified person, and hoped to do so soon.

“We want it done as soon as possible, if I can give you and the committee that assurance,” she said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.52pm GMT

Dr Tom Murray, a research fellow at Griffith University, has spoken to the ABC about his work investigating erosion at Byron Bay.

Murray says that a large “sand slug” has built up at a section known as the pass over the past six to 12 months. That meant that Byron’s Main beach was not getting the sand it usually did to protect it from storms coming from the east.

Surfers along the beach at Byron Bay on Monday. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

That made erosion particularly bad during the past few days.

“We only started recently looking into the Byron coast [so] I couldn’t comment on worst case, but locals are saying it is the worst in a generation at Main beach. “When we get a big storm from the east there is no sand buffer to protect against storm erosion. But... over the next few months it will fill in and the beach will come back.

“When we live on the coast we live in a highly dynamic environment and we do have to be ready to see these images and experience these events.”

Murray reckons the beach will correct naturally when the sand moves from the slug to the beach, but said climate change was affecting wave patterns that could have a longer-term impact.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.59pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.39pm GMT

1,000 properties at risk from flash floods in northern NSW

Flash flooding has closed roads and isolated small communities in northern NSW, with potentially 1,000 properties affected, as that region and south-east Queensland brace for another day of wild weather, AAP reports.

The State Emergency Service has issued a flood evacuation warning for south Murwillumbah, Tumbulgum and surrounding areas after the the Bureau of Meteorology predicted flooding for the Tweed River.

Heavy rain continued overnight in the Tweed catchment and will continue.

The SES says electricity, phones, internet, water and sewerage could be interrupted, and people need to closely monitor the weather and road closures.

A flooded road at Tumbulgum, NSW, on Monday. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

Residents should be prepared to evacuate when instructed to do so.

A flood evacuation order would be issued by the NSWSES if and when evacuations are required.

It warns once floodwater begins inundating the area, roads may be cut, trapping anyone who stays behind.

“If you remain in the area after this time, you may become trapped and it may be too dangerous for NSWSES to rescue you,” the SES warned.

Major flooding is expected at Tumbulgum around midday. A high tide and moderate flooding is forecast at Murwillumbah and Chinderah during Tuesday morning.

Further rises are possible if the rain intensifies again in the next few hours.

Minor flooding is occurring along the Nambucca River at Bowraville, with moderate flooding expected on Tuesday morning.

Minor flooding is possible at Macksville later on Tuesday morning.

NSWSES assistant commissioner Nicole Hogan said there had been more than 1,000 calls for help in the past few days.

“There are no evacuations taking place at the moment,” she told ABC TV. “It is a warning for the community so that they can prepare to evacuate should the situation arise.

“There was significant rainfall within the Tweed area last night. We’ve also had significant weather in Coffs Harbour and Lismore.”

A low-pressure system off the coast of south-east Queensland has brought massive rainfall and gale-force winds which combined with king tides to wash away much of Byron Bay’s Main beach on Monday.

On the Gold Coast the weather system has caused massive erosion, with the surf club at Currumbin becoming an island.

Southport beach on the Gold Coast on Sunday. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

A team of 300 SES workers from across the state were sent to support the northern NSW teams, as well as resources from Fire and Rescue, NSW RFS and NSW police.

“They’ll be out there working with the community, giving them information. If required, flood rescue. And in other instances, perhaps looking at tarping roofs, storm damage requests,” Hogan said.

Queensland Fire and Emergency Services deputy commissioner Mark Roche said his crews had received about 1,400 requests for help, mainly for leaking roofs, tarping and downed trees.

The wind and heavy rain was expected to ease, but he urged people to remain vigilant, stay out of floodwaters, drive with caution and turn back if they see a road or a bridge that’s flooded.

“As we say, if it’s flooded, forget it,” he told ABC TV.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.01pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.20pm GMT

The final Guardian Essential poll of the year found most of us reckon we’re the victim in this trade war with China, by the way.

Related:  Essential poll: two-thirds of Australians think Canberra is victim in trade war with Beijing

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.29pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.17pm GMT

Simon Birmingham 'deeply troubled' by China moving away from Australian coal

Trade minister Simon Birmingham has spoken to the ABC about China moving away from Australian coal  imports.

A truck at the Mount Thorley Warkworth mine near Muswellbrook in the NSW Hunter Valley. Photograph: Jessica Hromas/The Guardian

“We see these reports and obviously, again, are deeply troubled by them,” Birmingham said.

“They, if true, would indicate discriminatory trade practices being deployed by Chinese authorities and we would urge them to rule that out swiftly and demonstrate that they are continuing to operate in a manner consistent with the type of market principles they committed to as part of their membership of the World Trade Organization and through their free trade agreement.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.55pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.10pm GMT

I can recommend a look at the latest in Guardian Australia’s dreams interrupted series.

Related:  This year has shown how easily goals can be crushed. Will I have the government's support?

block-time published-time 10.02pm GMT

No doubt some of you would have made the connection between this nutty weather and climate change and wondered how that’s all going. Not well.

Related:  Australia's path to net zero emissions is massively behind schedule | Greg Jericho

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.55pm GMT

If you’re hankering for some politics, Victoria’s attorney-general Jill Hennessy is currently appearing before the public accounts and estimates committee.

She is being asked about funding for Ibac , the Lawyer X scandal , and various other issues.

block-time published-time 9.41pm GMT

Victoria records no new Covid cases

No new cases anywhere in Victoria, including in those pesky quarantine hotels (which are apparently not so pesky anymore and will not cause us any more problems).

enltrYesterday there were 0 new local cases, 0 new cases acquired overseas and 0 deaths reported. 7 active cases remain in quarantine. 8,296 test results were received - thanks, #EveryTestHelps  to #StaySafeStayOpen.  https://t.co/lIUrl0ZEco pic.twitter.com/pKNWFhlMc

— VicGovDHHS (@VicGovDHHS) December 14, 2020

That is a frankly wild 46 days without a locally acquired case.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.35pm GMT

There’s no storms in Victoria, but there was an enormous demand for ambulance services last night.

enltrUPDATE Ambulance Victoria is experiencing an extremely high demand for ambulances in the metropolitan region. All Code 1 (the most urgent and critically unwell) patients are being seen in a timely manner. (1 of 3)

— Ambulance Victoria (@AmbulanceVic) December 14, 2020

General secretary of the Victorian ambulance union Danny O’Brien told Melbourne radio station 3AW  that a code red emergency was called, a rare event that has only occurred a handful of times, such as during the thunderstorm asthma event in 2016.

He said at the busiest point there were more than 100 callouts deemed as requiring an ambulance, but not a single ambulance available.

It’s unclear what caused the spike of demand, but Hill reckoned it may have just been a “flow-on” effect of people not attending to their health properly during the pandemic. Melbourne was also pretty hot yesterday, with temperatures in the low 30s.

Last night was “unprecedented in that it’s not tied to anything other than an unusual surge in workload”, Hill said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.25pm GMT

'The bushfire season last year taught us to expect the unexpected,' Gladys Berejiklian says

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian  has just spoken to the media, providing an update on the weather situation (and confirming she has booked in some leave for January).

“We’ve already had evacuations in place in South Murwillumbah. We don’t want anybody to suffer injury or worse. We know that the storm conditions haven’t eased and they’re continuing, and I’ll have better advice in a couple of hours.

“But the advice to date is that the conditions will ease by today. But in the meantime, we expect parts of the north coast and mid-north coast to continue to get lashed.

“I know for many people, they’re used to flooding conditions. But the bushfire season last year taught us to expect the unexpected. What we saw last year was catastrophic conditions that we’d never been seen before.”

Berejiklian said government weather experts had predicted an increase in extreme weather events, but she was hoping these events wouldn’t continue throughout summer.

She said there would no doubt be an impact on tourism operators, who had already copped months without bookings because of the Covid-19 pandemic, but she believed communities would “bounce back”.

“We’ve actually seen regional tourism pick up in the second-half of this year, and certainly tourism operators have had more of a spread out season.

“So hopefully any impact that’s sustained by the operators won’t be so devastating. But, of course, we can’t make that assessment until the storms pass and we work out what the damage is.”

New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.39pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.18pm GMT

Byron Bay restaurant owner says he's 'dodged a bullet'

Ben Kirkwell believes he’s “dodged a bullet” after his Byron Bay restaurant narrowly avoided being washed into the Pacific Ocean, AAP reports.

His family and the Fink family co-own the salubrious Beach Byron Bay restaurant, which came close to going under as a mountainous swell smashed into the dunes under it in the early hours of Monday morning.

Kirkwell says a six-layer wall of sandbags installed in November held out, but the easterly swell direction had also helped spare the building in the northern NSW town.

“The waves were whitecapping across the bay and smashing into Belongil and Main Beach and we had big surf crashing over the sandbags at the foot of our restaurant,” he told AAP.

Kirkwell said the sandbags withstood a full stress test, and without them the waves would have gouged out the sand beneath his restaurant and the caravan park next door and washed them away.

“At the end of day we are looking like we might have dodged a bullet so we’re very lucky in that,” he said.

Despite the dramatic moments, he said it had been businesses as usual at the restaurant on Monday.

Kirkwell said they had a particularly brisk morning trade selling coffee to journalists before later offering a full lunch service to 100 diners.

“They were all sitting enjoying their wine and fresh seafood, really oblivious to what was going on,” he said.

Clarke Beach and Main Beach have lost so much sand that they’re covered with water at high tide.

There’s a near sheer drop from the dune beach access paths to the sand with locals saying about four metres of dune and vegetation were washed away during the king tide.

A surfer walks past the Beach Byron Bay restaurant on Monday. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

Local man Neil Holland and his wife Erica took a stroll along Clarkes Beach (also known as Main Beach) at low tide to inspect the damage on Monday afternoon.

He said the restaurant was lucky, but more sandbags were needed and the rest of the dune system should be reinforced.

“I don’t know what they’re going to do, because we need to stop it [now],” Holland, who has lived in Byron for 47 years, told AAP.

“Because [otherwise)] where do they stop it? When it cuts Lawson Street? It really can’t be left to keep going.”

Holland said the erosion was also exposing rock reefs under the sand, making the beach treacherous for swimmers and surfers, especially tourists and visitors who weren’t aware of the danger.

He said he was certain the weather causing the erosions is being caused by manmade climate change.

“It is absolutely, this has been ongoing now for years. It just seems to be exponential, it’s been accelerating,” Holland said.

Kirkwell does not believe the scale of erosion was caused by manmade climate change alone, but a combination of factors.

He said it was an east coast low-pressure system, longshore drift, king tides and easterly swells combining at the same time.

“They say this is a once-in-100-years storm, this is a once-in-a-generation type erosion event, so look it could happen, maybe not in my lifetime, but it could happen again,” Kirkwell said.

“Who knows, 2020 has been a hell of a year, we could get cyclones or anything still coming in so you never know what’s around the corner.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.27pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.08pm GMT

Protestors maintained a vigil outside the Mantra Hotel last night, according to organisers, as a fight against the detention and deportation of refugees enters a critical phase.

Protestors outside the hotel last night Photograph: James Ross/EPA

The 192 men being held in the hotel could be transported to another detention facility as early as today.

More on this story here:

Related:  'Playing games with us': the medevac men languishing in hotel detention for almost two years

block-time published-time 9.00pm GMT

The US has just recorded its 300,000th Covid-19 death (incidentally, on the same day the Electoral College formalises the election results). There’s more on that quite horrifying number here  and below:

Related:  US Covid deaths pass 300,000 as first Americans receive coronavirus vaccine

block-time published-time 8.48pm GMT

NSW watchdog delivers strip-search report

The NSW law enforcement watchdog will deliver its findings into strip searching by NSW police today, AAP reports.

The Law Enforcement Conduct Commission announced the investigation into the use by police officers of their powers to conduct strip searches in 2018 after it received specific complaints and anecdotal information from community organisations.

We have covered this issue extensively at Guardian Australia, including most recently in these pieces  from last month.

Commissioner Lea Drake suggested last week that the report will include a new policy about strip-searching developed with NSW Police.

Drake was appearing before an upper house inquiry investigating First Nations over-representation in prisons and deaths in custody.

The commission has published several reports already in the life of the inquiry, which has looked at individual strip-search incidents as well as how police monitor potential misconduct.

Police who strip-searched children had not been properly trained and did not understand the law on what they were doing, reports released in May found.

The findings of an inquiry into strip-searching practices of NSW police is set to be revealed. Photograph: Regi Varghese/AAP

The commission found that a 16-year-old girl was searched unlawfully at Byron Bay’s Splendour in the Grass music festival in 2018.

Police ordered her to strip completely naked in a tent that could not completely close, after a sniffer dog sat next to her as she entered the festival.

The male officer who first saw the girl had spent five minutes training on the topic in the past 14 years, the commission found.

In a report from July the commission made adverse findings against police officers involved in three of four searches of young people.

The inquiry has focused particularly on the treatment of young people, and also looked at the treatment of females.

The inquiry confirmed that Aboriginal youths and adults were disproportionately involved in strip-searching operations, Drake said last week.

The strip-searching inquiry was one of the earliest major moves by the independent agency, which was created in 2017.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.55pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.40pm GMT

Here’s more on the China-Australia coal brouhaha:

Related:  China formalises cut to Australian coal imports, state media reports

block-time published-time 8.35pm GMT

The Covid-19 vaccine will solve everything, right? Not exactly.

Related:  Vaccine likely to prevent Covid developing but not stop transmission

block-time published-time 8.26pm GMT

No free ride for Australian coal into China

Australia’s role as a major coal supplier to China looks set to end with a shifting of import restrictions, according to AAP.

The Asian superpower will throw open its doors to other coal suppliers including Mongolia, Indonesia and Russia, but not Australia, China’s state media outlet the Global Times reported.

The move follows a meeting of China’s National Development and Reform Commission and will allow coal imports without clearance restrictions for those other countries, but not Australia, the report said.

Prime minister Scott Morrison (who was treasurer at the time) fondles a piece of coal. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP

It’s the latest crackdown by China on Australian goods, which has so far hit consumables including beef, wine, barley and seafood, plus timber.

Australian exporters heavily reliant on China have been brought to their knees by deteriorating trade ties.

China is Australia’s most valuable export partner and in recent years has taken the majority of coal leaving Aussie shores, in an industry worth more than $10bn a year.

There are suspicions the trade tensions have grown from China’s grievance list spanning Australia’s foreign investment rules, banning Huawei from the 5G network and the push for an inquiry into the origins of Covid-19.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.32pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.23pm GMT

We will know more about this as the tide recedes, but this is our latest story on erosion at Byron Bay.

Related:  Byron Bay beach damage ‘worst in a generation’ as storms batter 1,000km of coastline

block-time published-time 8.23pm GMT

Happy Tuesday, who is up for some news?

block-time published-time 8.16pm GMT

NSW and Queensland endure wild weather

NSW and Queensland are facing another day of damaging waves, winds and rainfall, with warnings of further flooding, possible evacuations and coastal erosion, AAP reports.

A low-pressure system off the coast of south-east Queensland has brought massive rainfall and gale-force winds, which combined with a seasonal high tide to wash away much of Byron Bay’s main beach on Monday.

A severe weather warning has been issued for the NSW northern rivers and mid north coast.

Heavy rain has continued overnight in the Tweed catchment and will continue.

The State Emergency Service has now issued a flood evacuation warning for south Murwillumbah, Tumbulgum and Tweed Valley Way and surrounding areas after the the Bureau of Meteorology predicted possible flooding for the Tweed River.

enltrA Byron Bay lifesaver (my dad!) says the beach has dropped about 2 metres. “Those are old wooden piers. They were last exposed about 30 years ago and the tops were cut off. Thinking that we would never see them again”. pic.twitter.com/seuhEsmJeh

— Stuart Khan (@stukhan) December 14, 2020

Major flooding is expected at Tumbulgum around midday, with the high tide and moderate flooding forecast at Murwillumbah and Chinderah on Tuesday morning.

Further rises are possible if the rain intensifies again in the next few hours.

Minor flooding is occurring along the Nambucca River at Bowraville, with moderate flooding expected on Tuesday morning.

Minor flooding is possible at Macksville later on Tuesday morning.

The SES says electricity, phones, internet, water and sewerage could be interrupted, and people in those areas need to closely monitor the weather and road closures.

It says residents should monitor the rapidly changing situation and be prepared to evacuate when instructed to do so.

A flood evacuation order would be issued by the NSWSES if and when evacuations are required.

It warns once floodwater begins inundating the area, roads may be cut, trapping anyone who stays behind.

“If you remain in the area after this time, you may become trapped and it may be too dangerous for NSWSES to rescue you,” the SES warned in a statement on Tuesday.

NSWSES Assistant Commissioner Nicole Hogan said there had been more than 1,000 calls for help in the past few days.

“There are no evacuations taking place at the moment. It is a warning for the community so that they can prepare to evacuate should the situation arise,” she told ABC TV.

“There was significant rainfall within the Tweed area last night. We’ve also had significant weather in Coffs Harbour and Lismore.

Conditions are expected to ease later on in the morning but there is the possibility of thunderstorms.

A team of 300 SES workers from across the state had been sent to support the northern NSW teams, as well as resources from Fire & Rescue, NSW RFS and NSW Police to support of the operation.

“They’ll be out there working with the community, giving them information. If required, flood rescue. And in other instances, perhaps looking at tarping roofs, storm damage requests,” Hogan said.

South-east Queensland received a reprieve on Monday afternoon after earlier experiencing tropical cyclone-like conditions. The damaging winds and heavy rainfall eased up by evening, but surf and tide conditions are still dangerous.

The damage to storm-lashed beaches could be lasting, with Surf Life SavingNSW warning the giant waves could create new, permanent rips at beaches previously considered to be safe.

Sites in NSW’s Northern Rivers District had about 400mm of rain in just a few days, and some locations near the Queensland-NSW border were inundated with 180mm of rain on Sunday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.27pm GMT