block-time published-time 11.41am BST

Restaurants in Berlin are allowed to reopen this evening for the first time in two months, and with the weather forecast looking good, it is predicted that they will be very full. Here is a breakdown of the rules governing the new normal here in the world of gastronomy.

People from two separate households will be allowed to share a table, but must keep a distance of 1.5 metres from each other. Whether there is a maximum number of people allowed for each household has not been specified. For those from a single household the distancing rules do not apply.

Waiting staff are required to wear face coverings. Cooks and other kitchen staff who do not come into contact with diners, are not. Diners are not required to wear masks, although it is recommended they do so. It's unclear how that is compatible with eating and drinking, as repeatedly taking off and putting on the masks is not recommended by hygiene experts.

While guests are not obliged to make reservations, Berlin's senate has strongly advised restaurants to take down contact details of their guests, and to keep them for four weeks, in order to enable tracing in case of an infection.

The likelihood is that restaurateurs will soon be allowed to put chairs and tables in front of their establishments without having to gain the necessary permit - on condition that the pavement is wide enough.

In the district of Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg, officials have announced a plan to allow restaurants to effectively take over entire streets so that they can maximise the number of tables they can serve, and to ensure pavements do not become crowded. If restaurants submit applications specific to the streets they would like to occupy, officials will move to close the roads to traffic on Fridays and at weekends, between 11 am and 10pm.

Some concerns have been expressed that that arrangement may put the safety of diners under threat - with some sceptics making reference to the Berlin Christmas market attack of 2016 when an Islamist terrorist drove a lorry into the crowd killing 12.

block-time published-time 11.36am BST

I'm Aamna Mohdin, taking over the liveblog from my colleague Matt.

If you want to get in touch, you can email me (aamna.mohdin@theguardian.com) or reach me on Twitter ( @aamnamohdin ).

block-time published-time 11.33am BST

Summary

Here's a roundup of the key developments so far on Friday:

China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced

China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus on Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.

Virus pushes Germany into recession

German output shrank by 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020, according to new official data. The quarter-on-quarter contraction is "the worst since the financial crisis" in 2009, the federal statistics office Destatis said. The agency also revised its gross domestic product (GDP) figure for the final quarter of 2019 from zero growth to a contraction of 0.1%, meaning Germany has now experienced two consecutive quarters of contraction - the technical definition of a recession.

Slovenia proclaims end to the outbreak

Slovenia has become the first European country to proclaim an end to the coronavirus epidemic at home. It said on Friday that the spread of Covid-19 was under control and there was no longer a need for extraordinary health measures.

Spain announces lowest daily death toll since Monday

Spain's death toll from coronavirus registered its lowest increase since Monday with 138 new fatalities announced by the health ministry. The overall coronavirus death toll, in Europe's fourth worst hit country, rose to 27,459 on Friday, while the number of diagnosed cases rose to 230,183 cases from 229,540.

Italy and Germany to ease more restrictions

Italy is set to allow free travel across the country from 3 June, according to a draft decree seen by Reuters. The draft decree, which could still be modified before it is approved, also said all travel within separate Italian regions would be allowed from 18 May. Germany will loosen quarantine rules for travellers arriving from the European Union and the UK, according to the interior ministry.

China responds diplomatically to Trump threat of cutting off ties

China's foreign ministry has responded diplomatically to Donald Trump's threat of cutting ties with Beijing over the virus. The US president said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment. Cina's foreign ministry said on Friday that steady Sino-US bilateral relations served the interests of both countries.

Baltic states restore free movement

The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have opened their borders to each other to create a mini Schengen area. Free movement of people will be restored to all 6 million permanent residents of the Baltic states, but arrivals from outside the three countries will have to undergo a two-week quarantine period.

Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases

Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.

Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000

The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.

South Korea, China and Japan health ministers to hold video conference

The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Covid-19 reaches refugee camps in Bangladesh

Aid groups have warned of a looming humanitarian disaster after coronavirus was detected for the first time in the sprawling camps that host about one million Rohingya refugees. The UN confirmed that an ethnic Rohingya refugee and another person had tested positive for Covid-19. "Both patients are in isolation and contact tracing is underway," the UN's refugee agency said in a statement.

block-time published-time 11.14am BST

Germany will loosen coronavirus quarantine rules for travellers arriving from the European Union, the Schengen passport-free zone and Britain, Reuters reports, citing a spokesman for the interior ministry.

Authorities will only recommend travellers go into quarantine if they arrive from countries with elevated numbers of infections, he said at a regular news conference.

A mandatory two-week quarantine still applies for travellers from countries outside the EU, the spokesman said

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.15am BST

block-time published-time 11.06am BST

Children in Finland have been returning to school after eight weeks of lockdown, AFP reports. They will return for just two weeks before the summer holidays begin.

enltrVIDEO: Finnish schoolchildren return to class after eight weeks of coronavirus lockdown despite warnings from the teacher's union it may not be totally safe for its staff or the children pic.twitter.com/PuI9T3xDYA

- AFP news agency (@AFP) May 15, 2020

block-time published-time 10.54am BST

The French health minister, Olivier Véran, has said he has been assured France will benefit from a coronavirus vaccine "if there is one".

The comment came after Paul Hudson, the British CEO of the French-based pharmaceutical giant Sanofi, said it was working with the Americans to develop a Covid-19 vaccine and the US would be given priority.

Hudson's remarks caused outrage in France, where Sanofi has received research tax credits. Véran said he had been reassured this would not be the case. "I believe it was a phrase, as far as I can understand, that was slightly clumsy and perhaps taken out of context. I was quite reassured by the conversation I had with Sanofi," Véran told French television.

Two new studies have reportedly shown that hydroxychloroquine is not particularly effective against Covid-19 despite the claims of the charismatic Marseille epidemiologist Didier Raoult. New studies - one French and one Chinese - found the anti-malarial drug, whose use has been promoted by Donald Trump among others, did not significantly reduce the risk of the disease worsening or killing a patient, nor did it eliminate the virus any quicker than standard treatments.

France is to quarantine arrivals from neighbouring Spain. This is a "reciprocal" measure after Spain imposed 14 days' quarantine for anyone arriving from the EU/Schengen area.

The French border is currently closed to any visitors other than essential travellers who have a "compelling" professional or personal reason to enter the country and are carrying a sworn declaration to that effect. June 15 has been set for a possible reopening of French borders to European visitors.

Deaths on French roads dropped by just under 56% during April compared with the same month last year. This is hardly surprising as everyone was locked down, but police records suggested those who were on the empty roads drove faster. The drop in road deaths explains why some departements saw fewer deaths even during the coronavirus crisis.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.23am BST

block-time published-time 10.46am BST

Italy set to allow free travel from 3 June

Italy is set to allow free travel across the country from 3 June, according to a draft decree seen by Reuters, as the government moves to unwind the coronavirus lockdown and revive the battered economy.

Rigid restrictions were imposed on Italy in March in an effort to halt the disease and, with the death rate now falling, the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, is rolling back the curbs.

The draft decree, which could still be modified before it is approved, also said all travel within separate Italian regions would be allowed from 18 May.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.54am BST

block-time published-time 10.43am BST

The phased reopening of America' s national parks has raised concerns about exacerbating the spread of Covid-19 and endangering the residents of rural towns located near parks.

"We don't want the parks to become super-spreaders," said Timothy Whitehouse, executive director of the non-profit Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility. "These communities simply do not have the capacity or the medical infrastructure to deal with an outbreak."

Related:  US national park reopenings raise fears of coronavirus outbreaks

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.55am BST

block-time published-time 10.33am BST

Spain 's death toll from coronavirus registered its lowest increase since Monday with 138 new fatalities announced by the health ministry, Reuters reports.

The overall coronavirus death toll, in Europe's fourth worst hit country, rose to 27,459 on Friday, while the number of diagnosed cases rose to 230,183 cases from 229,540 on Thursday, the ministry said.

The UK, Italy and France have all announced more coronavirus deaths than Spain.

esltr?? Datos actualizados de #COVID19?? Situación actual en España:            https://t.co/skv9oHroYj?? Puedes encontrar información más amplia y explicación técnica de los datos por CCAA en este enlace:            https://t.co/ORIxhfmRB5           #esteviruslosparamosunidos           pic.twitter.com/X22J36MAHr

- Ministerio de Sanidad (@sanidadgob) May 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11am BST

block-time published-time 10.24am BST

Slovenia has become the first European country to proclaim an end to the coronavirus epidemic at home, AP reports.

It said on Friday that the spread of Covid-19 was under control and there was no longer a need for extraordinary health measures. The government says EU residents are free to cross into Slovenia from Austria, Italy and Hungary at predetermined checkpoints, while most non-EU nationals will have to undergo a mandatory 14-day quarantine.

The first coronavirus case in Slovenia was recorded on 4 March, in someone returning from neighbouring Italy. By 13 May, there were 1,467 confirmed cases and 103 deaths in Slovenia.

slltrTrend obolelosti s koronavirusom v Sloveniji na dan 14. 5. 2020 (00:00-24:00): - St. testiranj: 1023 - St. pozitivnih: 1 - St. hospitaliziranih: 29 - St. oseb na intenzivni negi: 7 - Dnevno | skupno st. odpuscenih iz bolnisnice: 3 | 270 - Stevilo umrlih: 0 pic.twitter.com/lyX9Tijw9C

- Vlada Republike Slovenije (@vladaRS) May 15, 2020

Update: Shaun Walker adds:

An easing of restrictions began on 20 April when some shops reopened, while restaurants and bars are now allowed to serve customers on their outdoor terraces. Public transport is slowly resuming and some schools will open on Monday.

Citizens are still advised to stick to social distancing and other virus prevention measures, but visitors arriving from EU countries who show no symptoms will no longer be required to quarantine.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.57am BST

block-time published-time 10.14am BST

Russia has announced more than 10,000 new coronavirus infections on Friday, bringing the country's total to 262,843, the second-highest in the world after the United States.

The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, this week announced that a nationwide lockdown aimed at slowing the spread of the virus would be eased, even as health officials record a steady increase in new cases.

The country reported 113 new coronavirus deaths on Friday, bringing Russia's total to 2,418.

On Thursday, Russian officials defended the country against claims that its unusually low mortality rate from Covid-19 was suspicious, saying its method of ascribing cause of death was "exceptionally precise".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.58am BST

block-time published-time 10.05am BST

Virus pushes Germany into recession

German output shrank by 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020, official data showed on Friday, as the coronavirus pandemic tipped Europe's top economy into a recession, AFP reports.

The quarter-on-quarter contraction is "the worst since the financial crisis" in 2009, the federal statistics office Destatis said.

The agency also revised its gross domestic product (GDP) figure for the final quarter of 2019 from zero growth to a contraction of 0.1%, meaning Germany has now experienced two consecutive quarters of contraction - the technical definition of a recession.

The German economy minister, Peter Altmaier, last month warned that the country was facing "the worst recession" in its postwar history as the pandemic battered the global economy.

Related:  German economy in recession as coronavirus hits - business live

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.59am BST

block-time published-time 10.02am BST

Most New Zealanders have embraced the easing restrictions with the first stop for many being the local hairdresser.

In Auckland, the barber Tomi Cvetanovski said he saw his fair share of unkempt hair coming through his doors. He opened up at one minute past midnight on Thursday with a line outside and he did not close until 4.30am. Then he reopened at 6am and kept going until 7pm.

Oh man, it's crazy, but I like it when it's like this. It was a big day, but everyone needs a haircut.

Related:  Reunions, eating out and a lot of haircuts: New Zealand embraces relaxation of lockdown

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.00am BST

block-time published-time 9.46am BST

For over a week Belgians have been allowed to pick just four friends or family who they may host at their home as part of a tentative easing of the lockdown.

But a study from the University of Antwerp has revealed that social embarrassment is holding many back from breaking their lockdown bubbles. The study showed that nearly half (43%) of the 83,000 people who participated in the study had not taken advantage of relaxation and 41% said the "rule of four" forcing them to choose among their friends had made them tense.

Koen Pepermans, faculty director of social sciences at Antwerp University, said:

The confusion and choice stress that this measure brought with it could have led to people being reluctant. I also noticed in my circle that it was a difficult choice. Not making a choice at all was perhaps the best choice that almost half of the participants chose.

There is also a lack of trust with 85% of participants admitting that they did not think their friends would stick to the social distancing rules. "The younger the participant, the more pessimistic they are towards the other," Pepermans said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.07am BST

block-time published-time 9.41am BST

The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia  have opened their borders to each other from Friday to create a mini Schengen area, Latvia's broadcaster LSM.LV reports.

Free movement of people will be restored to all 6 million permanent residents of the Baltic states, but arrivals from outside the three countries will have to undergo a two-week quarantine period. The Latvian president, Egils Levits, said:

Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have created a small Schengen area in Europe - an area without internal borders. From today, all of us, the 6 million of the Baltics, are free to cross the borders between our countries, subject to epidemiological rules. This is especially important for Latvia because Lithuania and Estonia are our largest economic partners.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.08am BST

block-time published-time 9.27am BST

Borussia Moenchengladbach supporters sustain their club by buying cardboard characters, so called 'Pappkameraden', that will be printed and then displayed at the stadium when games resume Photograph: Christian Verheyen/Borussia Moenchengladbach via Getty Images

Life-sized cardboard cutouts of football fans are being used to try to provide atmosphere at empty stadiums in Germany as the suspended Bundesliga gets ready to resume.

Thousands of Borussia Moenchengladbach fans have ordered (EURO)18 cutouts of themselves for their first home fixture at Borussia Park next week, Reuters reports.

enltrAll eyes on Germany as Bundesliga season restarts, @ossianshine has more            pic.twitter.com/uEtT8YTS7O

- ReutersIndia (@ReutersIndia) May 15, 2020

block-time published-time 9.09am BST

Brother Paul, a Belgian Trappist monk at Saint-Sixtus Abbey, wears a protective face mask while showing a bottle of Westvleteren beer at the drive thru area of the bottling plant Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters

Belgian Trappist monks who brew one of the world's most coveted beers have reopened for business after a two-month break, though Covid-19 restrictions mean they can only supply local rather than international demand, Reuters reports.

The Saint-Sixtus abbey, home to 19 monks, launched an online sale on Thursday evening of 6,000 crates, with pick-ups starting on Friday. Exceptionally, customers can buy three crates. Normally it is just two.

Customers can come as usual by car, but are told not to leave their vehicles while queuing until they pass a newly installed traffic light before the pick-up point.

There, a lay worker in mask and gloves passes their 24-bottle crates through a small gap in a plastic screen. Payment must made electronically, not with cash. The nearby cafe serving the beers remains closed.

Demand is no issue. Brother Godfried said 5,000 new online accounts were created from Wednesday to Thursday, bringing the total to 35,000.

"The picture is a bit distorted as for now we can only offer on the Belgian market. The borders are shut, even though the beer draws a certain international interest," he told Reuters.

The monks sold a few cases in advance to test their new system. Thomas Vuylsteke, a 33-year-old lawyer, was one of the lucky recipients.

"It has been selected a few times as the best beer in the world and it is really tasty. It's always great," he said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.10am BST

block-time published-time 8.59am BST

Afghanistan has recorded its worst day of the crisis so far, as the country's health ministry confirmed 414 new transmissions of Covid-19 and 17 more deaths. Afghanistan has so far confirmed 6,053 cases, 153 deaths and 745 recoveries. In a WhatsApp message to reporters, Wahid Majroh, the country's deputy health minister, said 1,122 suspected patients had been tested in the last 24 hours after the ministry pledged to increase the number of tests.

The capital, Kabul, and the western province of Herat recorded most of the new infections. Kabul is the country's worst affected area with 1,793 cases.

Despite a government authorised lockdown in several provinces, the streets are still crowded, raising fears among experts of a surge in the number of death and infections.

Updated at 11.11am BST

8.46am BST

China 's foreign ministry has responded diplomatically to Donald Trump's threat of cutting ties with Beijing over the virus.

The US president said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President            Xi Jinping at the moment.

Asked what measures he intended to take against China, he said: "There are many things we could do ... We could cut off the whole relationship."

China's foreign ministry said on Friday that steady Sino-US bilateral relations served the interests of both countries.

But its foreign ministry spokesman, Zhao Lijian, told reporters during a daily briefing that the US needed to cooperate with China in order to achieve stable relations.

Updated at 11.11am BST

8.22am BST

Environmental activist, Greta Thunberg, talks via video linkPhotograph: Jessica Gow/AP

The environmental campaigner Greta Thunberg has challenged "the myth" that children are not affected by the virus and can't spread it.

Speaking to CNN, the 17-year-old activist urged children to stick to physical distancing rules.

She said:

It's sort of a myth right now that children are not being being affected by this virus. And that is very wrong. Children both do get this disease and they also spread it on to others. So we need to be very careful that this misinformation, that it doesn't affect children, becomes mainstream. We need to make sure that people understand that this affects children.

Thunberg went into isolation in March after displaying mild symptoms of coronavirus. She said:

Many people don't even notice that they have symptoms and then they might spread the virus without even knowing it. We young people have a very big responsibility because we we might not experience the symptoms as as bad as many others. So we have to be extra careful, because our actions can be the difference between life and death for many others.

She also expressed hope that the crisis would mean that politicians and the public now followed the warnings of scientists. She said:

More people are starting to realise that we are actually depending on science, and that we need to listen to scientists and experts. I really hope that stays for other crises, such as the climate crisis and the environmental crisis, that we understand that we have to listen to the scientists.

Updated at 11.14am BST

7.26am BST

Nearly a quarter of a billion people across 47 African countries will catch coronavirus over the next year, but the result will be fewer severe cases and deaths than in the US and Europe, new research predicts.

A model by the World Health Organization's (WHO) regional office for Africa, published in the BMJ Global Health, predicts a lower rate of transmission and viral spread across the continent than elsewhere, resulting in up to 190,000 deaths. But the authors warn the associated rise in hospital admissions, care needs and "huge impact" on services such as immunisation and maternity, will overwhelm already stretched health services.

About one in four (22%) of the one billion people in the countries measured would be infected in the first year of the pandemic, the model suggests. However the disease is likely to linger for longer - possibly for several years.

Related: Africa facing a quarter of a billion coronavirus cases, WHO predicts

7.24am BST

Aid groups have warned of a looming humanitarian disaster after coronavirus was detected for the first time in the sprawling camps that host about one million Rohingya  refugees.

The camps in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh, which are more densely populated than some of the world's busiest cities, have been under lockdown since 14 March, in an attempt to stop the virus from spreading.

On Thursday, the UN confirmed that an ethnic Rohingya refugee and another person had tested positive for Covid-19. "Both patients are in isolation and contact tracing is underway," the UN's refugee agency said in a statement.

Related: Fears Rohingya refugees face disaster after Covid-19 reaches Cox's Bazar

7.16am BST

Like many children across the world sent home from school, youngsters in Turkey were encouraged to draw pictures of rainbows and place them in windows to cheer up the country in the face of the coronavirus pandemic. Orders to teachers from some local education boards to stop because the rainbows were part of a "plot" to turn children gay were met with surprise.

Instead of boosting morale, the lockdown rainbows have become yet another symbol of division, the latest cultural battleground in a country highly polarised along political and religious lines.

"Unfortunately this sort of anti-LGBTQ mentality is widespread amongst policy makers even if ordinary people don't see a connection between children's drawings and gay rights," said Meral Gülsen, a representative for teachers union Egitim Sen.

Related: Turkey's lockdown rainbows have become another symbol of division

Updated at 7.17am BST

7.10am BST

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan for today. I only wish I knew when that would be it for my neighbour's music speaker, too.

Thanks, as always, for following along.

7.00am BST

Summary

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

•Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak. The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.•China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus on Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.•Trump threatens to cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment and going so far as to suggest he could cut ties with the world's second largest economy. Chinese state media has responded saying his comments are "lunacy".•Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself. Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.•Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.•Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.•South Korea, China and Japan health ministers to hold video conference. The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.•Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.•Covid-19 reaches refugee camps in Bangladesh. A Rohingya man has become the first person to test positive for Covid-19 in the vast refugee camps in Bangladesh that is home to almost one million people. Local health coordinator Abu Toha Bhuiyan initially said two refugees had been put into isolation. The World Health Organization later said one case was of a Rohingya man, and the other was of a local man who lived near the camp and was being treated at a clinic inside the area.•36 million Americans are now unemployed. Another 3 million Americans filed for benefits, bringing the country's total unemployed to 36 million. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.

Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak. The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.

China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus on Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.

Trump threatens to cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment and going so far as to suggest he could cut ties with the world's second largest economy. Chinese state media has responded saying his comments are "lunacy".

Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself. Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.

Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.

Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.

South Korea, China and Japan health ministers to hold video conference. The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.

Covid-19 reaches refugee camps in Bangladesh. A Rohingya man has become the first person to test positive for Covid-19 in the vast refugee camps in Bangladesh that is home to almost one million people. Local health coordinator Abu Toha Bhuiyan initially said two refugees had been put into isolation. The World Health Organization later said one case was of a Rohingya man, and the other was of a local man who lived near the camp and was being treated at a clinic inside the area.

36 million Americans are now unemployed. Another 3 million Americans filed for benefits, bringing the country's total unemployed to 36 million. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.

Related: Coronavirus latest: at a glance

Updated at 8.05am BST

6.50am BST

Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

6.45am BST

Global report: Trump threat to cut trade ties over Covid-19 branded 'lunacy' by Chinese media

An escalation of rhetoric between Donald Trump and China over the coronavirus pandemic has sparked concerns that a trade deal between the nations is in peril, as Chinese state media dismissed as "lunacy" a suggestion by the US president that he could "cut off relations with Beijing.

The US president said he was very disappointed with China's failure to contain Covid-19 in an interview with Fox Business news. Trump said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment.

Asked what measures he intended to take against China, he said: "There are many things we could do ... We could cut off the whole relationship."

"Now, if you did, what would happen? You'd save $500bn," Trump said, referring to estimated US annual imports from China, which he has previously referred to as lost money.

The state-backed Global Times responded with an editorial titled "Trump turns up election strategy nonsense with China 'cut-off' threat".

"The very idea should not come as a surprise for those who remember when Trump speculated if disinfectants could be used on humans 'by injection' to wipe out the novel coronavirus [Covid-19]," it said.

"Such lunacy is a clear byproduct, first and foremost, of the proverbial anxiety that the US has suffered from since China began its global ascension," it said on Friday. "Trump seems insane right now or may have some psychological problems," another editorial wrote.

The escalating row between the two countries came as China marked one month with no deaths from Covid-19 and just four newly confirmed cases in the 24 hours to Friday.

Related: Global report: Trump threat to cut trade ties over Covid-19 branded 'lunacy' by Chinese media

Updated at 6.54am BST

6.31am BST

UK front pages: Friday, 15 May

Friday's GUARDIAN: "Revealed: 'chaos' at privately run warehouse of UK's PPE stockpile" #BBCPapers           #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/8dQKxeeIAP

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) May 14, 2020

Friday's Daily MAIL: "Let Our Teachers Be Heroes" #BBCPapers           #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/CBgIcv449F

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) May 14, 2020

Friday's INDEPENDENT Digital: "Heads rebel against PM's plan to reopen schools" #BBCPapers           #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/bhl0Lmlnh

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) May 14, 2020

Friday's FINANCIAL TIMES: "Nissan lifts hopes for thousands of jobs with boost for Sunderland" #BBCPapers           #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/suOYUhV9Z3

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) May 14, 2020

Friday's Daily TELEGRAPH: "Just 24 new cases per day in London, says PHE" #BBCPapers           #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/sNsjQClaT2

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) May 14, 2020

6.13am BST

What coronavirus is doing to stressed US health workers - and why it will be felt for years

Jenn Caldwell is a hospital nurse in Kansas City, Missouri. By her estimate, she has cared for nearly three dozen Covid-19 patients since the pandemic began, and her close friend, a fellow nurse, has died from the virus.

When she developed an upset stomach  consistent with Covid-19 she lost her composure. She curled up in a ball, cried and hyperventilated. Later, Caldwell wrote down all her financial account information, put it in her lockbox and texted her 20-year-old daughter the code.

"It's so random who is getting Covid and dying. There was a definite panic, a definite freak-out," Caldwell said, a member of the union National Nurses United. "It heightens my anxiety and paranoia ... I didn't feel like I had any before."

Related: What coronavirus is doing to stressed US health workers - and why it will be felt for years

6.05am BST

The the airlines Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon saw their passenger loads plummet by 62.3% to 21.7% in April, Reuters reports.

A Cathay Pacific Airline plane takes off from the runway at the Hong Kong International Airport in Hong Kong, 12 Apr 2020.Photograph: Kevin On Man Lee/Penta Press/REX/Shutterstock

Cathay Pacific & Cathay Dragon carried a total of 13,729 passengers, a decrease of 99.6% compared to April 2019.

In April, the two airlines carried 84,634 tonnes of cargo and mail, a decrease of 48.3% compared to April 2019.

The airlines expect that average daily passenger numbers will remain at around 500 in May.

In a report, the airlines said it is "widely expected that international travel demand will only return to pre covid-19 levels in a few years."

But, it added, "At this stage, we still see no immediate signs of improvement".

Updated at 6.10am BST

5.51am BST

This Australian snake doesn't seem to have heard that there are now more reasons to leave the house:

We don't know where this pipe goes... ???? pic.twitter.com/ppt7eujFD2

- Saffron Howden (@saffronhowden) May 15, 2020

5.47am BST

Australia is easing restrictions:

BUT WHY ARE THEY TOUCHING EACH OTHER https://t.co/SN0blS0l4o

- Isobel Roe (@isobelroe) May 14, 2020

5.45am BST

Summary

•Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.•China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.•Trump says he could cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over the novel coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy.•Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.•The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will gather by video conference to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.•Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.•Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.•Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.•A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker.•36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.•The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK.

Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.

China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.

Trump says he could cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over the novel coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy.

Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.

The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will gather by video conference to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.

Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.

Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.

A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker.

36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.

The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK.

Updated at 8.07am BST

5.41am BST

Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

5.37am BST

Oh my god, this is amazing. A German cafe is making people wear swimming pool noodles as hats to enforce social distancing. Pic via Cafe & Konditorei Rothe on Facebookhttps://t.co/fMgqgbTdt6           pic.twitter.com/ds0whysqqi

- Katy Lee (@kjalee) May 14, 2020

5.30am BST

Health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan to gather by video conference

The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said.

The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year. "The ministers will exchange views on the latest Covid-19 situation and related policy of each country," South Korea's Vice Health Minister Kim Gang-lip told a briefing, referring to the disease caused by the new coronavirus. "We're planning to introduce our work on information sharing, special entry procedures and large-scale treatment facilities."

Visitors wearing face masks walk near the Gwanghwamun, the main gate of the 14th-century Gyeongbok Palace, and one of South Korea's well-known landmarks, in Seoul, South Korea, 22 February 2020.Photograph: Lee Jin-man/AP

All three countries are optimistic they have got their outbreaks under control and are looking to get their economics back on track while keeping a wary eye out for any second waves of infection. China's Wuhan is seeking to test all of its 11 million residents for the coronavirus after a small cluster of new cases stoked fears after a long lockdown was lifted. Japan lifted a state of emergency in large swaths of the country on Thursday but major cities remain under restrictions and new testing indicated the outbreak in Tokyo was wider than the figures showed. South Korea, which suffered the first major outbreak outside China, has been held up as a coronavirus mitigation success story, bringing its daily rate of cases down to near zero without major disruptions, thanks to intensive testing and contact tracing. But a recent spike in infections linked to nightclubs and bars in some Seoul nightlife districts has led to the re-closing of some night spots and the postponement of the opening of schools by a week.

Updated at 5.43am BST

5.17am BST

Uki Goñi reports for the Guardian:

Coronavirus statistics have started rising sharply in Argentina in line with government predictions that mid-May could see a spike in cases. Thursday saw a record 24 deaths and 255 new cases, after Wednesday's record 317 new cases, bringing the total so far to 353 deaths and 7134 cases.

People wearing face mask attend the city fair to buy foods during the new phase of the national quarantine in Argentina Coronavirus outbreak, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 14 May 2020.Photograph: Roberto Tuero/REX/Shutterstock

The numbers are being pushed up by a sudden rise in the capital city of Buenos Aires, with 60% of reported new cases Thursday, most of them in the city's large "villas", or shanty towns, home to some 400 thousand of the city's three million inhabitants. The city's surrounding Greater Buenos Aires Area, home to another seven million people, was responsible for 30% of the day's new cases, with the rest of Argentina, total population 44 million, reporting only 10% of the day's toll. The national duplication rate of cases showed a worrying fall in recent days, from 25 days just one week ago, to only 17 days Thursday. The duplication rate in the city of Buenos Aires is well below the national average, at only 10 days Thursday.

5.06am BST

As Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison mentioned in that press conference earlier, suicides in three Australian states, Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania, have not increased during the lockdown.

Christine Morgan, CEO of the National Mental Health Commission and National Suicide Prevention Adviser to Morrison, was asked at the national press conference what she made of Japan's decline in suicides in April, reported on Thursday. In response she asked:

Is there a protective component in what we are finding (in the lockdown)? Which has been so challenging for so many. But maybe there's a silver lining. We have stopped. We have connected. We have been at home. We are in communication with people. We don't know the answer, but that's really important. "

4.50am BST

Helen Sullivan with you here. A short while ago I took a lunchtime stroll around my neighbourhood, which happens to be Bondi, in Sydney, Australia.

The New South Wales state regulations were eased today, which means people can dine in at bars, restaurants and cafes - something in no short supply in the neighbourhoods surrounding one of the world's most famous beaches. Small restaurants and cafes are allowed 10 patrons at a time.

Blog readers, it was a sight for sore eyes: a family of four walking around a little uncertainly, like they had perhaps been really strict about social distancing, looking for - it seemed - a cafe to go to. Dad patted his back pocket to make sure his wallet was there, and they crossed the road with purpose.

My local repainted its walls for the occasion of the eased restrictions, and was looking pretty schmick:

View this post on Instagram

BACK SOON!!! Not long now. #theshopandwinebar #newbeginnings #refresh

A post shared by ????????????????????? (@theshopandwinebar) on May 11, 2020 at 4:29pm PDT

View this post on Instagram

It's just pure happiness today! ?? @simondavidsonphotographer ??

A post shared by ????????????????????? (@theshopandwinebar) on May 14, 2020 at 4:52pm PDT

A nearby bagel shop had both its outside tables - it usually has about seven or so - occupied and a lunchtime queue was forming.

Next door, a barber shop, which had closed completely on 28 March, was doing a roaring trade. All barbers and customers wore masks, and in the window was a laminated poster showing that the business had completed Covid-19 training.

A customer left, and one of the barbers sprayed what I assume was disinfectant to an empty chair and wiped it down vigorously.

There was a very faint drizzle in the air - winter is arriving in Sydney - but the sun was shining. Mate, it was pretty good.

4.49am BST

That press conference has now ended.

4.48am BST

I spoke too soon. Back to that press conference for a moment, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is talking about the country's relationship with China now and he's getting a bit worked up:

When it comes to our relationship with China, it is built on mutual benefit. And we have a comprehensive strategic partnership which we've formed. And within that partnership, there are issues that need to be addressed from time to time, and the issues around beef and barley are those matters. And they have been, particularly on the barley issue, been running for some time.

He is speaking after China imposed a ban on beef supplied by four Australian abattoirs and            Beijing proposed imposing crippling tariffs on barley imports.

I'd stress again that what the Australian Government is doing is completely unremarkable. We are standing our ground on our values and the things that we know are always important.

...

One of the most important things about our approach to relationship is we're always consistent. We're always consistent. We draw very clear lines about things that are very important to us, as does the Chinese government.

And we respect their lines, as we expect our lines to be respected, whether it's on our foreign investment rules, or our rules around technology, our rules regarding human rights and things of that nature. I don't think anyAustralian would want us to compromise on those important things. And those things are not to be traded. Ever. Now, our Government is very clear about these things, and we will always continue to be clear. And these are not things to be traded.

4.33am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison on Trump and jobs:

Reporter:  What's your response toPresident Trump announcing that he's "changing all the policies"?

Morrison: We'll see what occurs there as it rolls out. But we have our contracts and arrangements in place for all of those matters, so we'll continue to pursue them in the normal way.

Reporter:  The "America First" slogan, is that something that Australia should perhaps adopt and prioritise Australian jobs?

Morrison:  Australia will always prioritise Australian jobs, and we always have. And one of the ways we've always done that is we've always had an outward look when it comes to our economic opportunities. Australia is one of the most successful trading nations on earth, and our economic prosperity lies not just here, but continuing to be an open trading nation. This is how we've always succeeded in the past.And Australia will continue to look to its prosperity both here at home and overseas to ensure that we can prioritise Australian jobs.

Updated at 4.34am BST

4.29am BST

As Australia adopts its National Mental Health and Wellbeing Pandemic Response Plan, Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt says:

We've already had some information from Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania that is heartening, and more heartening than we'd expected. For the first four

months, there has been no known increase in suicide rates in those three states. We watch very carefully, however, because these things can build up. They can brew. People can dwell. And so we want to get ahead of the curve."

4.21am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison says just 1% of the country's aged care facilities were affected by Coronavirus:

There are two areas that National Cabinet was most concerned at the start of this crisis more than any. One was, of course, our elderly, and the fact that only 1%, or thereabouts, of the aged care facilities in this country have been affected by Covid is a tremendous credit to the aged care sector.

But the other has been the low level of infection that has occurred in Indigenous communities around Australia. And to ourIndigenous leaders in each and everyone of those hundreds of communities, thank you for your leadership. Thank you for keeping your communities, our people, together, safe.

4.17am BST

Brendan Murphy, the country's Chief Medical Officer, is speaking now.

There are just 50 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across Australia, with 12 of those people on ventilators, he says.

My general epidemiology update, with 7,017 cases at the moment. Around about 20 new cases a day over recent days. Still a small number of community-acquired cases in some jurisdictions. Just a reminder this virus is still there, at very low levels in the community, and I reiterate the Prime Minister's message - as people start to go back to some normal activities and open up, please, please be careful. Please practise all of those new ways of interacting that we've talked about on so many occasions.

Updated at 4.18am BST

4.16am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison says:

As businesses and cafes and others are opened up this weekend, those businesses, knowing that at just 10patrons at a time, that won't necessarily be a profitable patronage for them to really sustain that, they're backing themselves, they're backing their staff, they're backing their communities, and they're backing their country. And I want to commend them for that brave step that they're taking this weekend. Good on ya for reopening.

Morrison announces decisions made by the national Cabinet:

•Elective surgeries can resume•The National Mental Health and Wellbeing Pandemic Response Plan was adopted. An additional AI$48.1 million was committed for the implementation of that plan.•Human biosecurity emergency powers have also been extended under the Biosecurity Act, from June 17 to September 17.

Elective surgeries can resume

The National Mental Health and Wellbeing Pandemic Response Plan was adopted. An additional AI$48.1 million was committed for the implementation of that plan.

Human biosecurity emergency powers have also been extended under the Biosecurity Act, from June 17 to September 17.

4.10am BST

Australia's Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is speaking to the media now.

Morrison begins with the usual preamble about the difficulties we all face. Says state leaders have met more in the past two months than the previous 10 years.

But with restrictions easing following the release of the government's roadmap last week, Morrison says now "the task is to really build that confidence and to get that momentum going, as we move to the next challenge, which is to reset the Australian economy for growth to support Australians and their livelihoods well into the future".

He says today's National Cabinet meeting was briefed by the head of the Treasury department, Philip Lowe, the head of the Reserve Bank, and Wayne Byres, the head of APRA.

4.03am BST

Top luxury brands from Chanel to Louis Vuitton have increased prices of some of their most coveted products as they seek to make up for sales lost during weeks of coronavirus lockdowns. High-end houses have all reported brisk business in South Korea and the key Chinese market, where shops began to reopen in March, partly offsetting a slump in Europe and the United States, where restrictions are only just starting to be lifted. But with consultancy Bain estimating sales for the $300 billion sector to fall by up to 35% this year, bringing to a crushing halt a decade of spectacular growth, luxury groups are moving quickly to protect margins.

A woman is having her handbag checked by a security staff as she is about to enter a Vuitton store on the Champs Elysees on 11 May 2020 in Paris, France.Photograph: Pierre Suu/Getty Images

Chanel said on Wednesday it was increasing prices on its iconic handbags and some small leather goods by between 5% and 17% around the world as the pandemic had pushed up the cost of certain raw materials.

"These adjustments are made while ensuring that we avoid excessive price differentials between countries," it said. Industry powerhouse LVMH's star fashion label Louis Vuitton - which the company said last month was enjoying sales growth in excess of 50% in China in early April - has also been hiking prices of handbags in the United States and Europe.  In China and South Korea, people were queuing outside Chanel stores as soon as rumours of imminent price increases began to spread on social media. Xie Lan, a documentary maker in Beijing, said she had managed to buy a handbag for nearly 30,000 yuan ($4,225) before the price hike. "Work is busy and stressful, I wanted to give myself a treat," she said by phone.

3.43am BST

Israel's children can go back to school and nurseries full-time, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Thursday, as the country presses on with easing its coronavirus curbs. Israel, which has a population nine million, has reported 16,579 cases of the novel coronavirus and 265 deaths. With the new case rate levelling out in the past few weeks, it has lifted bans on gatherings, eased travel and reopened malls and markets. A partial reopening of schools began on 3 May, with the first three grades of elementary school and the last two grades of high school redistributed in classes capped at 15 pupils to enforce social-distancing. Kindergartens joined a week later.

Parents wait with their children to enter their elementary school in Sderot as it reopens in Israel 3 May, 2020.Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters

In a written statement, Netanyahu said that from Sunday all children, from the age of zero, may go back to school on a voluntary basis. Those in outbreak epicentres, however, would have to stay home for now. Schools reopening full time could help the economy contend with the fallout of weeks of coronavirus lockdown, relieving working parents from having to stay at home and mind their children. More than 1.1 million people have filed for unemployment benefits in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, which would be equal to a jobless rate of about 27%. They include employees put on unpaid leave, some self-employed, as well as those who have lost their jobs entirely.

3.33am BST

We have more from Mexico, which has recorded its biggest daily rise in cases. Assistant health secretary Hugo López-Gatell has called it the "peak moment" when the country is experiencing its fastest growth but also pointed to declines in cities such as Cancún, Villahermosa in the Gulf coast state of Tabasco, Culiacán in the northern state of Sinaloa, and the border city of Tijuana.

Mexico recorded 2,409 cases on Thursday, the first time it has exceeded 2,000 in one day. Officials also reported 257 more deaths from Covid-19, making a total of 4,477 since the pandemic began

3.23am BST

'They threw us into chaos': Wisconsin lockdown ruling is latest in partisan war

A conservative majority on the Wisconsin supreme court            struck down a stay-at-home order from the state's Democratic governor on Wednesday, further illustrating the remarkable amount of power Republicans have in the state and the way they have            been able to curb the authority of their Democratic rivals.

The Wisconsin decision is the most significant legal victory for conservatives, egged on by Donald Trump, who are beginning to challenge stay-at-home orders across the country through protests and legal actions. Republican lawmakers in Michigan, where the legislature is extremely gerrymandered, are also            challenging the legal authority of a similar order issued by the state's Democratic governor there. Other suits from businesses challenging stay-at-home orders in other states have been largely unsuccessful, so far.

The decision was the latest in a nasty partisan battle in Wisconsin between Republicans and Democrats that has shaped the last decade. The state is narrowly divided politically and seen as a crucial state to win for both campaigns in the November presidential election.

Related: 'They threw us into chaos': Wisconsin lockdown ruling is latest in partisan war

3.07am BST

Stranded without support, international students across Australia rely on free food to survive

International students and other temporary visa holders locked out of federal government support are relying on food banks and restaurants giving away free meals to survive during the coronavirus pandemic.

Images of long lines outside emergency relief services have emerged in the international student hubs of Sydney and Melbourne, as well as smaller cities including Darwin.

Australia has more than 560,000 international students, many of whom have supported themselves with part-time or casual jobs while studying.

But as the economy has shut down and with the federal government declining to offer direct financial support to temporary visa holders, the queues forming outside food banks each day suggest that startling numbers are now struggling to feed themselves.

National food relief charities say the increase in demand has been huge, driven by a surge in requests from temporary visa holders.

Related: Stranded without support, international students across Australia rely on free food to survive

2.53am BST

Here is the video of US President Donald Trump saying that he could 'cut off' the relationship with China following the coronavirus outbreak.

In an interview wth Fox Business, Trump expressed his disappointment with China for failing to contain the Covid-19 outbreak before adding he maintained a good relationship with leader, Xi Jinping, but 'right now, I don't want to speak with him':

2.38am BST

China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced

China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus, AP reports. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April.

Visitors wearing face masks enter the Disneyland theme park in Shanghai as it reopened, Monday, 11 May 2020.Photograph: Sam McNeil/AP

Just 91 people remain in treatment for Covid-19 and 623 others are under isolation and monitoring for being suspected cases or for having tested positive without showing symptoms, including 11 newly detected. In total, China has reported 4,633 deaths among 82,933 cases since the virus was first detected late last year in the central city of Wuhan. China has maintained social distancing and bans on foreigners entering the country, but has increasingly opened up the world's second-largest economy to allow both large factories and small businesses to resume production and dealings with customers. The government plans to hold the ceremonial parliament's annual session later this month, but with highly limited access for journalists and others.

2.33am BST

Beleaguered cruise operators signalled a return in demand for cruises that would set sail late this year or early 2021 after travel restrictions and no-sail orders due to the Covid-19 pandemic raised concerns about the future of the industry. Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd and Carnival Corp said on Thursday customers were booking trips, even though there was no clarity on when the cruises would begin.

US Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings cruise ship Marina arrives at the Havana bay, Cuba 9 March, 2017.Photograph: Alexandre Meneghini/Reuters

Shares of Norwegian, Carnival and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd reversed course following the positive commentary on demand from Norwegian executives on a post-earnings call. The cruise industry has been hammered by the coronavirus as health officials asked customers to avoid cruises and extended port quarantines in Japan and California. Norwegian Cruise's Chief Executive Officer Frank Del Rio said the company noticed a significant amount of new cash bookings in April and collected advanced ticket sales. "It took decades to build this industry," Del Rio told analysts on the call. "And in a matter of weeks, we dismantled it. And it's going to take not decades to build it up again, but a little time. And we just have to be patient."

2.20am BST

This three Michelin star Virginia restaurant has its own innovative solutions to the new normal:

Mannequins costumed in 1940s era clothing are seated in the dining area of the Inn at Little Washington, a Michelin three star restaurant in the Virginia countryside, in Rappahannock County 14 May 2020 in Washington, Virginia.Photograph: Win McNamee/Getty Images

There you are enjoying a nice meal at an ornate, three-Michelin star restaurant, when you spot something odd. The waiter refills the wine glass of the patron sitting next to you. The person does not move, they do not blink. They do not even say "thank you" to the waiter. You are dining with a dummy. Welcome to dining out in the age of coronavirus.

That's the experience the Inn at Little Washington, a restaurant in northern Virginia, is planning for diners as they experiment with what dining in could look like amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

With the idea that guests may feel lonely eating at a restaurant that can only reach 50% capacity - the maximum mandated by Virginia's social distancing regulations - the restaurant will be placing mannequins throughout its dining rooms.

Related: Model companions: restaurant solves social distancing dilemma with mannequins

2.14am BST

A pub with no bar: what visiting a pub in the Australian state of New South Wales will look like now

In Australia, the New South Wales state government has announced that bars and clubs with kitchens will be able to reopen on 15 May, as Covid-19 lockdowns ease. Restaurants and cafes will be permitted to reopen on the same date.

But to say that "pubs are reopening" does not quite capture the truth of the situation. Bars and pubs will be subject to the same social distancing and headcount caps as other venues - with 4 square metres of space for each patron, up to a maximum of 10 patrons. Pubs and clubs will only be allowed to open "an eating area on the premises" according to the public health order issued 14 May, and can serve alcohol "only if any liquor sold is sold with or ancillary to food served".

The experience most typically associated with a pub - ordering a beer from the counter - will not be back on the menu. "The ability to conduct politics at the front bar of a pub are probably a way away yet," John Green of the Australian Hotels Association told Guardian Australia:

Related: A pub with no bar: what visiting a pub in NSW will look like now

Updated at 2.14am BST

2.03am BST

Reunions, eating out and a lot of haircuts: New Zealand embraces relaxation of lockdown

Charles Anderson reports for the Guardian from Nelson:

Joshua Young was raring to get to the Tahunanui Beach playground on Friday morning.

For almost two months, the seven-year-old Nelson resident has had to see one of his favourite play spots wrapped up in caution tape, while New Zealand undertook the strictest lockdown in its history.

While Joshua and his mother Claire Young have explored other parts of Nelson, there was no substitute for the popular beachside park.

"We are lucky here that there are plenty of places to play without climbing structures, but he just couldn't wait to come today," she said.

Returning to the playground was one of several signs of normality creeping across New Zealand as the nation settled into Covid-19 alert level 2. It began on Thursday with the re-opening of shops, malls, cafes, restaurants, cinemas, and other public spaces, including playgrounds and gyms. Family members kept apart by the lockdown were also finally allowed to reunite. Next week, schools and early learning centres across the country will also reopen.

Related: Reunions, eating out and a lot of haircuts: New Zealand embraces relaxation of lockdown

1.47am BST

Vietnam reported 24 new coronavirus infections on Friday, all of which were imported cases involving Vietnamese citizens returning from Russia who were placed under quarantine on arrival, the country's health ministry said. The Southeast Asian country has gone 29 days without a domestically transmitted infection and has registered a total of 312 cases, with no deaths, the ministry said. Over 90% of Vietnam's confirmed cases have recovered.

File picture of a health worker after spraying disinfectant inside a Vietnam Airlines plane during the coronavirus outbreak, at Noi Bai airport in Hanoi, Vietnam 21 February 2020.Photograph: Nguyen Huy Kham/Reuters

1.38am BST

Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases

Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.

The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally.

Priest Esteban Lopez wears a face mask as he checks the temperature of the people before entering the Sagrada Familia Church in Mexico City, on 14 May 2020.Photograph: Alfredo Estrella/AFP via Getty Images

Updated at 2.32am BST

1.27am BST

Meanwhile, the EU pledged to step up support for the island's breakaway Turkish-run north. Commission president Ursula Von Der Leyen, responding to a request for aid from the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akinci, said the bloc would provide 2.5 million euro for the immediate purchase of medical equipment. Further assistance will also be sent for the support of 25 health workers over the next three months with additional aid earmarked for farmers, she wrote in a letter to Akinci.

Medics perform an examination on a rescued Syrian refugee in the Iskele district (Trikomo) in the self-declared Turkish Republic of North Cyprus recognised only by Turkey, north of Famagusta, on 21 March 2020.Photograph: Birol Bebek/AFP via Getty Images

"The pandemic has forced humanity to deal with an unprecedented situation so we must all do our part and work together throughout these difficult times," the EU chief was quoted as saying in the letter.

A moderate, whose five-year term was due to end in April before the coronavirus caused presidential elections to be postponed, Akinci had requested the support at the end of March.

The leader had been slammed by the self-styled state's hawkish prime minister and other hardline nationalist politicians for previously accepting aid from Greek Cypriots. One MP described it as a backhanded attempt to "make the Greek side look nice."

Akinci has said he will be competing for a second term when the polls take place October 11 th.

After implementing strict lockdown measures, Cyprus, the EU's eastermost member, has managed to keep a tight lid on the pandemic reporting 905 confirmed cases in the internationally recognised Greek south and some 108 in the north. To date there have been 24 Covid-related deaths in the south and four in the north.

1.21am BST

Another case of coronavirus has been detected in Cyprus' sovereign British base areas, it was announced on Thursday.

A statement confirmed "one further member of the British Forces Cyprus community" had tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. The individual was in self-isolation after displaying what were described as "only mild symptoms."

"This brings the total number of positive tests within the British bases to 12," the announcement said.

Health workers wear protective gear while collecting nasopharyngeal swab samples from senior high school students in Nicosia, Cyprus, 13 May 2020.Photograph: Katia Christodoulou/EPA

It was unclear if the person had travelled recently from the UK. Despite commercial air traffic being suspended since 21 March by Greek Cypriot authorities in the war-split Mediterranean island, the UK military is believed to have continued airlifting personnel on transport planes from Britain. The Republic's lockdown regulations are however adhered to on the overseas territories with arrivals from the UK screened for the virus and ordered to self-isolate for two weeks.

The bases - a legacy of Cyprus' past as a former crown colony - are home to nearly 6,000 British military personnel and their dependents.

1.07am BST

Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000

The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.

The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.

The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data.

844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993.

Locals walk after the funeral of Chief Messias Martins Moreira, 53, of the Kokama ethnic group, who died of Covid-19, at Parque das Tribos in Manaus, Amazonas state, Brazil, Thursday, 14 May 2020.Photograph: Edmar Barros/AP

Updated at 8.06am BST

1.00am BST

And in other Trump news, in case you missed it:

Donald Trump goes maskless to tour medical equipment facility

Donald Trump traveled to a medical equipment distribution facility in Allentown, Pennsylvania, on Thursday, to tout a plan to replenish and upgrade the vital federal stockpile.

According to the pool report, "the president and his entourage were led around by Owens and Minor employees, who explained their distribution system and the products they handle.

"Trump and [White House chief of staff] Mark Meadows did not wear masks. Everyone else did."

The Pennsylvania event had the trappings of a campaign rally. For his remarks, Trump approached the podium to the sound of God Bless the USA:

Related: Donald Trump goes maskless to tour medical equipment facility

12.58am BST

Meanwhile a reporter for News 12 Long Island has shared this video of Trump supporters at a protest:

The level of anger directed at the media from these protestors was alarming. As always, I will tell a fair and unbiased story today. pic.twitter.com/5jCR0YY9VH

- Kevin Vesey (@KevinVesey) May 14, 2020

12.44am BST

Trump's remarks drew ridicule from Hu Xijin, editor in chief of China's influential Global Times tabloid, who referred to Trump's much-criticized comments last month about how Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, might be treated:

This president once suggested COVID-19 patients inject disinfectants to kill the virus. Remember this and you won't be surprised when he said he could cut off the whole relationship with China. All I can say is he is beyond my imagination for a normal president. pic.twitter.com/nl3icbhgUE

- Hu Xijin ??? (@HuXijin_GT) May 14, 2020

12.34am BST

Trump says he could cut China ties

US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over the novel coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy, Reuters reports.

In an interview with Fox Business Network broadcast on Thursday, Trump said he was very disappointed with China's failure to contain the disease and that the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing, which he has previously hailed as a major achievement.

US President Donald Trump walks to the White House residence after exiting Marine One on the South Lawn of the White House on 14 May 2020 in Washington, DC.Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images

"They should have never let this happen," Trump said. "So I make a great trade deal and now I say this doesn't feel the same to me. The ink was barely dry and the plague came over. And it doesn't feel the same to me." Trump's pique extended to Xi, with whom the US president has said repeatedly he has a good relationship. "But I just - right now I don't want to speak to him," Trump said in the interview, which was taped on Wednesday. Trump was asked about a Republican senator's suggestion that US visas be denied to Chinese students applying to study in fields related to national security, such as quantum computing and artificial intelligence. "There are many things we could do. We could do things. We could cut off the whole relationship," he replied. "Now, if you did, what would happen? You'd save $500 billion," Trump said, referring to estimated US annual imports from China, which he often refers to as lost money.

12.32am BST

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's coverage of the global coronavirus pandemic.

I'm Helen Sullivan, with you for the next few hours. You can get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

US President Donald Trump has said he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy. More on this shortly. Meanwhile, more than 300,000 people are confirmed to died in this crisis so far, according to Johns Hopkins University figures. The true number is likely to be higher.

•Global death toll passes 300,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has just passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected.According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 301,370 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,426,937 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.•Nearly 600,000 Australians have lost their jobs during the pandemic. Almost 600,000 Australians lost their jobs between March and April, unemployment rose to 6.2%, the underemployment rate increased by 4.9 points to 13.7% and the underutilisation rate increased by 5.9 points to 19.9%.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the figures were "terribly shocking, although not totally unexpected".•Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.•Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.•A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker.•36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.•The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK.•Officials in Bangladesh have announced the first confirmed case of coronavirus in the country's Rohingya refugee camps. Health experts and NGOs have issued warnings that the virus could race through the camps that house almost a million people forced to flee a military offensive in Myanmar almost two years ago.•Greece will open 515 organised beaches to the public this weekend, but alcohol and music will be banned, along with sports and games. Scientists advising the government also insisted that given the dictates of social distancing there can only be 40 people per 1000 sq meters.•Governments, health authorities and civil society groups should urgently address mental health problems sparked by the coronavirus pandemic, the UN secretary general has said. Launching a policy briefing on mental health during the outbreak, António Guterres said that "the Covid-19 pandemic is now hitting families and communities with additional mental stress."•Ten people in Vietnam, including a 70-year-old military veteran, have offered to donate their lungs to a British man who is the country's most seriously ill Covid-19 patient. "We are touched by their good intentions, but current regulations don't allow us to transplant lungs donated by most living people," a representative of Vietnam's organ transplant authority said.111812020-05-14T23:32:35Zfalsefalse2020-05-15T10:59:14ZtrueAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/dpdgyfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/94cfebec26771f8c5f4db7e0110e538755152d9a/0_152_4000_2401/500.jpgfalseentrueRestaurants in Berlin are allowed to reopen this evening for the first time in two months, and with the weather forecast looking good, it is predicted that they will be very full. Here is a breakdown of the rules governing the new normal here in the world of gastronomy. People from two separate households will be allowed to share a table, but must keep a distance of 1.5 metres from each other. Whether there is a maximum number of people allowed for each household has not been specified. For those from a single household the distancing rules do not apply. Waiting staff are required to wear face coverings. Cooks and other kitchen staff who do not come into contact with diners, are not. Diners are not required to wear masks, although it is recommended they do so. It's unclear how that is compatible with eating and drinking, as repeatedly taking off and putting on the masks is not recommended by hygiene experts. While guests are not obliged to make reservations, Berlin's senate has strongly advised restaurants to take down contact details of their guests, and to keep them for four weeks, in order to enable tracing in case of an infection. The likelihood is that restaurateurs will soon be allowed to put chairs and tables in front of their establishments without having to gain the necessary permit - on condition that the pavement is wide enough. In the district of Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg, officials have announced a plan to allow restaurants to effectively take over entire streets so that they can maximise the number of tables they can serve, and to ensure pavements do not become crowded. If restaurants submit applications specific to the streets they would like to occupy, officials will move to close the roads to traffic on Fridays and at weekends, between 11 am and 10pm. Some concerns have been expressed that that arrangement may put the safety of diners under threat - with some sceptics making reference to the Berlin Christmas market attack of 2016 when an Islamist terrorist drove a lorry into the crowd killing 12. I'm Aamna Mohdin, taking over the liveblog from my colleague Matt. If you want to get in touch, you can email me (aamna.mohdin@theguardian.com) or reach me on Twitter (@aamnamohdin). Here's a roundup of the key developments so far on Friday: China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus on Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April. Virus pushes Germany into recession German output shrank by 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020, according to new official data. The quarter-on-quarter contraction is "the worst since the financial crisis" in 2009, the federal statistics office Destatis said. The agency also revised its gross domestic product (GDP) figure for the final quarter of 2019 from zero growth to a contraction of 0.1%, meaning Germany has now experienced two consecutive quarters of contraction - the technical definition of a recession. Slovenia proclaims end to the outbreak Slovenia has become the first European country to proclaim an end to the coronavirus epidemic at home. It said on Friday that the spread of Covid-19 was under control and there was no longer a need for extraordinary health measures. Spain announces lowest daily death toll since Monday Spain's death toll from coronavirus registered its lowest increase since Monday with 138 new fatalities announced by the health ministry. The overall coronavirus death toll, in Europe's fourth worst hit country, rose to 27,459 on Friday, while the number of diagnosed cases rose to 230,183 cases from 229,540. Italy and Germany to ease more restrictions Italy is set to allow free travel across the country from 3 June, according to a draft decree seen by Reuters. The draft decree, which could still be modified before it is approved, also said all travel within separate Italian regions would be allowed from 18 May. Germany will loosen quarantine rules for travellers arriving from the European Union and the UK, according to the interior ministry. China responds diplomatically to Trump threat of cutting off ties China's foreign ministry has responded diplomatically to Donald Trump's threat of cutting ties with Beijing over the virus. The US president said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment. Cina's foreign ministry said on Friday that steady Sino-US bilateral relations served the interests of both countries. Baltic states restore free movement The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have opened their borders to each other to create a mini Schengen area. Free movement of people will be restored to all 6 million permanent residents of the Baltic states, but arrivals from outside the three countries will have to undergo a two-week quarantine period. Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally. Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000 The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993. South Korea, China and Japan health ministers to hold video conference The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year. Covid-19 reaches refugee camps in Bangladesh Aid groups have warned of a looming humanitarian disaster after coronavirus was detected for the first time in the sprawling camps that host about one million Rohingya refugees. The UN confirmed that an ethnic Rohingya refugee and another person had tested positive for Covid-19. "Both patients are in isolation and contact tracing is underway," the UN's refugee agency said in a statement. Germany will loosen coronavirus quarantine rules for travellers arriving from the European Union, the Schengen passport-free zone and Britain, Reuters reports, citing a spokesman for the interior ministry. Authorities will only recommend travellers go into quarantine if they arrive from countries with elevated numbers of infections, he said at a regular news conference. A mandatory two-week quarantine still applies for travellers from countries outside the EU, the spokesman said Children in Finland have been returning to school after eight weeks of lockdown, AFP reports. They will return for just two weeks before the summer holidays begin. The French health minister, Olivier Véran, has said he has been assured France will benefit from a coronavirus vaccine "if there is one". The comment came after Paul Hudson, the British CEO of the French-based pharmaceutical giant Sanofi, said it was working with the Americans to develop a Covid-19 vaccine and the US would be given priority. Hudson's remarks caused outrage in France, where Sanofi has received research tax credits. Véran said he had been reassured this would not be the case. "I believe it was a phrase, as far as I can understand, that was slightly clumsy and perhaps taken out of context. I was quite reassured by the conversation I had with Sanofi," Véran told French television. Two new studies have reportedly shown that hydroxychloroquine is not particularly effective against Covid-19 despite the claims of the charismatic Marseille epidemiologist Didier Raoult. New studies - one French and one Chinese - found the anti-malarial drug, whose use has been promoted by Donald Trump among others, did not significantly reduce the risk of the disease worsening or killing a patient, nor did it eliminate the virus any quicker than standard treatments. France is to quarantine arrivals from neighbouring Spain. This is a "reciprocal" measure after Spain imposed 14 days' quarantine for anyone arriving from the EU/Schengen area. The French border is currently closed to any visitors other than essential travellers who have a "compelling" professional or personal reason to enter the country and are carrying a sworn declaration to that effect. June 15 has been set for a possible reopening of French borders to European visitors. Deaths on French roads dropped by just under 56% during April compared with the same month last year. This is hardly surprising as everyone was locked down, but police records suggested those who were on the empty roads drove faster. The drop in road deaths explains why some departements saw fewer deaths even during the coronavirus crisis. Italy is set to allow free travel across the country from 3 June, according to a draft decree seen by Reuters, as the government moves to unwind the coronavirus lockdown and revive the battered economy. Rigid restrictions were imposed on Italy in March in an effort to halt the disease and, with the death rate now falling, the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, is rolling back the curbs. The draft decree, which could still be modified before it is approved, also said all travel within separate Italian regions would be allowed from 18 May. The phased reopening of America's national parks has raised concerns about exacerbating the spread of Covid-19 and endangering the residents of rural towns located near parks. "We don't want the parks to become super-spreaders," said Timothy Whitehouse, executive director of the non-profit Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility. "These communities simply do not have the capacity or the medical infrastructure to deal with an outbreak." Spain's death toll from coronavirus registered its lowest increase since Monday with 138 new fatalities announced by the health ministry, Reuters reports. The overall coronavirus death toll, in Europe's fourth worst hit country, rose to 27,459 on Friday, while the number of diagnosed cases rose to 230,183 cases from 229,540 on Thursday, the ministry said. The UK, Italy and France have all announced more coronavirus deaths than Spain. Slovenia has become the first European country to proclaim an end to the coronavirus epidemic at home, AP reports. It said on Friday that the spread of Covid-19 was under control and there was no longer a need for extraordinary health measures. The government says EU residents are free to cross into Slovenia from Austria, Italy and Hungary at predetermined checkpoints, while most non-EU nationals will have to undergo a mandatory 14-day quarantine. The first coronavirus case in Slovenia was recorded on 4 March, in someone returning from neighbouring Italy. By 13 May, there were 1,467 confirmed cases and 103 deaths in Slovenia. Update: Shaun Walker adds: An easing of restrictions began on 20 April when some shops reopened, while restaurants and bars are now allowed to serve customers on their outdoor terraces. Public transport is slowly resuming and some schools will open on Monday. Citizens are still advised to stick to social distancing and other virus prevention measures, but visitors arriving from EU countries who show no symptoms will no longer be required to quarantine. Russia has announced more than 10,000 new coronavirus infections on Friday, bringing the country's total to 262,843, the second-highest in the world after the United States. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, this week announced that a nationwide lockdown aimed at slowing the spread of the virus would be eased, even as health officials record a steady increase in new cases. The country reported 113 new coronavirus deaths on Friday, bringing Russia's total to 2,418. On Thursday, Russian officials defended the country against claims that its unusually low mortality rate from Covid-19 was suspicious, saying its method of ascribing cause of death was "exceptionally precise". German output shrank by 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020, official data showed on Friday, as the coronavirus pandemic tipped Europe's top economy into a recession, AFP reports. The quarter-on-quarter contraction is "the worst since the financial crisis" in 2009, the federal statistics office Destatis said. The agency also revised its gross domestic product (GDP) figure for the final quarter of 2019 from zero growth to a contraction of 0.1%, meaning Germany has now experienced two consecutive quarters of contraction - the technical definition of a recession. The German economy minister, Peter Altmaier, last month warned that the country was facing "the worst recession" in its postwar history as the pandemic battered the global economy. Most New Zealanders have embraced the easing restrictions with the first stop for many being the local hairdresser. In Auckland, the barber Tomi Cvetanovski said he saw his fair share of unkempt hair coming through his doors. He opened up at one minute past midnight on Thursday with a line outside and he did not close until 4.30am. Then he reopened at 6am and kept going until 7pm. Oh man, it's crazy, but I like it when it's like this. It was a big day, but everyone needs a haircut. For over a week Belgians have been allowed to pick just four friends or family who they may host at their home as part of a tentative easing of the lockdown. But a study from the University of Antwerp has revealed that social embarrassment is holding many back from breaking their lockdown bubbles. The study showed that nearly half (43%) of the 83,000 people who participated in the study had not taken advantage of relaxation and 41% said the "rule of four" forcing them to choose among their friends had made them tense. Koen Pepermans, faculty director of social sciences at Antwerp University, said: The confusion and choice stress that this measure brought with it could have led to people being reluctant. I also noticed in my circle that it was a difficult choice. Not making a choice at all was perhaps the best choice that almost half of the participants chose. There is also a lack of trust with 85% of participants admitting that they did not think their friends would stick to the social distancing rules. "The younger the participant, the more pessimistic they are towards the other," Pepermans said. The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have opened their borders to each other from Friday to create a mini Schengen area, Latvia's broadcaster LSM.LV reports. Free movement of people will be restored to all 6 million permanent residents of the Baltic states, but arrivals from outside the three countries will have to undergo a two-week quarantine period. The Latvian president, Egils Levits, said: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have created a small Schengen area in Europe - an area without internal borders. From today, all of us, the 6 million of the Baltics, are free to cross the borders between our countries, subject to epidemiological rules. This is especially important for Latvia because Lithuania and Estonia are our largest economic partners. Life-sized cardboard cutouts of football fans are being used to try to provide atmosphere at empty stadiums in Germany as the suspended Bundesliga gets ready to resume. Thousands of Borussia Moenchengladbach fans have ordered (EURO)18 cutouts of themselves for their first home fixture at Borussia Park next week, Reuters reports. Belgian Trappist monks who brew one of the world's most coveted beers have reopened for business after a two-month break, though Covid-19 restrictions mean they can only supply local rather than international demand, Reuters reports. The Saint-Sixtus abbey, home to 19 monks, launched an online sale on Thursday evening of 6,000 crates, with pick-ups starting on Friday. Exceptionally, customers can buy three crates. Normally it is just two. Customers can come as usual by car, but are told not to leave their vehicles while queuing until they pass a newly installed traffic light before the pick-up point. There, a lay worker in mask and gloves passes their 24-bottle crates through a small gap in a plastic screen. Payment must made electronically, not with cash. The nearby cafe serving the beers remains closed. Demand is no issue. Brother Godfried said 5,000 new online accounts were created from Wednesday to Thursday, bringing the total to 35,000. "The picture is a bit distorted as for now we can only offer on the Belgian market. The borders are shut, even though the beer draws a certain international interest," he told Reuters. The monks sold a few cases in advance to test their new system. Thomas Vuylsteke, a 33-year-old lawyer, was one of the lucky recipients. "It has been selected a few times as the best beer in the world and it is really tasty. It's always great," he said. Afghanistan has recorded its worst day of the crisis so far, as the country's health ministry confirmed 414 new transmissions of Covid-19 and 17 more deaths. Afghanistan has so far confirmed 6,053 cases, 153 deaths and 745 recoveries. In a WhatsApp message to reporters, Wahid Majroh, the country's deputy health minister, said 1,122 suspected patients had been tested in the last 24 hours after the ministry pledged to increase the number of tests. The capital, Kabul, and the western province of Herat recorded most of the new infections. Kabul is the country's worst affected area with 1,793 cases. Despite a government authorised lockdown in several provinces, the streets are still crowded, raising fears among experts of a surge in the number of death and infections. China's foreign ministry has responded diplomatically to Donald Trump's threat of cutting ties with Beijing over the virus. The US president said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment. Asked what measures he intended to take against China, he said: "There are many things we could do ... We could cut off the whole relationship." China's foreign ministry said on Friday that steady Sino-US bilateral relations served the interests of both countries. But its foreign ministry spokesman, Zhao Lijian, told reporters during a daily briefing that the US needed to cooperate with China in order to achieve stable relations. The environmental campaigner Greta Thunberg has challenged "the myth" that children are not affected by the virus and can't spread it. Speaking to CNN, the 17-year-old activist urged children to stick to physical distancing rules. She said: It's sort of a myth right now that children are not being being affected by this virus. And that is very wrong. Children both do get this disease and they also spread it on to others. So we need to be very careful that this misinformation, that it doesn't affect children, becomes mainstream. We need to make sure that people understand that this affects children. Thunberg went into isolation in March after displaying mild symptoms of coronavirus. She said: Many people don't even notice that they have symptoms and then they might spread the virus without even knowing it. We young people have a very big responsibility because we we might not experience the symptoms as as bad as many others. So we have to be extra careful, because our actions can be the difference between life and death for many others. She also expressed hope that the crisis would mean that politicians and the public now followed the warnings of scientists. She said: More people are starting to realise that we are actually depending on science, and that we need to listen to scientists and experts. I really hope that stays for other crises, such as the climate crisis and the environmental crisis, that we understand that we have to listen to the scientists. Nearly a quarter of a billion people across 47 African countries will catch coronavirus over the next year, but the result will be fewer severe cases and deaths than in the US and Europe, new research predicts. A model by the World Health Organization's (WHO) regional office for Africa, published in the BMJ Global Health, predicts a lower rate of transmission and viral spread across the continent than elsewhere, resulting in up to 190,000 deaths. But the authors warn the associated rise in hospital admissions, care needs and "huge impact" on services such as immunisation and maternity, will overwhelm already stretched health services. About one in four (22%) of the one billion people in the countries measured would be infected in the first year of the pandemic, the model suggests. However the disease is likely to linger for longer - possibly for several years. Aid groups have warned of a looming humanitarian disaster after coronavirus was detected for the first time in the sprawling camps that host about one million Rohingya refugees. The camps in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh, which are more densely populated than some of the world's busiest cities, have been under lockdown since 14 March, in an attempt to stop the virus from spreading. On Thursday, the UN confirmed that an ethnic Rohingya refugee and another person had tested positive for Covid-19. "Both patients are in isolation and contact tracing is underway," the UN's refugee agency said in a statement. Like many children across the world sent home from school, youngsters in Turkey were encouraged to draw pictures of rainbows and place them in windows to cheer up the country in the face of the coronavirus pandemic. Orders to teachers from some local education boards to stop because the rainbows were part of a "plot" to turn children gay were met with surprise. Instead of boosting morale, the lockdown rainbows have become yet another symbol of division, the latest cultural battleground in a country highly polarised along political and religious lines. "Unfortunately this sort of anti-LGBTQ mentality is widespread amongst policy makers even if ordinary people don't see a connection between children's drawings and gay rights," said Meral Gülsen, a representative for teachers union Egitim Sen. That's it from me, Helen Sullivan for today. I only wish I knew when that would be it for my neighbour's music speaker, too. Thanks, as always, for following along. Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak. The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures. China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus on Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April. Trump threatens to cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment and going so far as to suggest he could cut ties with the world's second largest economy. Chinese state media has responded saying his comments are "lunacy". Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself. Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work. Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally. Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993. South Korea, China and Japan health ministers to hold video conference. The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year. Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation. Covid-19 reaches refugee camps in Bangladesh. A Rohingya man has become the first person to test positive for Covid-19 in the vast refugee camps in Bangladesh that is home to almost one million people. Local health coordinator Abu Toha Bhuiyan initially said two refugees had been put into isolation. The World Health Organization later said one case was of a Rohingya man, and the other was of a local man who lived near the camp and was being treated at a clinic inside the area. 36 million Americans are now unemployed. Another 3 million Americans filed for benefits, bringing the country's total unemployed to 36 million. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan. Global report: Trump threat to cut trade ties over Covid-19 branded 'lunacy' by Chinese media An escalation of rhetoric between Donald Trump and China over the coronavirus pandemic has sparked concerns that a trade deal between the nations is in peril, as Chinese state media dismissed as "lunacy" a suggestion by the US president that he could "cut off relations with Beijing. The US president said he was very disappointed with China's failure to contain Covid-19 in an interview with Fox Business news. Trump said the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing and that he had no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping at the moment. Asked what measures he intended to take against China, he said: "There are many things we could do ... We could cut off the whole relationship." "Now, if you did, what would happen? You'd save $500bn," Trump said, referring to estimated US annual imports from China, which he has previously referred to as lost money. The state-backed Global Times responded with an editorial titled "Trump turns up election strategy nonsense with China 'cut-off' threat". "The very idea should not come as a surprise for those who remember when Trump speculated if disinfectants could be used on humans 'by injection' to wipe out the novel coronavirus [Covid-19]," it said. "Such lunacy is a clear byproduct, first and foremost, of the proverbial anxiety that the US has suffered from since China began its global ascension," it said on Friday. "Trump seems insane right now or may have some psychological problems," another editorial wrote. The escalating row between the two countries came as China marked one month with no deaths from Covid-19 and just four newly confirmed cases in the 24 hours to Friday. What coronavirus is doing to stressed US health workers - and why it will be felt for years Jenn Caldwell is a hospital nurse in Kansas City, Missouri. By her estimate, she has cared for nearly three dozen Covid-19 patients since the pandemic began, and her close friend, a fellow nurse, has died from the virus. When she developed an upset stomach consistent with Covid-19 she lost her composure. She curled up in a ball, cried and hyperventilated. Later, Caldwell wrote down all her financial account information, put it in her lockbox and texted her 20-year-old daughter the code. "It's so random who is getting Covid and dying. There was a definite panic, a definite freak-out," Caldwell said, a member of the union National Nurses United. "It heightens my anxiety and paranoia ... I didn't feel like I had any before." The the airlines Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon saw their passenger loads plummet by 62.3% to 21.7% in April, Reuters reports. Cathay Pacific & Cathay Dragon carried a total of 13,729 passengers, a decrease of 99.6% compared to April 2019. In April, the two airlines carried 84,634 tonnes of cargo and mail, a decrease of 48.3% compared to April 2019. The airlines expect that average daily passenger numbers will remain at around 500 in May. In a report, the airlines said it is "widely expected that international travel demand will only return to pre covid-19 levels in a few years." But, it added, "At this stage, we still see no immediate signs of improvement". This Australian snake doesn't seem to have heard that there are now more reasons to leave the house: Australia is easing restrictions: Global death toll passes 302,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected. According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 302,452 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,443,597 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures. China marks one month with no new coronavirus deaths announced. China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April. Trump says he could cut China ties. US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over the novel coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy. Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work. The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will gather by video conference to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year. Mexico sees record one-day increase in cases. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began.The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally. Brazil confirmed cases pass 200,000. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday.The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry.The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993. Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation. A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker. 36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK. Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan. The health ministers of South Korea, China and Japan will get together by video conference on Friday to discuss ways to work together in the global campaign against the novel coronavirus, South Korean officials said. The meeting is the first between top health officials of the East Asian neighbours since the outbreak emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year. "The ministers will exchange views on the latest Covid-19 situation and related policy of each country," South Korea's Vice Health Minister Kim Gang-lip told a briefing, referring to the disease caused by the new coronavirus. "We're planning to introduce our work on information sharing, special entry procedures and large-scale treatment facilities." All three countries are optimistic they have got their outbreaks under control and are looking to get their economics back on track while keeping a wary eye out for any second waves of infection. China's Wuhan is seeking to test all of its 11 million residents for the coronavirus after a small cluster of new cases stoked fears after a long lockdown was lifted. Japan lifted a state of emergency in large swaths of the country on Thursday but major cities remain under restrictions and new testing indicated the outbreak in Tokyo was wider than the figures showed. South Korea, which suffered the first major outbreak outside China, has been held up as a coronavirus mitigation success story, bringing its daily rate of cases down to near zero without major disruptions, thanks to intensive testing and contact tracing. But a recent spike in infections linked to nightclubs and bars in some Seoul nightlife districts has led to the re-closing of some night spots and the postponement of the opening of schools by a week. Uki Goñi reports for the Guardian: Coronavirus statistics have started rising sharply in Argentina in line with government predictions that mid-May could see a spike in cases. Thursday saw a record 24 deaths and 255 new cases, after Wednesday's record 317 new cases, bringing the total so far to 353 deaths and 7134 cases. The numbers are being pushed up by a sudden rise in the capital city of Buenos Aires, with 60% of reported new cases Thursday, most of them in the city's large "villas", or shanty towns, home to some 400 thousand of the city's three million inhabitants. The city's surrounding Greater Buenos Aires Area, home to another seven million people, was responsible for 30% of the day's new cases, with the rest of Argentina, total population 44 million, reporting only 10% of the day's toll. The national duplication rate of cases showed a worrying fall in recent days, from 25 days just one week ago, to only 17 days Thursday. The duplication rate in the city of Buenos Aires is well below the national average, at only 10 days Thursday. As Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison mentioned in that press conference earlier, suicides in three Australian states, Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania, have not increased during the lockdown. Christine Morgan, CEO of the National Mental Health Commission and National Suicide Prevention Adviser to Morrison, was asked at the national press conference what she made of Japan's decline in suicides in April, reported on Thursday. In response she asked: Is there a protective component in what we are finding (in the lockdown)? Which has been so challenging for so many. But maybe there's a silver lining. We have stopped. We have connected. We have been at home. We are in communication with people. We don't know the answer, but that's really important. " Helen Sullivan with you here. A short while ago I took a lunchtime stroll around my neighbourhood, which happens to be Bondi, in Sydney, Australia. The New South Wales state regulations were eased today, which means people can dine in at bars, restaurants and cafes - something in no short supply in the neighbourhoods surrounding one of the world's most famous beaches. Small restaurants and cafes are allowed 10 patrons at a time. Blog readers, it was a sight for sore eyes: a family of four walking around a little uncertainly, like they had perhaps been really strict about social distancing, looking for - it seemed - a cafe to go to. Dad patted his back pocket to make sure his wallet was there, and they crossed the road with purpose. My local repainted its walls for the occasion of the eased restrictions, and was looking pretty schmick: A nearby bagel shop had both its outside tables - it usually has about seven or so - occupied and a lunchtime queue was forming. Next door, a barber shop, which had closed completely on 28 March, was doing a roaring trade. All barbers and customers wore masks, and in the window was a laminated poster showing that the business had completed Covid-19 training. A customer left, and one of the barbers sprayed what I assume was disinfectant to an empty chair and wiped it down vigorously. There was a very faint drizzle in the air - winter is arriving in Sydney - but the sun was shining. Mate, it was pretty good. That press conference has now ended. I spoke too soon. Back to that press conference for a moment, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is talking about the country's relationship with China now and he's getting a bit worked up: When it comes to our relationship with China, it is built on mutual benefit. And we have a comprehensive strategic partnership which we've formed. And within that partnership, there are issues that need to be addressed from time to time, and the issues around beef and barley are those matters. And they have been, particularly on the barley issue, been running for some time. He is speaking after China imposed a ban on beef supplied by four Australian abattoirs and Beijing proposed imposing crippling tariffs on barley imports. I'd stress again that what the Australian Government is doing is completely unremarkable. We are standing our ground on our values and the things that we know are always important.... One of the most important things about our approach to relationship is we're always consistent. We're always consistent. We draw very clear lines about things that are very important to us, as does the Chinese government. And we respect their lines, as we expect our lines to be respected, whether it's on our foreign investment rules, or our rules around technology, our rules regarding human rights and things of that nature. I don't think anyAustralian would want us to compromise on those important things. And those things are not to be traded. Ever. Now, our Government is very clear about these things, and we will always continue to be clear. And these are not things to be traded. Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison on Trump and jobs: Reporter: What's your response toPresident Trump announcing that he's "changing all the policies"? Morrison: We'll see what occurs there as it rolls out. But we have our contracts and arrangements in place for all of those matters, so we'll continue to pursue them in the normal way. Reporter: The "America First" slogan, is that something that Australia should perhaps adopt and prioritise Australian jobs? Morrison: Australia will always prioritise Australian jobs, and we always have. And one of the ways we've always done that is we've always had an outward look when it comes to our economic opportunities. Australia is one of the most successful trading nations on earth, and our economic prosperity lies not just here, but continuing to be an open trading nation. This is how we've always succeeded in the past.And Australia will continue to look to its prosperity both here at home and overseas to ensure that we can prioritise Australian jobs. As Australia adopts its National Mental Health and Wellbeing Pandemic Response Plan, Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt says: We've already had some information from Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania that is heartening, and more heartening than we'd expected. For the first four months, there has been no known increase in suicide rates in those three states. We watch very carefully, however, because these things can build up. They can brew. People can dwell. And so we want to get ahead of the curve." Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison says just 1% of the country's aged care facilities were affected by Coronavirus: There are two areas that National Cabinet was most concerned at the start of this crisis more than any. One was, of course, our elderly, and the fact that only 1%, or thereabouts, of the aged care facilities in this country have been affected by Covid is a tremendous credit to the aged care sector. But the other has been the low level of infection that has occurred in Indigenous communities around Australia. And to ourIndigenous leaders in each and everyone of those hundreds of communities, thank you for your leadership. Thank you for keeping your communities, our people, together, safe. Brendan Murphy, the country's Chief Medical Officer, is speaking now. There are just 50 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across Australia, with 12 of those people on ventilators, he says. My general epidemiology update, with 7,017 cases at the moment. Around about 20 new cases a day over recent days. Still a small number of community-acquired cases in some jurisdictions. Just a reminder this virus is still there, at very low levels in the community, and I reiterate the Prime Minister's message - as people start to go back to some normal activities and open up, please, please be careful. Please practise all of those new ways of interacting that we've talked about on so many occasions. Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison says: As businesses and cafes and others are opened up this weekend, those businesses, knowing that at just 10patrons at a time, that won't necessarily be a profitable patronage for them to really sustain that, they're backing themselves, they're backing their staff, they're backing their communities, and they're backing their country. And I want to commend them for that brave step that they're taking this weekend. Good on ya for reopening. Morrison announces decisions made by the national Cabinet: Elective surgeries can resume The National Mental Health and Wellbeing Pandemic Response Plan was adopted. An additional AI$48.1 million was committed for the implementation of that plan. Human biosecurity emergency powers have also been extended under the Biosecurity Act, from June 17 to September 17. Australia's Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is speaking to the media now. Morrison begins with the usual preamble about the difficulties we all face. Says state leaders have met more in the past two months than the previous 10 years. But with restrictions easing following the release of the government's roadmap last week, Morrison says now "the task is to really build that confidence and to get that momentum going, as we move to the next challenge, which is to reset the Australian economy for growth to support Australians and their livelihoods well into the future". He says today's National Cabinet meeting was briefed by the head of the Treasury department, Philip Lowe, the head of the Reserve Bank, and Wayne Byres, the head of APRA. Top luxury brands from Chanel to Louis Vuitton have increased prices of some of their most coveted products as they seek to make up for sales lost during weeks of coronavirus lockdowns. High-end houses have all reported brisk business in South Korea and the key Chinese market, where shops began to reopen in March, partly offsetting a slump in Europe and the United States, where restrictions are only just starting to be lifted. But with consultancy Bain estimating sales for the $300 billion sector to fall by up to 35% this year, bringing to a crushing halt a decade of spectacular growth, luxury groups are moving quickly to protect margins. Chanel said on Wednesday it was increasing prices on its iconic handbags and some small leather goods by between 5% and 17% around the world as the pandemic had pushed up the cost of certain raw materials. "These adjustments are made while ensuring that we avoid excessive price differentials between countries," it said. Industry powerhouse LVMH's star fashion label Louis Vuitton - which the company said last month was enjoying sales growth in excess of 50% in China in early April - has also been hiking prices of handbags in the United States and Europe. In China and South Korea, people were queuing outside Chanel stores as soon as rumours of imminent price increases began to spread on social media. Xie Lan, a documentary maker in Beijing, said she had managed to buy a handbag for nearly 30,000 yuan ($4,225) before the price hike. "Work is busy and stressful, I wanted to give myself a treat," she said by phone. Israel's children can go back to school and nurseries full-time, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Thursday, as the country presses on with easing its coronavirus curbs. Israel, which has a population nine million, has reported 16,579 cases of the novel coronavirus and 265 deaths. With the new case rate levelling out in the past few weeks, it has lifted bans on gatherings, eased travel and reopened malls and markets. A partial reopening of schools began on 3 May, with the first three grades of elementary school and the last two grades of high school redistributed in classes capped at 15 pupils to enforce social-distancing. Kindergartens joined a week later. In a written statement, Netanyahu said that from Sunday all children, from the age of zero, may go back to school on a voluntary basis. Those in outbreak epicentres, however, would have to stay home for now. Schools reopening full time could help the economy contend with the fallout of weeks of coronavirus lockdown, relieving working parents from having to stay at home and mind their children. More than 1.1 million people have filed for unemployment benefits in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, which would be equal to a jobless rate of about 27%. They include employees put on unpaid leave, some self-employed, as well as those who have lost their jobs entirely. We have more from Mexico, which has recorded its biggest daily rise in cases. Assistant health secretary Hugo López-Gatell has called it the "peak moment" when the country is experiencing its fastest growth but also pointed to declines in cities such as Cancún, Villahermosa in the Gulf coast state of Tabasco, Culiacán in the northern state of Sinaloa, and the border city of Tijuana. Mexico recorded 2,409 cases on Thursday, the first time it has exceeded 2,000 in one day. Officials also reported 257 more deaths from Covid-19, making a total of 4,477 since the pandemic began 'They threw us into chaos': Wisconsin lockdown ruling is latest in partisan war A conservative majority on the Wisconsin supreme court struck down a stay-at-home order from the state's Democratic governor on Wednesday, further illustrating the remarkable amount of power Republicans have in the state and the way they have been able to curb the authority of their Democratic rivals. The Wisconsin decision is the most significant legal victory for conservatives, egged on by Donald Trump, who are beginning to challenge stay-at-home orders across the country through protests and legal actions. Republican lawmakers in Michigan, where the legislature is extremely gerrymandered, are also challenging the legal authority of a similar order issued by the state's Democratic governor there. Other suits from businesses challenging stay-at-home orders in other states have been largely unsuccessful, so far. The decision was the latest in a nasty partisan battle in Wisconsin between Republicans and Democrats that has shaped the last decade. The state is narrowly divided politically and seen as a crucial state to win for both campaigns in the November presidential election. Stranded without support, international students across Australia rely on free food to survive International students and other temporary visa holders locked out of federal government support are relying on food banks and restaurants giving away free meals to survive during the coronavirus pandemic. Images of long lines outside emergency relief services have emerged in the international student hubs of Sydney and Melbourne, as well as smaller cities including Darwin. Australia has more than 560,000 international students, many of whom have supported themselves with part-time or casual jobs while studying. But as the economy has shut down and with the federal government declining to offer direct financial support to temporary visa holders, the queues forming outside food banks each day suggest that startling numbers are now struggling to feed themselves. National food relief charities say the increase in demand has been huge, driven by a surge in requests from temporary visa holders. Here is the video of US President Donald Trump saying that he could 'cut off' the relationship with China following the coronavirus outbreak. In an interview wth Fox Business, Trump expressed his disappointment with China for failing to contain the Covid-19 outbreak before adding he maintained a good relationship with leader, Xi Jinping, but 'right now, I don't want to speak with him': China has gone a month without announcing any new deaths from the coronavirus, AP reports. The National Health Commission reported four new cases of the virus Friday, all local cross-infections in the northeastern province of Jilin where a cluster of uncertain origin has been detected in recent days. The last time the commission reported a death was on 14 April. Just 91 people remain in treatment for Covid-19 and 623 others are under isolation and monitoring for being suspected cases or for having tested positive without showing symptoms, including 11 newly detected. In total, China has reported 4,633 deaths among 82,933 cases since the virus was first detected late last year in the central city of Wuhan. China has maintained social distancing and bans on foreigners entering the country, but has increasingly opened up the world's second-largest economy to allow both large factories and small businesses to resume production and dealings with customers. The government plans to hold the ceremonial parliament's annual session later this month, but with highly limited access for journalists and others. Beleaguered cruise operators signalled a return in demand for cruises that would set sail late this year or early 2021 after travel restrictions and no-sail orders due to the Covid-19 pandemic raised concerns about the future of the industry. Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd and Carnival Corp said on Thursday customers were booking trips, even though there was no clarity on when the cruises would begin. Shares of Norwegian, Carnival and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd reversed course following the positive commentary on demand from Norwegian executives on a post-earnings call. The cruise industry has been hammered by the coronavirus as health officials asked customers to avoid cruises and extended port quarantines in Japan and California. Norwegian Cruise's Chief Executive Officer Frank Del Rio said the company noticed a significant amount of new cash bookings in April and collected advanced ticket sales. "It took decades to build this industry," Del Rio told analysts on the call. "And in a matter of weeks, we dismantled it. And it's going to take not decades to build it up again, but a little time. And we just have to be patient." This three Michelin star Virginia restaurant has its own innovative solutions to the new normal: There you are enjoying a nice meal at an ornate, three-Michelin star restaurant, when you spot something odd. The waiter refills the wine glass of the patron sitting next to you. The person does not move, they do not blink. They do not even say "thank you" to the waiter. You are dining with a dummy. Welcome to dining out in the age of coronavirus. That's the experience the Inn at Little Washington, a restaurant in northern Virginia, is planning for diners as they experiment with what dining in could look like amid the Covid-19 pandemic. With the idea that guests may feel lonely eating at a restaurant that can only reach 50% capacity - the maximum mandated by Virginia's social distancing regulations - the restaurant will be placing mannequins throughout its dining rooms. A pub with no bar: what visiting a pub in the Australian state of New South Wales will look like now In Australia, the New South Wales state government has announced that bars and clubs with kitchens will be able to reopen on 15 May, as Covid-19 lockdowns ease. Restaurants and cafes will be permitted to reopen on the same date. But to say that "pubs are reopening" does not quite capture the truth of the situation. Bars and pubs will be subject to the same social distancing and headcount caps as other venues - with 4 square metres of space for each patron, up to a maximum of 10 patrons. Pubs and clubs will only be allowed to open "an eating area on the premises" according to the public health order issued 14 May, and can serve alcohol "only if any liquor sold is sold with or ancillary to food served". The experience most typically associated with a pub - ordering a beer from the counter - will not be back on the menu. "The ability to conduct politics at the front bar of a pub are probably a way away yet," John Green of the Australian Hotels Association told Guardian Australia: Reunions, eating out and a lot of haircuts: New Zealand embraces relaxation of lockdown Charles Anderson reports for the Guardian from Nelson: Joshua Young was raring to get to the Tahunanui Beach playground on Friday morning. For almost two months, the seven-year-old Nelson resident has had to see one of his favourite play spots wrapped up in caution tape, while New Zealand undertook the strictest lockdown in its history. While Joshua and his mother Claire Young have explored other parts of Nelson, there was no substitute for the popular beachside park. "We are lucky here that there are plenty of places to play without climbing structures, but he just couldn't wait to come today," she said. Returning to the playground was one of several signs of normality creeping across New Zealand as the nation settled into Covid-19 alert level 2. It began on Thursday with the re-opening of shops, malls, cafes, restaurants, cinemas, and other public spaces, including playgrounds and gyms. Family members kept apart by the lockdown were also finally allowed to reunite. Next week, schools and early learning centres across the country will also reopen. Vietnam reported 24 new coronavirus infections on Friday, all of which were imported cases involving Vietnamese citizens returning from Russia who were placed under quarantine on arrival, the country's health ministry said. The Southeast Asian country has gone 29 days without a domestically transmitted infection and has registered a total of 312 cases, with no deaths, the ministry said. Over 90% of Vietnam's confirmed cases have recovered. Mexico's health ministry on Thursday confirmed 257 additional coronavirus deaths and 2,409 new infections, the biggest one-day rise in cases since the pandemic began. The new infections brought confirmed coronavirus cases to 42,595 and 4,477 deaths in total, according to the official tally. Meanwhile, the EU pledged to step up support for the island's breakaway Turkish-run north. Commission president Ursula Von Der Leyen, responding to a request for aid from the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akinci, said the bloc would provide 2.5 million euro for the immediate purchase of medical equipment. Further assistance will also be sent for the support of 25 health workers over the next three months with additional aid earmarked for farmers, she wrote in a letter to Akinci. "The pandemic has forced humanity to deal with an unprecedented situation so we must all do our part and work together throughout these difficult times," the EU chief was quoted as saying in the letter. A moderate, whose five-year term was due to end in April before the coronavirus caused presidential elections to be postponed, Akinci had requested the support at the end of March. The leader had been slammed by the self-styled state's hawkish prime minister and other hardline nationalist politicians for previously accepting aid from Greek Cypriots. One MP described it as a backhanded attempt to "make the Greek side look nice." Akinci has said he will be competing for a second term when the polls take place October 11th. After implementing strict lockdown measures, Cyprus, the EU's eastermost member, has managed to keep a tight lid on the pandemic reporting 905 confirmed cases in the internationally recognised Greek south and some 108 in the north. To date there have been 24 Covid-related deaths in the south and four in the north. Another case of coronavirus has been detected in Cyprus' sovereign British base areas, it was announced on Thursday. A statement confirmed "one further member of the British Forces Cyprus community" had tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. The individual was in self-isolation after displaying what were described as "only mild symptoms." "This brings the total number of positive tests within the British bases to 12," the announcement said. It was unclear if the person had travelled recently from the UK. Despite commercial air traffic being suspended since 21 March by Greek Cypriot authorities in the war-split Mediterranean island, the UK military is believed to have continued airlifting personnel on transport planes from Britain. The Republic's lockdown regulations are however adhered to on the overseas territories with arrivals from the UK screened for the virus and ordered to self-isolate for two weeks. The bases - a legacy of Cyprus' past as a former crown colony - are home to nearly 6,000 British military personnel and their dependents. The number of cases in Brazil passed 200,000 on Thursday. The country now has 202,918 confirmed cases, with 13,944 added in last 24 hours, according to health ministry. The tally means it is the sixth-worst-affected country worldwide in terms of cases, according to Johns Hopkins data. 844 new deaths were reported in last 24 hours, bringing the total to 13,993. And in other Trump news, in case you missed it: Donald Trump goes maskless to tour medical equipment facility Donald Trump traveled to a medical equipment distribution facility in Allentown, Pennsylvania, on Thursday, to tout a plan to replenish and upgrade the vital federal stockpile. According to the pool report, "the president and his entourage were led around by Owens and Minor employees, who explained their distribution system and the products they handle. "Trump and [White House chief of staff] Mark Meadows did not wear masks. Everyone else did." The Pennsylvania event had the trappings of a campaign rally. For his remarks, Trump approached the podium to the sound of God Bless the USA: Meanwhile a reporter for News 12 Long Island has shared this video of Trump supporters at a protest: Trump's remarks drew ridicule from Hu Xijin, editor in chief of China's influential Global Times tabloid, who referred to Trump's much-criticized comments last month about how Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, might be treated: US President Donald Trump signalled a further deterioration of his relationship with China over the novel coronavirus, saying he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy, Reuters reports. In an interview with Fox Business Network broadcast on Thursday, Trump said he was very disappointed with China's failure to contain the disease and that the pandemic had cast a pall over his January trade deal with Beijing, which he has previously hailed as a major achievement. "They should have never let this happen," Trump said. "So I make a great trade deal and now I say this doesn't feel the same to me. The ink was barely dry and the plague came over. And it doesn't feel the same to me." Trump's pique extended to Xi, with whom the US president has said repeatedly he has a good relationship. "But I just - right now I don't want to speak to him," Trump said in the interview, which was taped on Wednesday. Trump was asked about a Republican senator's suggestion that US visas be denied to Chinese students applying to study in fields related to national security, such as quantum computing and artificial intelligence. "There are many things we could do. We could do things. We could cut off the whole relationship," he replied. "Now, if you did, what would happen? You'd save $500 billion," Trump said, referring to estimated US annual imports from China, which he often refers to as lost money. Hello and welcome to today's coverage of the global coronavirus pandemic. I'm Helen Sullivan, with you for the next few hours. You can get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan. US President Donald Trump has said he has no interest in speaking to President Xi Jinping right now and going so far as to suggest he could even cut ties with the world's second largest economy. More on this shortly. Meanwhile, more than 300,000 people are confirmed to died in this crisis so far, according to Johns Hopkins University figures. The true number is likely to be higher. Global death toll passes 300,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has just passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected.According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 301,370 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,426,937 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures. Nearly 600,000 Australians have lost their jobs during the pandemic. Almost 600,000 Australians lost their jobs between March and April, unemployment rose to 6.2%, the underemployment rate increased by 4.9 points to 13.7% and the underutilisation rate increased by 5.9 points to 19.9%.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the figures were "terribly shocking, although not totally unexpected". Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation. Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work. A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker. 36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK. Officials in Bangladesh have announced the first confirmed case of coronavirus in the country's Rohingya refugee camps. Health experts and NGOs have issued warnings that the virus could race through the camps that house almost a million people forced to flee a military offensive in Myanmar almost two years ago. Greece will open 515 organised beaches to the public this weekend, but alcohol and music will be banned, along with sports and games. Scientists advising the government also insisted that given the dictates of social distancing there can only be 40 people per 1000 sq meters. Governments, health authorities and civil society groups should urgently address mental health problems sparked by the coronavirus pandemic, the UN secretary general has said. Launching a policy briefing on mental health during the outbreak, António Guterres said that "the Covid-19 pandemic is now hitting families and communities with additional mental stress." Ten people in Vietnam, including a 70-year-old military veteran, have offered to donate their lungs to a British man who is the country's most seriously ill Covid-19 patient. "We are touched by their good intentions, but current regulations don't allow us to transplant lungs donated by most living people," a representative of Vietnam's organ transplant authority said.68553falsefalseAamna Mohdin (now), Matthew Weaver and Helen Sullivan (earlier)People wearing face masks dance at a park in Shenyang, in China's northeastern Liaoning province.Borussia Moenchengladbach supporters sustain their club by buying cardboard characters, so called 'Pappkameraden', that will be printed and then displayed at the stadium when games resumeBrother Paul, a Belgian Trappist monk at Saint-Sixtus Abbey, wears a protective face mask while showing a bottle of Westvleteren beer at the drive thru area of the bottling plantEnvironmental activist, Greta Thunberg, talks via video linkA Cathay Pacific Airline plane takes off from the runway at the Hong Kong International Airport in Hong Kong, 12 Apr 2020.Visitors wearing face masks walk near the Gwanghwamun, the main gate of the 14th-century Gyeongbok Palace, and one of South Korea's well-known landmarks, in Seoul, South Korea, 22 February 2020.People wearing face mask attend the city fair to buy foods during the new phase of the national quarantine in Argentina Coronavirus outbreak, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 14 May 2020.A woman is having her handbag checked by a security staff as she is about to enter a Vuitton store on the Champs Elysees on 11 May 2020 in Paris, France.Parents wait with their children to enter their elementary school in Sderot as it reopens in Israel 3 May, 2020.Visitors wearing face masks enter the Disneyland theme park in Shanghai as it reopened, Monday, 11 May 2020.US Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings cruise ship Marina arrives at the Havana bay, Cuba 9 March, 2017.Mannequins costumed in 1940s era clothing are seated in the dining area of the Inn at Little Washington, a Michelin three star restaurant in the Virginia countryside, in Rappahannock County 14 May 2020 in Washington, Virginia.File picture of a health worker after spraying disinfectant inside a Vietnam Airlines plane during the coronavirus outbreak, at Noi Bai airport in Hanoi, Vietnam 21 February 2020.Priest Esteban Lopez wears a face mask as he checks the temperature of the people before entering the Sagrada Familia Church in Mexico City, on 14 May 2020.Medics perform an examination on a rescued Syrian refugee in the Iskele district (Trikomo) in the self-declared Turkish Republic of North Cyprus recognised only by Turkey, north of Famagusta, on 21 March 2020.Health workers wear protective gear while collecting nasopharyngeal swab samples from senior high school students in Nicosia, Cyprus, 13 May 2020.Locals walk after the funeral of Chief Messias Martins Moreira, 53, of the Kokama ethnic group, who died of Covid-19, at Parque das Tribos in Manaus, Amazonas state, Brazil, Thursday, 14 May 2020.US President Donald Trump walks to the White House residence after exiting Marine One on the South Lawn of the White House on 14 May 2020 in Washington, DC.

Global death toll passes 300,000. The global toll from Covid-19 has just passed 300,000, with nearly 4.5 million people infected.According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 301,370 people have now died as a result of the outbreak.The institution says it has counted 4,426,937 confirmed cases worldwide. It's important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures.

Nearly 600,000 Australians have lost their jobs during the pandemic. Almost 600,000 Australians lost their jobs between March and April, unemployment rose to 6.2%, the underemployment rate increased by 4.9 points to 13.7% and the underutilisation rate increased by 5.9 points to 19.9%.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the figures were "terribly shocking, although not totally unexpected".

Doctors in Italy and France report spike in rare inflammatory syndrome linked to coronavirus. Doctors in northern Italy, one of the areas hardest hit by coronavirus, and in France have reported spikes in cases of a rare inflammatory syndrome in young children that appears similar to one reported in the US, Britain and Spain, according to a report in the Lancet.The condition shares symptoms with toxic shock and Kawasaki disease including fever, rashes, swollen glands and, in severe cases, heart inflammation.

Donald Trump visits a mask distribution centre without wearing a mask himself. Donald Trump toured a mask distribution centre in the political swing state of Pennsylvania on Thursday but without wearing a mask himself.Trump, who is running for re-election in November, has resisted wearing a mask in public despite his administration's guidance to Americans to wear them and new White House rules requiring staff to wear them at work.

A vaccine for coronavirus must be available to all countries, the EU has insisted, after the British chief executive of French drugs company Sanofi said it was reserving the first shipments of its vaccine for the US. "The vaccine against Covid-19 should be a global public good and its access needs to be equitable and universal," said the European commission spokesman, Stefan de Keersmaecker.

36 million Americans are now unemployed as another 3 million filed for benefits. The latest figures from the Department of Labor show the rate of claims is slowing but the record-breaking pace of layoffs has already pushed unemployment to levels unseen since the Great Depression of the 1930s.

The European commission has suspended the delivery of 10 million face masks from China after two countries complained about the poor quality of the batches they received, the Associated Press reports. As part of its efforts to tackle the Covid-19 crisis, this month the commission started dispatching the masks to healthcare workers in its 27 member states and the UK.

Officials in Bangladesh have announced the first confirmed case of coronavirus in the country's Rohingya refugee camps. Health experts and NGOs have issued warnings that the virus could race through the camps that house almost a million people forced to flee a military offensive in Myanmar almost two years ago.

Greece will open 515 organised beaches to the public this weekend, but alcohol and music will be banned, along with sports and games. Scientists advising the government also insisted that given the dictates of social distancing there can only be 40 people per 1000 sq meters.

Governments, health authorities and civil society groups should urgently address mental health problems sparked by the coronavirus pandemic, the UN secretary general has said. Launching a policy briefing on mental health during the outbreak, António Guterres said that "the Covid-19 pandemic is now hitting families and communities with additional mental stress."

Ten people in Vietnam, including a 70-year-old military veteran, have offered to donate their lungs to a British man who is the country's most seriously ill Covid-19 patient. "We are touched by their good intentions, but current regulations don't allow us to transplant lungs donated by most living people," a representative of Vietnam's organ transplant authority said.