Hasan Hamed almost didn't make it to the UK. Trembling, he couldn't bring himself to step into the boat in Calais, having paid £3,000 to make the crossing. The smuggler told him: "Either get in now or you lose your money."

Hamed, 32, from Yemen, was dealing with multiple traumas by that point. He had been jailed and tortured by Houthi fighters in his home country after he refused their efforts to forcibly conscript him. "The Houthis imprisoned me naked for one week and deprived me of sleep," he said, describing various tortures he was put through, including having to sleep under a blanket smeared with excrement and threatened with rape.

Hamed escaped to Saudi Arabia, where he was subjected to labour exploitation and given only a fraction of the wages to which he was entitled from working as a salesperson. Once again he fled, paying smugglers to help him cross from Turkey to Greece. "One of my friends drowned on that journey. It took them 15 days to recover his body from the sea," he said.

When Hamed reached the UK he was placed in temporary accommodation by the Home Office before being taken to Napier barracks in Kent.

Napier and Penally barracks, in Pembrokeshire, which between them hold more than 600 men, were handed over from the Ministry of Defence to the Home Office  in September to be used as accommodation for asylum seekers.

The barracks, which are run by the private contractor Clearsprings, have been criticised for crowded conditions, limited access to healthcare and legal advice and, more recently, a significant Covid-19 outbreak in which more than one in four of the 400 residents at Napier were infected.

Many of the asylum seekers who have ended up at these sites have fled from the risk of torture, persecution and death in their countries of origin. In many cases, those who sought to harm them represented an armed force of some kind, making the military environment of the barracks traumatising for them.

"It is hard to describe the effect of being surrounded by security after going through the things I went through. I thought a lot about suicide in Napier but the only thing that stopped me was the effect that would have on my family," Hamed said.

"I only went out a few times in my three months in Napier because of the far right protesters. I could see the hatred in their eyes. One of them started to accelerate towards me in his car one time when I left the barracks and was walking on the wrong side of the road."

Hamed is now out of the barracks and in a hotel in London. He tried to get an appointment with a counselling service in Dover while he was in the barracks, but he was not offered one until he moved to London.

"The worst thing in the barracks is the emptiness of waiting, just waiting inside four walls," he said.

Matin, 26, from Iran, said mental health among Napier residents was so poor that there had been multiple suicide and self-harm attempts.

"The first impression I had was it looked like a prison. There were fences, security guards walking around, I was really depressed," he said. "There is no support for mental wellbeing. We have one nurse on site, in case you get a cold or flu. People are getting more and more frustrated."

Matin said there was no privacy in blocks holding 28 people of varying nationalities, and language barriers made negotiations over the two showers and two toilets they share challenging.

"The toilets and showers are often out of order, or there's no water, or no flush. The showers are cold. Or they are so dirty I don't want to use them," he said.

Matin said he was told by Migrant Help, the Home Office-contracted charity that is supposed to provide assistance to the men, that he would be out in a month, but he had been there for three and a half months and counting. He said he had received no communication from the Home Office on the progress of his asylum application.

Last October he met the immigration minister Chris Philp, who was visiting Napier and described the camp as a "fine place". "It's true we have a roof above our heads ... but this is what many animals have," Matin said. "We really need reassurance and safety. The Home Office do not provide this."

Matin was one of at least 120 people at Napier who contracted Covid-19 in mid-January. He said efforts to encourage the men to self-isolate in their blocks were poor and the management appeared to adopt a policy of treating the entire site as one "big house".

"We were all terrified. We had some people who wanted to open the doors at night. A few people preferred to sleep outside. Some people didn't want to use the toilets and showers. Last night I saw a guy in his 50s, he was shaking out of fear," he said.

"When you walk round the camp, you can hear the coughing, the sneezing all over the block. I was waiting for this to happen. It was inevitable."

Another asylum seeker, Taha, said that when he was moved to Napier he was told he was on his way to a hotel. "When we arrived we were so scared and thought it was detention, because it looks like detention."

He said he was told he would be in the camp for no more than a month, but after a couple of months he stopped believing this. "We felt like we were animals in a closed place," he said. "Mentally, problems became more difficult for all people because we're scared of being in detention."

Taha described a hunger strike held at the end of last year. "We wanted a clear answer from the Home Office as to how long we are going to stay here. But again, no answer, and the manager here said he didn't have contact with the Home Office."

Another asylum seeker, Mohamed, was taken from London to Penally last September in the middle of the night. "They came and took me from my hotel at 3am. We went to another hotel in Wembley and about 50 asylum seekers were put on a bus. Nobody told us where we were going. We kept seeing airport signs on our journey and thought they were going to put us on a plane to deport us. We travelled for eight hours without a stop. There was a toilet on the bus but everyone was using it and I was worried about Covid so avoided it."

He said one of the worst things about Penally was the flashbacks and nightmares it triggered about the situation from which he had fled in a war-torn country in the Middle East. "We are human beings, not terrorists. We came here because of war. I swear to God I would not leave my country if I could stay there safely."

Mohamed was one of a group of asylum seekers who created a union at Penally - CROP, or Camp Residents of Penally. "Home secretary Priti Patel said we should be grateful for the accommodation in the barracks," he said. "How can we be grateful? The conditions here are against humanity."

The Home Office has previously said it is meeting all its statutory duties to accommodate asylum seekers, and insisted the barracks sites are safe and secure.

Philp, the immigration compliance minister, has previously said: "The government takes the wellbeing of asylum seekers extremely seriously. We are required by law to house asylum seekers who would otherwise be destitute, and we provide safe, warm, Covid-secure, suitable accommodation, where they receive three meals a day while their claims are being processed."

Names have been changed at the request of the interviewees