China has opened the door to imposing tariffs on Australian wine imports by launching the same kind of trade investigation that triggered steep imposts on barley, sparking sharp falls among affected businesses on the Australian share market.

Amid ongoing tensions between the two countries, China's commerce ministry announced on Tuesday that it was starting an "anti-dumping" investigation into imported wines originating in Australia, with a decision on any action due within 12 months.

The Australian government pledged to help the wine industry contest the "disappointing and perplexing" claims that it sold products into the Chinese market at artificially low prices.

The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, said the decision "does pose a threat to all producers who export" and he revealed that he was still unable to make direct contact with his Chinese counterpart after months of requests.

Beijing's decision to introduce tariffs of about 80% on Australian barley imports in May this year followed a 18-month-long investigation by China's commerce ministry into "dumping" - when a product is sold into an overseas market at artificially low prices - and the effect of government subsidies.

China is the leading export market for Australian wine, but China also produces wine domestically and has been seeking to grow that industry. The commerce ministry investigation is understood to have been triggered after China's wine industry association complained about the impact of alleged dumping by Australian competitors.

Australia's agriculture minister, David Littleproud, said the country's reputation as a quality wine producer was "recognised by Chinese consumers who have helped make China our largest export market with $1.1bn exported in 2019/20".

"I am committed to working with the Australian wine industry to ensure that all necessary information is provided to refute any claim that Australian wine is being dumped," Littleproud said.

The move has unsettled the sector, given that China is the top export market for Australian wine. Mainland China was responsible for 39% of the total export value of Australian wine in the year ending June 2020, followed by the United States (15%) and United Kingdom (13%), according to Wine Australia.

Treasury Wine Estates Limited - whose share price fell by nearly 20% before regaining slightly to close 14% down - told the Australian stock market it would cooperate with any requests for information from Chinese or Australian authorities.

It emphasised that Treasury Wine Estates - which has headquarters in Melbourne and is known for brands such as Penfolds - had "had a long and respectful relationship with China over many years" and remained committed to China as a priority market.

The share price of Australian Vintage Limited - whose brands include McGuigan Wines, Tempus Two and Nepenthe - also fell by nearly 8% when the news broke, before closing down about 3.3% on Tuesday.

Industry watchers said it was another blow to Australia's wine production industry, after previous predictions its revenue would fall by 5% this year as a result of slowing growth and the Covid-19 outbreak reducing exports to China.

"This investigation is a real threat to Australian wine producers, which receive over a third of their total export revenue from Chinese buyers," Matthew Reeves, a senior industry analyst for the research firm IBISWorld, said.

Australian Grape & Wine - a group representing Australian producers - said exporting companies would cooperate fully with the investigation.

The National Farmers' Federation was more forthright in its response, describing the investigation as "baffling and deeply concerning".

But the federation's president, Fiona Simson, also warned against allowing this matter to feed into broader diplomatic tensions. "It is crucial that every trade-related issue is considered in isolation and on its merits," she said.

Wine was one of the goods cited by China's ambassador to Australia, Cheng Jingye, in a controversial interview in which he warned that Australia's forthright push for an international investigation into the origins and early handling of Covid-19 could sour bilateral ties and affect consumer sentiment.

Cheng told the Australian Financial Review in April that "if the mood is going from bad to worse", Chinese consumers might ask: "Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?"

The Australian government condemned those remarks at the time, branding them as a form of economic coercion, but there have been fears about broader trade impacts. Earlier this year, China also barred red-meat imports from four Australian abattoirs on technical regulatory grounds.

In May the Global Times, a Chinese state media outlet, said Australia would be "delusional to think that economic and trade cooperation between the two countries would not suffer from a deteriorating bilateral relationship".

Birmingham said on Tuesday that Chinese officials had advised Australia they were also considering a request to launch a countervailing duties investigation into Australian wine. That would focus on the alleged trade-distorting impact of government subsidies.

Addressing the media in Adelaide, Birmingham insisted Australian wine was not sold below market prices. Australian wine was the second highest priced, after only New Zealand, in the Chinese market in the first half of this year, he said.

Birmingham played down talk of a trade war with China: "Australia is certainly not engaging in any type of war."

Labor's trade spokesperson, Madeleine King, said the opposition was "deeply concerned" by the development and called on the government "to use all appropriate diplomatic channels to address these allegations" in order to prevent tariffs from being imposed.

As the Guardian has previously reported, the Australian government has been receiving advice to be patient and hold the line amid the turbulence in its relationship with China, even as trade is increasingly emerging as a pressure point.

Insiders point out that Chinese officials have long had objections to Australia's anti-dumping system and how it has affected Chinese products such as steel. They say both countries will ultimately have to find a new settling point in the relationship.

Comment has been sought from the Chinese embassy in Australia.