block-time published-time 10.27am BST

That's where we will wrap up the Covid-19 live blog for the evening.

This is what happened in Australia on Tuesday 19 May:

•The Australian death toll related to Covid-19 reached 100 with the 19th death of a Newmarch aged care centre resident.•Victoria reports 5,600 fines issued for restrictions breached in the state worth $8m.•Qantas is preparing to relaunch domestic flights in mid-June.•Australia claims vindication for support for investigation into the origins of Covid-19, which China labelled "nothing but a joke"•China puts an 80% tariff on Australian barley•The federal government has indicated it could end the free childcare subsidy soon, and plans to keep a report on the success of its childcare industry subsidy under wraps

The Australian death toll related to Covid-19 reached 100 with the 19th death of a Newmarch aged care centre resident.

Victoria reports 5,600 fines issued for restrictions breached in the state worth $8m.

Qantas is preparing to relaunch domestic flights in mid-June.

Australia claims vindication for support for investigation into the origins of Covid-19, which China labelled "nothing but a joke"

China puts an 80% tariff on Australian barley

The federal government has indicated it could end the free childcare subsidy soon, and plans to keep a report on the success of its childcare industry subsidy under wraps

For the latest on the coronavirus pandemic please see our global live blog.

We'll be back tomorrow with all the Australian coronavirus news. Until then, please take care.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.34am BST

block-time published-time 9.34am BST

NSW regional travel to recommence from 1 June

7NEWS is reporting that people will be allowed to travel to regional parts of NSW again from 1 June.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.44am BST

block-time published-time 9.32am BST

A bit more on the 5,600 fines issued in Victoria for breaching the chief health officer's orders (I'm watching the replay of this morning's hearing). The justice department wasn't aware of anyone challenging the fines in court yet, but the government is confident they would stand up because police were told to use discretion, and because the development of the health orders had a lot of legal advice.

Victoria police is in the process of breaking down the fines to local government area-level, which means we will be able to match up the fines with the locations of the most coronavirus cases and see if it has been evenly distributed.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.53am BST

block-time published-time 9.01am BST

Labor is calling on the government to explain why it now thinks the World Health Organisation is best placed to investigate the origins of the coronavirus.

The call comes amid expectations a European Union-drafted motion, strongly backed by Australia, is set to be adopted at the World Health Assembly overnight tonight.

Labor's Senate leader and foreign affairs spokeswoman, Penny Wong, is seeking to draw attention to the fact that the motion deals with the origin and handling of the coronavirus through potentially different processes.

As has been widely reported already, the motion allows for the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, to initiate "a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of lessons learned from the global health response to Covid-19.

But the question of origins is not dealt with in that process. A separate clause in the motion urges Tedros to continue to work closely with the World Organisation for Animal Health, the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and countries "to identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population".

In a statement issued tonight, Wong said the Labor party was pleased to see broad international support for the resolution, but the government should clarify "how the two reviews will work and explain how they deliver on what Australia has called for".

While the resolution calls for an independent review into the response to coronavirus, the review into the source will be carried out by the WHO.

The government needs to explain why it changed its mind and now thinks the WHO is best placed to investigate the origins of the coronavirus.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.16am BST

block-time published-time 8.47am BST

Good evening, everyone. Earlier this evening we published this story from me on how Australia's biggest state (population-wise) can't even use the Covidsafe app data yet, despite the heavy push from the government.

Add to that several states haven't had cause to use it yet, and it begs the question of why did the government tie it so hard to easing restrictions?

Related:  NSW is unable to use Covidsafe app's data for contact tracing

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.52am BST

block-time published-time 8.43am BST

On that note I will hand over to Josh Taylor, who will see you through the evening. Stay well and wear long pants in professional video calls, even if no one can see. It's a psychological thing.

block-time published-time 8.37am BST

A strong entry in the field of camera v reality when working from home.

enltrWorking from home: Behind the scenes v what makes it on screen... pic.twitter.com/OcJ0gIXEAz

- Simon Cullen (@Simon_Cullen) May 19, 2020

Simon is based in London. I don't understand why he's not wearing long pants.

You can see more WFH setups (and feel better about angling your webcam away from the pile of laundry every morning) here.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.41am BST

block-time published-time 8.20am BST

This temporary fence has been erected around the Olympic Park oval at the Holden Centre, which is the training and administrative headquarters for the Magpies.

AFL players have returned to training, under strict social distancing guidelines, ahead of the season recommencing on 11 June.

Temporary fencing has been erected at the AFL home base of the Collingwood Magpies in Melbourne. Photograph: Michael Dodge/AAP

As someone who attended a lot of music festivals in their youth, I can tell you it's quite easy to get through this type of temporary fence, so this poses more of a deterrent than an actual obstacle. If someone really wanted to get on the oval, they would get on the oval.

That is not encouragement. Please do not bust through the fences; leave the footballers to train in infection-free peace.

The temporary fencing around Olympic Park oval. Photograph: Michael Dodge/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.36am BST

block-time published-time 7.59am BST

If you're wondering how WA is feeling, take a look at talkback radio.

enltrWith just three cases of coronavirus and no community spread, calls grow to open the interstate border to save tourism. Is it time? pic.twitter.com/Nw1d3GtWYB

- Perth LIVE 6PR with Oliver Peterson (@PerthLive6PR) May 19, 2020

block-time published-time 7.57am BST

The refusal of states such as Queensland and Western Australia to reopen their borders has become a point of tension in the national cabinet, Ben Doherty  reports.

Related:  State leaders resist Morrison government push to reopen borders closed by coronavirus

Although it's worth noting that we have just heard two Queensland MPs, David Littleproud and Matt Canavan, saying they support the state border.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.01am BST

block-time published-time 7.48am BST

Littleproud says there was a six-month extension to the anti-dumping investigation, which pushed it out to this month.

So I don't think it's wise to speculate. It's important that we calmly and methodically work through each of these issues, no matter whether with China or with any other nation that we trade with.

And it's a timely reminder to our exporters to make sure that they meet the specifications of those countries that we're exporting to. Otherwise, they have grounds on which to challenge the free trade agreements that we put in place. So we'll continue to work calmly and methodically.

We firmly believe that Australian farmers aren't subsidised and we'll continue to prosecute that case. But to try and draw links isn't wise, and speculating isn't wise. We need to work in facts and deal in facts and work calmly and methodically through this.

Asked by host Patricia Karvelas if he is offended by China's comments, Littleproud says no.

Look, I'm a big boy. The reality is what I want to do is continue to engage with our trading partners to ensure that we understand one another. We understand how we trade with one another. But when we make our own decisions, that we respect each other's sovereignty in a respectful way. And that's what we'll continue to do at a ministerial level, at a government level, and a diplomatic level.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.59am BST

block-time published-time 7.47am BST

Speaking of David Littleproud, he just spoke to the ABC's Afternoon Briefing program about meetings he and the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, have had today in the wake of China's barley tariffs decision.

Littleproud says Australia is "not going to get into tit for tat" with China and return tariffs. "That's a retaliation, and we don't retaliate," he says.

We've accepted it on face value, China's decision around these exports. But we have made quite clear that we reserve our right to explore that decision through all avenues - firstly domestically back through China - there's a short window for us to appeal this decision - and then we will reserve our right to take it to the WTO.

He says the grain industry is "very calm and they're very mature about this", even though the drought means that some farmers have just put in their first barley crop for two or three years.

We're tying make sure that not only China, but all our trading partners, appreciate, understand, that Australian agriculture is probably one of the least subsidised agricultural production systems in the world.

Unlike his colleague Matt Canavan, Littleproud says we should not read anything into the fact that the barley tariffs have hit at the same time that Australia is having a diplomatic stoush with China over its push for an independent investigation into the coronavirus.

Look, I don't think it's wise to speculate on what's been an 18-month protracted process that has simply got to a juncture that coincided with events around the WHO.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.59am BST

block-time published-time 7.36am BST

The Greens have repeated their call for Australia to push for a ban on the global wildlife trade, in the wake of the agriculture minister, David Littleproud, today calling for an investigation into the risks posed by wildlife wet markets. You can read Littleproud's comments here.

The Greens environment spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young, says Littleproud's push to investigate wet markets will not come to anything unless the wildlife trade is also halted. She put up a motion in the Senate last week calling for support for a global ban on the wildlife trade, but the motion failed.

Says Hanson-Young:

The agriculture minister and the PM can wax lyrical about an investigation into wildlife wet markets all they like, but if wildlife continue to be traded for consumption and other purposes, a health risk will remain.

The science is well established on the link between wildlife consumption and the transfer of zoonotic diseases to humans.

When wildlife is traded, it brings animals in contact with humans and other species in horrendous conditions leading to the spread of disease.

The Australian government has an opportunity to really lead on this issue and help end the cruelty and reduce the risk of another pandemic like coronavirus in the future.

Right now it seems they're not really serious about leading a global effort to reduce the risks for disease to emerge and spread.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55am BST

block-time published-time 7.15am BST

Canavan says the Queensland premier's decision to keep the state borders closed until possibly September is sensible, given the continued spread of the coronavirus in Victoria and NSW.

He says "the decision to close state borders has been proven the right one".

It seemingly has helped constrain the virus in some states. And I myself have thought we should have had stronger processes or restrictions on regional travel here in Queensland. We just had a case in Rockhampton, where I'm talking to you now, which seems to have come from travel between Brisbane and Rockhampton. I'm not against [state borders].

However, Canavan says he would like to see a "more responsive timeframe".

I don't know if we need to set September as a hard marker if conditions in NSW continue to decline as they seem to have or are doing. Surely let's reopen earlier.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.22am BST

block-time published-time 7.12am BST

Still on barley, the Labor MP Ed Husic is also on the ABC describing the barley tariffs as "a $500m kick in the guts to us, to our country".

Husic says Labor will support the government taking the issue to the World Trade Organization.

The Queensland LNP senator Matt Canavan says the Chinese embassy's claim that it was "nothing but a joke" for Australia to say its push for an independent investigation into the origin of the coronavirus had been vindicated by widespread global support, is "clearly" a provocative comment.

Asked if China's decision to impose tariffs is "clearly economic retaliation", Canavan says:

I wouldn't use the word clearly, I'd say it's most likely... I think it's hard to explain otherwise.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.15am BST

block-time published-time 6.58am BST

The chief executive of Grain Trade Australia, Pat O'Shannassy, has been on ABC24 talking about the impact on Australian farmers of China's decision to impose an 80% tariff on barley imports.

O'Shannassy says the tariffs amount to a $500m hit to the Australian grains industry, and the industry is disappointed by China's decision.

We know that the allegations and what has been claimed through this case is unsubstantiated and not true. We're refuting that. It is disappointing but we have to work with what is in front of us.

O'Shannassy says Australia has been working on its malt and barley trade with China since the 1960s, and there are varieties of barley grown in Australia that have been bred specifically for the Chinese market. Other markets can be developed, but that takes time. He says farmers will not necessarily be "abandoning barley" and switching to other grains.

Unfortunately, barley growers are in the middle of their planting season now and going at it. For many, it's perhaps a little too late to adjust their plans.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.06am BST

block-time published-time 6.48am BST

The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, has warned against "cheap politicking", after the Chinese embassy in Canberra declared it was "nothing but a joke" for Australia to claim vindication over the growing global support for an international review into the handling of the coronavirus outbreak.

Asked on Sky News about the comments, Birmingham said:

Australia is not going to engage in cheap politicking over an issue as important as Covid-19.

Birmingham signalled his displeasure with the "provocative" comments. He said just as with the trade dispute, Australia would not engage in a "tit for tat" retaliation.

We're not going to escalate rhetoric.

block-time published-time 6.41am BST

Labor has released a joint statement from its shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, employment spokesman, Brendan O'Connor, and industrial relations spokesman, Tony Burke,  on the ABS data released today that showed 730,000 jobs have been lost since the coronavirus outbreak began.

The ABS data showed the impact on the Covid-19 outbreak on employment and wages, sourced from single touch payroll data. It showed a 7.3% decline in payroll jobs overall and the loss of one out of every four payroll jobs in accommodation and food services.

The Labor frontbenchers said the Morrison government "botched" the rollout of the jobkeeper program, which meant support "arrived too late or not at all".

Too many Australians are left out and left behind, some accidentally but many deliberately.

Since the outbreak of the virus, the biggest job losses have been concentrated in hospitality and the arts, with young Australians hardest hit.

They said those workers would not be able to "snap back" in September, when jobkeeper and the expanded jobseeker payments are due to expire.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.54am BST

block-time published-time 6.22am BST

Meanwhile in the Covid-19 Senate inquiry, Kristina Keneally  is asking about the education minister's offer to give non-government schools early funding if they reopen by 1 June.

Alex Gordon, the deputy secretary of schools, has explained the two payments of 12.5% of their funding were first for returning to classroom learning in term two, and then to have a plan to reach 50% of in-person attendance by 1 June.

Keneally asks what sort of checks will be applied. Gordon confirms the department "won't be checking" if schools reach 50% attendance, because the requirement was to "have a plan" not to achieve that target.

She said:

We haven't required them to provide a plan. It's a bringing forward of funding they'd get in July, so it was deemed a low risk. Schools have to provide an assurance that they have a plan, to declare to us that they have a plan for classroom learning.

Gordon said the department "won't check every school" but it will apply its "assurance framework re the requirements of the act on an ongoing basis".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.52am BST

block-time published-time 6.08am BST

Calla Wahlquist  will guide you through the next little while.

Thank you again for joining me today. Take care of you.

block-time published-time 5.55am BST

The NRL has worked out where it will be playing:

enltrBreaking venues for NRL 2020 season (restart) ? @7NewsSydney ? ?            @7NewsMelbourne ?            @7NewsBrisbane ? details tonight 6pm            pic.twitter.com/mGTYBlTl7d

- Michelle Bishop (@7michellebishop) May 19, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.00am BST

block-time published-time 5.52am BST

The heads of the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, the Caribbean Community, and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat  have come together to create a joint statement on the Covid response.

It is very worried about the economic and social challenges to its member states and wants debt relief:

We are gravely concerned  about the potentially dire consequences to the economies and livelihoods of our member states.

While welcoming the recent decision of international creditors such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank to provide debt relief to low income countries, we call for this relief to include the most vulnerable economies in the world, including our member states.

... We acknowledge the potentially dire consequences to the economies and livelihoods of our member states, and the exacerbation of inequalities in our societies. Determined to protect the lives and livelihoods of our people, we  also  call on our development partners and relevant multilateral organisations - the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the United Nations (UN), the World Bank Group (WBG), the World Food Programme (WFP), and the World Health Organization (WHO) - to put in place the needed short, medium, and long-term emergency response programmes, in coordination with our regional institutions, to assist developing countries to address the consequences of the Covid-19 pandemic.

It also calls for greater coordination of health resources and equipment - and then moves on to this kicker:

We recognise that while Covid-19 is the most urgent threat facing humanity today, climate change remains the greatest threat in the longer term. We also call on all countries to ensure that the economic recovery measures to tackle Covid-19 align with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The transboundary nature of this pandemic reinforces the importance of multilateralism to address our common challenges.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.59am BST

block-time published-time 5.22am BST

Labor's Murray Watt is asking education officials about the government's $18bn funding guarantee and shift towards short courses.  Rob Heferen  confirms the $18bn is a guarantee on funding such that, even if domestic student enrolments fall, universities will still get their government funding. But he doesn't have a figure on domestic enrolments.

On short courses, Heferen confirms there is no extra funding but argues the benefit universities get is "flexibility" about how they allocate their places to bachelor and sub-bachelor courses, which is "extremely valuable" to some universities.

Labor's Tanya Plibersek  seizes this evidence to argue there is no funding in the relief package at all: twitter.com/tanya_plibersek/status/1262596236336484352

Which is not quite true... There is a separate $100m of fee relief, but that is shared with the whole tertiary sector. Asked if universities have warned of insolvency, Heferen replies: "Insolvency? No. Challenges? Definitely." The department is aware that hundreds of casuals have been let go, for example.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.42am BST

block-time published-time 5.16am BST

So, to repeat, that is WA, SA and the NT all saying they'll be keeping their borders closed, until their health authorities say it is OK.

South Australia's Liberal premier Steven Marshall  spoke about his reluctance on ABC radio this morning:

I want to open the borders but I want to open them when they're safe and I just don't think there's any chance that we'll be opening them anytime soon - there's still too many cases interstate.

I think that they will open this year but we'll only do it once the other states get themselves into a good position as well.

But so far, it is only Queensland which is under pressure to open up, despite the Queensland government using the same line as the other jurisdictions - only when the health officials say it is safe.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am BST

block-time published-time 5.13am BST

WA premier Mark McGowan  says Simon Birmingham "can say what he likes" but the borders with the east will be staying up for as long as the state's health authorities believe it to be necessary.

We understand and we support our businesses across the state. We understand that a lot of them are doing it tough. As soon as we can bring the borders down,  we will, inside Western Australia.

The border with the east will stay up for a period longer. The border with the east will stay up for as long as is necessary to protect the health of Western Australians.

Mr Birmingham can say what he likes, we're gonna keep the borders in place for as long as is required to protect the health of the citizens of Western Australia.

The South Australian government, I note, has a similar approach to the Western Australian government, as does the Northern Territory.

And you might note that the Northern Territory and South Australia have very low rates of infection, just like Western Australia. So our borders with the east are an important part of our defence mechanism against the introduction of the virus into our state. We'll keep 'em up as long as is necessary.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am BST

block-time published-time 5.12am BST

As the 'this is not a trade war' back and forth continues, it might be worth pointing out that the Nationals lost the trade portfolio after almost 60 years in 2013, when Tony Abbott  decided to shift it to the Liberals in his cabinet, as part of an "aggressive free trade and foreign investment strategy".

There was a bit of a push to get the trade portfolio back following Scott Morrison's  election win a year ago, but obviously, the Nationals lost that, as Simon Birmingham, who is very much a Liberal, got the job.

But the barley biff will have those rumblings starting up again.

block-time published-time 5.05am BST

Suddenly, not even Bondi looks that bad.

enltrNot even SNL could not write something as ridiculous as this actual, real news report from my local station pic.twitter.com/VVTziwuyOd

- socially distant rendon (@maria_rendon97) May 18, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06am BST

block-time published-time 4.57am BST

Rob Heferen  acknowledges that universities are experiencing "the most extreme instance of financial difficulty we could imagine" but said their financial position is "pretty solid" because many have large cash reserves.

James Paterson 's questioning established that about one-fifth of international students were unable to enter Australia (120,000 out of 626,000) and universities are still receiving all their government funding. He therefore rejected the claim universities have been "abandoned".

Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi  asks if the department has done any modelling of potential job losses in the sector. Heferen says, no, they haven't, because universities can decide for themselves whether to respond to decreased revenue through reduced staff, capital projects or dipping into reserves.

Michele Bruniges, the education department secretary, backs Heferen, that it is not possible for the department to do modelling because universities are autonomous.

On the topic of schools, officials reveal that about 670 non-government schools applied for early funding by meeting Dan Tehan's  conditions of resuming in-person teaching and a plan for 50% attendance by 1 July.

block-time published-time 4.40am BST

Meanwhile, Donald Trump has threatened to permanently cut the US's funding to the World Health Organisation.

enltrFollow the latest on coronavirus asTrump threatens to quit WHO and cuts its funding permanently, claiming an 'alarming' lack of independence from China https://t.co/eavCsyok4i

- Graham Russell (@G_J_Russell) May 19, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am BST

block-time published-time 4.37am BST

Liberal senator James Paterson  is asking the Department of Education about universities' eligibility for jobkeeper.

Rob Heferen, the deputy secretary of higher education, research and international, has said that although universities are eligible for the wage subsidy, "so far as we're aware no university has qualified".

Heferen said universities had to meet the same turnover tests as other businesses to qualify - a 30% decline in revenue for those earning less than $1bn or 50% for those earning more - but there were "a couple of variations" to the rules affecting universities.

Universities have to count their commonwealth grants and Help funding (which will make it harder to meet the downturn test) and measure revenue declines over 6 months, not one.

Heferen has set out other supports for university, including $100m of fee relief (shared with the tertiary sector) and a guarantee on commonwealth funding, even if enrolments drop.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.41am BST

block-time published-time 4.27am BST

Childcare report to remain under wraps as 'cabinet-in-confidence'

The Department of Education is up before the Covid-19 Senate committee. So far, officials have said they will not release a full report on the first four weeks of the free childcare policy, arguing it is cabinet-in-confidence and contains commercially confidential information.

A summary showed a quarter of services found the relief package had not helped their financial viability.

Ros Baxter, the deputy secretary of early childhood and child care, says the program is on track to cost the $1.6bn estimated for the 12 weeks from 6 April to 28 June. She says that childcare subsidies cost $8.3bn last year - a figure suggesting the government will spend less this quarter than normal - but Baxter warned against a simple comparison because numbers vary through the year.

When the relief package was announced, the department believed it was on track to spend $1.3bn over the same period because of a 30% decline in attendance. So on that figure the relief package did add $300m to the sector.

Baxter says many providers were "on the brink of collapse" if it weren't for the relief package and that if they had been allowed to fall over, the commonwealth would have owed much less in childcare subsidies.

Labor's  Katy Gallagher  is now probing the fact the department estimated that a third of workers in the sector would be ineligible for the jobkeeper wage subsidy.

The government is only providing 50% of childcare fees, and providers are expected to apply for jobkeeper to make up the difference. Understandably, providers with a lot of staff who are ineligible for jobkeeper were among the biggest critics of the package.

Baxter is noting there is a fund for "exceptional circumstances" to make up the difference.

Updated at 4.32am BST

4.17am BST

A quick update on the situation in Victoria. We now have three aged care homes that are being managed as active outbreak sites. The first is the Villa Maria aged care home in Bundoora, reported yesterday.

You'll recall that a resident at that home had an inconclusive test result, then tested negative, but the Victorian Health Department's protocol is to manage all inconclusive cases as if they are a positive case.

That is also what happened at the Hammond Care facility in Caulfield, which was reported today.

A resident produced a positive test result, and subsequently tested negative, but the outbreak is being managed as if it were a positive result because aged care homes are so high-risk.

So the facility is closed to visitors for 14 days.

The third aged care facility is Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell. A resident of that home tested positive while being treated in a hospital in Melbourne, and remains in that hospital.

This has not been reported as an inconclusive result - it's a true positive.

All of their close contacts have been told to quarantine for 14 days and all residents and staff at the home will be tested.

There was also a new case associated with the Cedar Meats cluster, bringing the total number of cases to 100.

There are no new cases linked to the Maccas cluster.

In all there were seven new cases reported overnight, but the state's total has only gone up by six (to 1,573) because another case was removed due to "reclassification".

This usually means either a) a case that was part of Victoria's total is now counted in some other state's total, or b) a case that was inconclusive has now been deemed negative and struck off the list.

Updated at 4.21am BST

4.16am BST

The ACT remains (known) active Covid case-free.

Updated at 4.21am BST

4.06am BST

Just in case there are any Melbourne radio 3AW listeners on the blog.

Cured meat lovers, sorry to burst your bubble after @3AW693 news mistakenly said            @DanielAndrewsMP would fund prosciutto development. It was actually a            @Jamestalia75 auto-correct. Products. The govt is funding product development.            #springst

- Rebecca Thistleton (@RebeccaThiso) May 19, 2020

Updated at 4.09am BST

4.01am BST

Victoria Health has also just released its official update:

There are seven new cases since yesterday - one case was removed from the overall total due to reclassification.

Today's new cases include:

A single case of coronavirus in a resident of the Lynden aged care facility in Camberwell. The resident was diagnosed at a metropolitan hospital, where they are being treated. Residents and families are all being informed and we're working closely with the facility to ensure appropriate public health actions have been taken, including isolation, quarantine, cleaning and contact tracing. Close contacts have been ordered into home quarantine and all residents and staff at the home will be tested.

A single case of coronavirus was notified in a resident of the HammondCare facility in Caulfield. A subsequent test has since come back negative. As per the policy of the public health team, even when a subsequent test result comes back negative the case is still managed as though it is a positive. This is a precautionary approach designed to minimise potential spread as quickly as possible. Because of the high-risk setting, the aged care facility will continue to be managed as if it were an outbreak site.

Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution.

One new case linked to the Cedar Meats outbreak - with the total number of cases now linked to this cluster at 100, made up of 64 staff and 36 external to the facility.

One case of a returned traveller in hotel quarantine. Three other cases are under investigation.

There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that outbreak remaining at 12.

Updated at 4.11am BST

3.56am BST

Just catching up on the Victorian situation (there can be multiple press conferences on at the same time, so reviewing the information can take some time) and there have been more Covid cases diagnosed in aged care homes.

The deputy chief medical officer in Victoria, Annaliese van Diemen,  says there has been a Covid case identified in the Hammond aged care home in Caulfield. There has been another case identified at the Lyndon aged care facility in Campbellwell.

That's on top of the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora reporting a case yesterday. Both the HammondCare facility and the Villa Maria centre are in lockdown as a precaution.

The aged care cases are: 1) a resident at Lynden Aged Care facility in Camberwell, who was diagnosed at a metro hospital and is still in said hospital for treatment. Close contacts are in 14-day home quarantine and all residents and staff at the home are being tested.

- Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) May 19, 2020

Updated at 4.02am BST

3.46am BST

This was the whole Anthony Albanese  quote on the impact of the US deal with China when it comes to barley exports:

I've said before, there's nothing remarkable about suggesting that there should be an inquiry into the origins and the spreading that occurred with the coronavirus. We have a coronial inquiry into a single death in this country and that is a significant thing that we do and it is normal practice. There's more than 300,000 people who have died due to this crisis globally and, of course, there should be an inquiry.

With regard to trade, it would appear that this is unfair treatment of Australian barley farmers by China and the government should be giving that consideration.

And Labor would support taking action at the WTO, the World Trade Organisation, to hold China to account on this. The imposition of 80% tariffs is an extraordinary decision.

And we need to also - the Australian government should be pursuing with the US what the circumstances are behind the agreement between China and the US for access to China for US agriculture, and whether that has disadvantaged Australia, and we should be pursuing that on behalf of our farmers.

Updated at 4.03am BST

3.40am BST

Victoria reports six new cases

Victoria has recorded six new positive Covid-19 tests in the past 24 hours.

Updated at 4.04am BST

3.38am BST

Australia's Covid-19 death toll reaches 100

The death of a 93-year-old woman, who had been diagnosed with Covid-19, takes Australia's official Covid-19 death toll to 100.

The woman had been a resident at Newmarch House, the aged care home in western Sydney which has been the site of a heartbreaking cluster. The woman was the 19th resident to die after contracting the virus while living in the facility.

Updated at 4.05am BST

3.35am BST

The Reserve Bank has released its minutes from the 5 May meeting, explaining its outlook for the Australian economy (a 10% decline in GDP over the first half of 2020). Some interesting details:

•Household consumption was expected to contract by about 15% over the first half of 2020, despite a spike in retail spending in March as households stocked up on groceries, pharmaceuticals, home office and home exercise equipment.•Overall, the peak-to-trough decline in total hours worked was expected to be around 20%, with a weak labour market to lead to wage freezes or even cuts.•The unemployment rate was expected to peak at around 10% in the June quarter - the number is being suppressed by people on the jobkeeper wage subsidy not counting as unemployed, but may rise as requirements to seek work are reapplied to jobseekers.•Covid-19 is expected to have a "very large" impact on prices, with inflation as measured by CPI expected to fall by around 2.25% in the June quarter, driven by the decline in petrol prices and the removal of childcare fees.•Interest rates, including for home mortgages, are now at record lows.•Commercial property is particularly vulnerable. With more people working from home, vacancy rates are expected to rise and rents to fall.

Household consumption was expected to contract by about 15% over the first half of 2020, despite a spike in retail spending in March as households stocked up on groceries, pharmaceuticals, home office and home exercise equipment.

Overall, the peak-to-trough decline in total hours worked was expected to be around 20%, with a weak labour market to lead to wage freezes or even cuts.

The unemployment rate was expected to peak at around 10% in the June quarter - the number is being suppressed by people on the jobkeeper wage subsidy not counting as unemployed, but may rise as requirements to seek work are reapplied to jobseekers.

Covid-19 is expected to have a "very large" impact on prices, with inflation as measured by CPI expected to fall by around 2.25% in the June quarter, driven by the decline in petrol prices and the removal of childcare fees.

Interest rates, including for home mortgages, are now at record lows.

Commercial property is particularly vulnerable. With more people working from home, vacancy rates are expected to rise and rents to fall.

The RBA summarised its decision:

In considering the policy decision, members recognised that the global economy was experiencing a very severe downturn as countries sought to contain the Covid-19 outbreak through restrictions on activity. Many countries were likely to experience their biggest peacetime economic contractions since the 1930s and labour markets were very weak. The outlook remained uncertain, although if infection rates continued to decline and restrictions were eased, a recovery could be expected to start later in 2020, supported by both the large fiscal packages and the monetary policy response.

The bank is planning for both an upside scenario, that as restrictions are eased economic activity returns, and a downside scenario where restrictions need to be reimposed due to a second wave of infections. But there's not a lot of language explaining which is considered more likely.

Updated at 4.07am BST

3.04am BST

The Australian Bureau of Statistics has released new data showing total payroll jobs fell by 7.3% and total wages paid fell by 5.4% in the seven weeks from mid-March (when Covid-19 restrictions were introduced after Australia reached 100 cases) and early May.

ABS chart about downturn in payroll jobs in each state and territory, with worst affected industries(accomodation and food) and age group (under 20s) #auspol           #Covid19aus           pic.twitter.com/PlIJFBS0GW

- Paul Karp (@Paul_Karp) May 19, 2020

The head of labour statistics at the ABS, Bjorn Jarvis, said:

The latest data shows a further slowing in the fall in Covid-19 job losses between mid-April and early May.

The largest net job losses over the seven weeks of theCovid-19period, in percentage terms, were in Victoria and New South Wales, where the falls in payroll jobs were around 8.4% and 7.7 %.

The accommodation and food services industry had lost around a third of payroll jobs (33.3%) by the week ending 11 April, and a subsequent increase in jobs saw this reduce to around 27.1% by the week ending 2 May.

Breaking down the statistics by demographic:

•Women have had a bigger hit to jobs (down 7.1% compared with 6.9% for men) but a smaller hit to wages (down 1.9% compared with 7.6% for men).•People under 20 have had the biggest cut to jobs (down 14.6%).

Women have had a bigger hit to jobs (down 7.1% compared with 6.9% for men) but a smaller hit to wages (down 1.9% compared with 7.6% for men).

People under 20 have had the biggest cut to jobs (down 14.6%).

Jobs and wages downturn by age #auspol           #Covid19aus           pic.twitter.com/9seX0mJ28E

- Paul Karp (@Paul_Karp) May 19, 2020

Updated at 4.09am BST

3.00am BST

Australia's agricultural minister claims 'vindication'

And straight after the statement from the Chinese embassy calling Australia's claims of "vindication" in terms of calling for a Covid origins inquiry "nothing but a joke", David Littleproud  has released a statement claiming "the setting up of this scientific review has vindicated our efforts".

The minister for agriculture, David Littleproud, is pleased to see the strong international support which he led last month at the G20 to investigate wildlife wet markets as part of the broader review of Covid-19.

Minister Littleproud said his call for the expert review to look into the wildlife wet markets which he led at the G20 last month will provide a greater understanding of how to prevent another devastating event like Covid-19.

"Since 1980, two pandemics have been linked to wildlife wet markets and a further two linked to unsustainable wildlife practices - this is acknowledgment we need to work globally to protect us from these risks.

"We have long known about the risks associated with wildlife wet markets and the potential for pandemics they pose but they also are a risk to agriculture and food security," minister Littleproud said.

"That is why I worked with Australia's chief veterinary officer, Mark Schipp,  to push for global reforms underpinned by a scientific review.

"It's fair to say I was the outlier at that time, but with calm and methodical work, the setting up of this scientific review has vindicated our efforts.

"It will take a global effort to reduce the risks for disease to emerge and spread, and the threat to agriculture that the mix of wildlife, domestic animals and humans provide in wildlife wet markets.

"The review will be a joint WHO, OIE, FAO collaboration. Together we can gather information that will contribute to the betterment of all nations.

"Let's hope the outcomes of the review finds ways to protect human life and the agriculture that underpins global food security."

Updated at 4.14am BST

2.52am BST

Add Tasmania to the list of states - South Australia, Western Australia and Queensland - that are pushing back against opening borders.

Premier Peter Gutwein says he won't be setting a date to reopen Tasmania's borders until at least July. He says it's far too early to make that decision, despite other states considering the issue #politas           #covid19tas

- Monte Bovill (@MonteBovill) May 19, 2020

Updated at 2.54am BST

2.39am BST

As we were pointing out yesterday, the World Health Assembly motion which is under discussion was put forward by the EU, not Australia - Australia was a co-sponsor. But the motion is different to what Australia wanted, in that it allows for the World Health Organization to lead the inquiry, which was the main thing Australia did not want.

Updated at 3.58am BST

2.38am BST

Chinese embassy says Australia's claims of investigation vindication are 'nothing but a joke'

Things are going really well.

Breaking - the Chinese Embassy in Canberra says the WHA #covid inquiry motion which China is backing is "totally different" to the Morrison Government's original call for an independent investigation. It says for Australia to claim vindication is "nothing but a joke"            pic.twitter.com/5K2cCqbtD3

- Stephen Dziedzic (@stephendziedzic) May 19, 2020

Updated at 2.56am BST

2.28am BST

Anthony Albanese says Australia needs to know what the agreement is between China and the US in terms of trade, so it knows what the playing field looks like as it negotiates the barley tariff decision.

Last week, China said it would immediately allow more imports of barley from the US. Donald Trump has been playing a very hard trade deal with China, but no one seems to know what the state of play is, and how it is impacting other trading nations.

Albanese is the one of the first to raise that issue today - and it is a pretty big point, given Australia's response is to tell China, not so subtly, it will look to other markets to sell barley.

Updated at 2.31am BST

2.25am BST

AAP has an update on the Victorian rental situation, since the Covid measures were put in place:

Victorian tenants who have struck agreements with their landlords to drop their rent amid the effects of coronavirus are paying 31% less on average.

Attorney general Jill Hennessy has revealed the average decrease while being grilled at a parliamentary inquiry investigating the state government's response to Covid-19.

During the pandemic, Victorian tenants seeking rent reductions, their landlords and agents have been encouraged to reach agreements and register them with Consumer Affairs Victoria.

Emergency laws passed in the state on 29 March also introduced a new dispute resolution process for when parties can't come to an agreement independently. That will last until September.

Hennessy said more than 15,000 people had contacted Consumer Affairs making inquiries about residential tenancies during the pandemic.

More than 6,800 changed rental agreements have been struck without any need for dispute resolution.

Almost 1,270 others were reached after assistance teams stepped in to help resolve disputes, with that process taking about six days on average.

Where an agreement has been struck, weekly rent has decreased by an average of 31%, or about $184.

There are still cases were agreement has not been reached, with 81 residential tenancy matters referred to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. Since 12 May, when a chief resolution officer has been able to accept disputes referred by Consumer Affairs Victoria, 216 matters have also been sent their way.

Updated at 2.29am BST

2.23am BST

Speaking from Tumbarumba in New South Wales, which is part of the Eden-Monaro electorate,  Anthony Albanese says he'll leave it to the states to decide when they reopen their borders:

No one wants any restriction to be in place for one day more than necessary. But state governments are making decisions based upon the health advice. I haven't been critical of any of the state governments, be they New South Wales, where we're now, or any of the other states. They'll make their decisions based upon the advice they receive.

Updated at 2.28am BST

2.11am BST

Qantas prepares for relaunch of domestic travel

It looks like Qantas is preparing for domestic travel to resume from 12 June - it has loaded information on its "fly well" program onto its website, outlining its new procedures:

Pre-flight

•Information sent to all customers before they fly, so they know what to expect.•Contactless check-in (via online/app) and self-serve bag drop strongly encouraged, including use of Q Bag Tags.•Hand sanitising stations at departure gates.•Temporary changes to Qantas Lounges, including increased physical distancing, hand sanitising stations, enhanced disinfection of surfaces and adjustments to food and drink service.•Working with airports on other safeguards in the terminal, including regular disinfection of security screening points and installing hygiene screens at airline customer service desks, wherever practical.

Information sent to all customers before they fly, so they know what to expect.

Contactless check-in (via online/app) and self-serve bag drop strongly encouraged, including use of Q Bag Tags.

Hand sanitising stations at departure gates.

Temporary changes to Qantas Lounges, including increased physical distancing, hand sanitising stations, enhanced disinfection of surfaces and adjustments to food and drink service.

Working with airports on other safeguards in the terminal, including regular disinfection of security screening points and installing hygiene screens at airline customer service desks, wherever practical.

Onboard

•Masks provided to all passengers on each flight - while not mandatory from a safety point of view, they are recommended to be worn in the interests of everyone's peace of mind.•Enhanced cleaning of aircraft with a disinfectant effective against coronaviruses, with a focus on high contact areas - seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toilets.•Sanitising wipes given to all passengers to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselves, if preferred.•Simplified service and catering to minimise touchpoints for crew and passengers.•Passengers asked to limit movement around cabin, once seated.•Sequenced boarding and disembarkation to minimise crowding.

Masks provided to all passengers on each flight - while not mandatory from a safety point of view, they are recommended to be worn in the interests of everyone's peace of mind.

Enhanced cleaning of aircraft with a disinfectant effective against coronaviruses, with a focus on high contact areas - seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toilets.

Sanitising wipes given to all passengers to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselves, if preferred.

Simplified service and catering to minimise touchpoints for crew and passengers.

Passengers asked to limit movement around cabin, once seated.

Sequenced boarding and disembarkation to minimise crowding.

In addition, the air conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9% of all particles including viruses. Air inside the cabin is refreshed on average every five minutes during flight.

All airline employees are required to follow strict personal hygiene protocols, for the benefit of themselves and others.

All passengers are encouraged to download the Australian Government's CovidSafe app as part of improving the ability of health authorities to contain the spread of coronavirus. In line with public health advice, anyone with cold and flu-like symptoms should stay at home.

Updated at 3.58am BST

2.00am BST

Queensland stimulus and support package

Queensland has announced part of its Covid-19 stimulus response.

The key takeaways:

•A $400m accelerated works program to deliver new road, bridge and pavement sealing works across the state;•A further $200m in 2020-21 for a works for Queensland program to support jobs and fund productive building projects; and•An $11.25m expansion of the household resilience program in cyclone-affected areas.•$50m for tourism infrastructure and more funding towards a domestic tourism campaign;•Redirecting $50m of industry attraction funding under the Making it for Queensland initiative to continue to expand manufacturing capacity for PPE, hand sanitiser and medical supplies to respond to Covid-19; and•A $10m package to support international students and safeguard Queensland's global education brand.•$20m for free online training which includes training in safety and hygiene standards to keep Covid-19 contained;•A further $14.8m to support project development of the CopperString 2.0 project that will connect the North West Minerals Province with the national electricity market; and•$20m towards construction of a Queensland apprenticeships centre in renewable hydrogen at Beenleigh.

A $400m accelerated works program to deliver new road, bridge and pavement sealing works across the state;

A further $200m in 2020-21 for a works for Queensland program to support jobs and fund productive building projects; and

An $11.25m expansion of the household resilience program in cyclone-affected areas.

$50m for tourism infrastructure and more funding towards a domestic tourism campaign;

Redirecting $50m of industry attraction funding under the Making it for Queensland initiative to continue to expand manufacturing capacity for PPE, hand sanitiser and medical supplies to respond to Covid-19; and

A $10m package to support international students and safeguard Queensland's global education brand.

$20m for free online training which includes training in safety and hygiene standards to keep Covid-19 contained;

A further $14.8m to support project development of the CopperString 2.0 project that will connect the North West Minerals Province with the national electricity market; and

$20m towards construction of a Queensland apprenticeships centre in renewable hydrogen at Beenleigh.

Small businesses will also have access to grants of up to $10,000.

Updated at 3.58am BST

1.56am BST

Sorry folks - just saw an incorrect headline on the blog (it has been a long week) and yes, the push is for domestic border restrictions to be scrapped, not international (which obviously would be much bigger news than a blog post, at this point).

Sorry for the confusion - it should be fixed now, and if it's still showing, just reload the page.

Updated at 3.59am BST

1.45am BST

Meanwhile, Simon Birmingham  again singles out Queensland for not opening up its borders, while ignoring that South Australia, where he lives and which he represents and is currently standing in, has also indicated it will be keeping its borders closed to other states, possibly until the end of winter. Which would be September.

The Queensland premier yesterday suggested that borders could be shut all the way through to September. If we continue to see the national success in containing Covid-19 as things like restaurants and pubs reopen and we get things gradually back to normal with appropriate social distancing, then there's no reason, if all of those next steps are successful, that we can't see borders reopen well before September.

Updated at 1.49am BST

1.44am BST

It doesn't sound like Australia is rushing off to the World Trade Organisation just yet, and instead hopes "other avenues" will offer a solution.

Australia is not interested in a trade war. We don't pursue our trade policies on a tit-for-tat basis. We will continue to operate as we always do.

We acknowledge that China has a right to use anti-dumping laws and rules.

We use those laws and rules at times as well.

But it is a case where China, we think, in this case, has made errors of both fact and law in the application of those rules.

Updated at 1.48am BST

1.42am BST

Question: What about the issues that the Chinese present about subsidies and how they use the context of the farm allowance payments... How do they come to those conclusions? And how have we not been able to set them straight on that?

Simon Birmingham:

It's completely ridiculous to be listing things like the Murray-Darling Basin infrastructure upgrades as some sort of subsidy to barley exporters when the bulk of that barley comes out of Western Australia or South Australia and is firmly dryland farming.

The Murray-Darling basin is nowhere near Geraldton or other parts of the barley-growing world  and I think it demonstrates the absence of factual analysis in the decision that's been made by China.

We will continue to mount the case, and we hope that - through whatever appeal mechanisms we determine to use - that we find a hearing that takes greater account of the facts of the argument.

Updated at 1.45am BST

1.38am BST

Simon Birmingham, as the more senior minister, can at least acknowledge the elephant in the room, which David Littleproud, could not.

Q: So you believe this is not in any way related to Australia's push for an investigation into how Covid-19 started?

Birmingham:

I can understand why people draw those links - particularly given the unhelpful comments of the Chinese ambassador to Australia a few weeks ago. In the end, China denies there's a link.

The only thing we can do in defence of our farmers is engage in the process as constructively as we can.

That's what we've done with Australian industry to date and we now enter a new phase in terms of analysing how we can appeal, what steps we can take, and we're going to do that with the same determination we've shown in defending rights of our farmers up until now.

... The decision was always due by today. So from the minute it started, 18 months ago, the deadline for a decision was today, so there is some coincidence that exists around the timing.

As I say, others can debate whether or not there's a linkage.  As Australia's trade minister, my job is to put the best foot forward in defence of our farmers and exporters and that's what we're going to do in terms of continuing to defend their behaviour, their work and their hard work and to make sure that we stand up for Aussie farmers and Aussie jobs.

Updated at 1.44am BST

1.36am BST

China decision 'doesn't stack up', trade minister says

Simon Birmingham  says Australia will take some time to examine the Chinese government tariff decision, but says on the outset it does not make sense;

China's decision is one that does concern us deeply, because it appears to have been based, without a proper understanding of the facts or the evidence.

It just doesn't stack up in terms of any analysis of Australian farming and our barley production to suggest that our exporters engage in dumping of products or unduly subsidised.

We're going to take some time to talk with industry while, together with the farming sector, we thoroughly analyse the details of this case and the determination that China's made, so that we construct the best pathway forward to appeal the decision, to get the decision reversed and we want to make sure that is done in a calm way with the best interests of all parts of Australian farmers, but in particular our barley-producers.

In the meanwhile, we're going to work damn hard with those barley-producers to make sure we find alternative markets for them, to make sure that when this year's crop is harvested, they're able to get it out onto the world market as they always do so successfully, and we have our new free trade agreement coming online with Indonesia on July 5.

It provides some opportunities. We have sent a message to our trade and diplomatic posts around the world to make sure that they continue their efforts, as they do, to find new market opportunities for Australian farmers.

Updated at 4.23am BST

1.16am BST

Simon Birmingham  should be holding his press conference closer to 10.30.

But his lines will be very similar to what he was saying this morning as he did the breakfast rounds.

Here he is talking to the Seven network, but it was all pretty much the same - Australia won't apologise for calling for an independent investigation into the origins of Covid, but insists there is no trade war:

Outside of what we've seen, in terms of decisions around four meat processing plants and some of the usual ebbing and flowing we see in terms of commodity trades, I'm not getting any signals of that [other sectors being impacted]

I hope and trust that we can continue to see, in total, the benefits of the two-way trade we have with China continue to flow for both countries. You know, this barley decision is bad for Australian farmers but it's also bad for Chinese breweries and other customers of Australian barley in China who will end up paying more for product or getting substandard product from around the world. And so we hope that China will reconsider this at some point and we'll continue to work with them where we can.

Updated at 1.28am BST

1.14am BST

This number is huge - Victoria social distancing fines have hit $8m.

There have been 5604 #COVID19 -related fines added to Fines Victoria's system, valued at more than $8 million (as of Sunday), Department of Justice and Community Safety secretary Rebecca Falkingham has told            #PEAC.            #springst

- Marnie Banger (@marniebanger) May 19, 2020

Updated at 1.29am BST

1.03am BST

No new cases in Queensland

Queensland has recorded no new cases of Covid-19 in the last 24 hours.

But, as with every other jurisdiction, the economic impact has been profound.

Annastacia Palaszczuk  says the health response meant Queensland avoided a potential worse case scenario of 30,000 deaths, but came with a "much greater economic toll".

The Queensland government plans on revealing its stimulus plan, when parliament sits.

Updated at 1.11am BST

12.59am BST

In the meantime, Australia will be picking up the phone to the Middle East, particularly Saudi Arabia, as well as Indonesia and India to see if they want some more barley.

David Littleproud:

So we'll pursue other markets as quickly as we can.

We're not saying we'll never come back to China, but we'll make sure that we have this conversation and this dialogue constructively to work through to make sure that if we can get to an agreement, understanding of what's happened, an appreciation of our point of view, then those markets will continue, as do other agricultural markets into China.

China is pretty into beer, which is why Australian barley has been so popular. So there will be domestic implications within China, with the subtle threat from Australia being "maybe our barley won't be there for you when you want it back".

Diplomacy is a tricky bish.

Updated at 1.07am BST

12.56am BST

Neither Simon Birmingham or David Littleproud had any warning about the decision, based on their public comments this morning, which would point to the CCP still not picking up the phone to the Australian ministers.

They found out about it around 9pm last night, when it was announced.

So, in short, China is still not taking our calls.

That isn't new - China banned Australian ministers from visiting under the Turnbull administration as well - you may remember Steve Ciobo  couldn't get a visa there for a bit while he was trade minister. But given the sensitivities around the pandemic, and the world trade situation as it stood even before the pandemic, there isn't exactly an easy diplomatic fix to this.

Updated at 1.08am BST

12.52am BST

The Australian assertion that the Chinese government's decision to impose an 80% tariff on Australian barley has nothing to do with the Australian push for an independent inquiry into the Covid pandemic origins and response is completely at odds with the very public assertion of the Chinese ambassador that there would be questions over Australian products, including higher education, if the investigation push continued.

I mean, there were cranky diplomatic phone calls over the comments, which first appeared in the Australian Financial Review last month.

But that will be the public line. Privately, it is something very different.

Updated at 12.54am BST

12.47am BST

So the message from the federal government is - this has nothing to do with Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into Covid, Australia will diversify its export markets, Australia will be "calm and methodical" in its response, and everything else is cool beans.

Shorter version - calm your farms.

Except, exporters are rightly worried, and this won't be the end of it.

12.46am BST

Question:  But are Australian farmers paying the price for that?

David Littleproud:

No. Because unless you have evidence to the contrary to say that this barley decision is predicated on that, then you can't make those assertions. They are dangerous assertions to make.

This is a process that started 18 months ago, well before Covid-19 came into place, and this was the juncture, coincidentally, of when it had to come to a decision. So I think you're trying to speculate wildly.

They have given reasons, which we are working through now, and if we do not agree with those reasons, we'll take it to the umpire.

That's what you do, calmly and methodically.

There is no trade war. Everyone needs to take a deep breath, take a cold shower and understand that we produce the best food and fibre in the world and we have marketplaces that we'll be able to send our barley and other produce into other markets if our producers wish to do so.

Updated at 12.56am BST

12.45am BST

Question: Should your government apologise to Australian farmers for them getting caught up in this diplomatic stoush?

David Littleproud:

No. Australians will always stand up for our sovereign right to make a determination. We did, in no way, ask for confrontation.

It was an investigation that we asked for. And I think the world, last night, accepted that view. This wasn't about persecution.

This was about understanding of a pandemic that 300,000 souls lost their lives to. That is the responsible thing to do as a good global citizen.

The fact that Australia led the way, and asked for that, for that review to take place, we should be damn proud as a nation that we led the world, not only on understanding what the WHO has done, but understanding what wildlife wet markets' role is in these pandemics.

We should be damn proud Australia is now leading the world.

The reality is they are separate. These are issues in which the Chinese officials raised on barley 18months ago.

This wild speculation is dangerous.

The facts remain that we'll calmly and methodically work through it with our trading partners and what we believe, as a nation, around something that affects us as a global citizen is important to continue and we will continue to stand up for that every day of the week.

Updated at 12.56am BST

12.43am BST

David Littleproud  repeats that there is no trade war, and he has no reason to think the tariff decision was linked to Australia's call for an independent investigation into the origins and original response to the coronavirus pandemic:

There's no trade war. In fact, even today, I think you have seen that there's increased demand for iron ore out of China.

The reality is they have used a process, quite fairly, around a belief that we have not been fair in our trade.

We prosecute the case, quite strongly, that that is not the case.

We will now reserve our right - and probably go to the independent umpire to make that determination. That's... That's what you do in a fair trading system.

You use the rules. China has been well within their rules in what they have done.

We continue to trade openly on a number of other commodities, not only in agriculture, but in minerals and also services. This will not change. But we will continue to make sure that everything is done on a fair and equitable basis and when we believe that it isn't, then we'll have the independent umpire make that assessment.

12.42am BST

'There is no trade war,' says agriculture minister

David Littleproud  says Australia will continue to do what it can to work with China to rectify the barley decision, and will "probably" go to the World Trade Organisation to appeal the tariff imposition, but says there is no trade war with China.

In the meantime, can I say to barley-producers around the country we will not take our foot off the accelerator in finding other markets.

We have already - only in the last week - opened up greater access into India in getting some of their... in some of their conditions eased to allow easier access into India.

We now have a free trade agreement that starts on 5 July with Indonesia and also within the Middle East - Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are also interested.

So we'll continue to work with our trading partners, but we'll continue to prosecute our case that Australian barley-producers and producer of any commodity here in Australia are not subsidised.

We hold that view strongly.

We'll continue to prosecute that calmly and methodically, work with China as best we can to ensure that we understand one another better.

My door is always opened and my phone is always on to my Chinese counterpart and my department, who are ensconced in Beijing, are working continuously with government officials there to ensure there is better understanding in the future.

Australian farmers can take comfort in the fact that our produce is the best in the world and there is demand for it in other parts of the world and we will pursue those markets vigorously.

Updated at 12.57am BST

12.27am BST

Simon Birmingham  will hold a press conference at 10am.

He's got a lot to talk about today.

Updated at 12.29am BST

12.24am BST

ACT looks to further relax restrictions

The ACT, which remains (known) active Covid-19 case free, is looking at further relaxing of its physical distance restrictions.

The ABC reports chief minister Andrew Barr  has released the territory's "roadmap" (the new favourite political buzzword, along with "Covid-safe") towards reopening.

If things stay as they currently are, gatherings of up to 20 people would be allowed from 30 May, which would also allow gyms, cinemas, beauticians and tattoo studios to reopen (think stage two restrictions).

If that goes well, from 19 June, then stage three could be put into place, which would see gatherings of up to 100 people, meaning - pubs would be back.

Updated at 12.27am BST

12.15am BST

The Senate select committee looking at the government's Covid-19 response will hold a hearing today, from 1pm.

It's on education, skills and training today

Updated at 12.19am BST

12.00am BST

The ACCC has opened up discussion on its concept paper on how to make the digital media space a little fairer:

The ACCC has released a concepts paper seeking views on each of the issues to be covered in a mandatory code to address bargaining power imbalances between Australian news media business and each of Google and Facebook.

We welcome all interested parties to make a submission in response to the questions set out in this concepts paper.

With 157 newsrooms closing in Australia in the last year, Buzzfeed, 10 Daily and (possibly) Australian Associated Press among them, as well as the loss of crucial regional media outlets, despite massive audience jumps in an age where people need more information than ever, it's a review which is beyond time.

You'll find it here.

Updated at 12.08am BST

11.51pm BST

National Farmers' Federation 'deeply concerned' with China's decision to place 80% tariff on Australian barley

The National Farmers' Federation is "frustrated and deeply concerned" with China's decision to place an 80% tariff on Australian barley.

NFF CEO Tony Mahar released a statement saying that from today, Australian barley exports face a dumping margin of up to 73.6% as well as a subsidy margin of up to almost 7%, making exporting barley to China "very difficult to say the least".

"China is Australia's largest barley market, almost 50% of our barely worth about $917 million is exported to China each year," he said. "The new tariffs will significantly curtail and, most likely stop, exports of Australian barley to China by artificially increasing the price, until the situation can be can resolved."

Maher rubbished the Chinese government's claims that Australian growers were subsidised.

Australian grain growers are amongst the least subsidised in the world. They operate in a free and competitive global market. The idea that Australian barley has been 'dumped' in China doesn't match the realities of Australian grain production.

Export sales are made at prices above the purchase value offered to farmers, which in turn surpasses their cost of production.

He wants Australia to appeal the decision at the World Trade Organisation, which Simon Birmingham has already floated, and urged the government to try and reopen talks with the CCP.

More than two-thirds of Australia's agricultural production is exported, and up to 30% of that goes to China.

Our relationship with China has gone from strength to strength since the coming into force of ChAFTA in 2015. China is an important market for Australian wool, red meat, cotton, dairy, wine, horticulture and seafood. Australia's barley trade relationship with China goes back to the 1960s.

It is the NFF's strong hope that a resolution that is satisfactory to both parties can be reached sooner rather than later, to avoid unnecessary detriment to Australian farmers and Chinese consumers - who value our barley.

Updated at 12.20am BST

11.39pm BST

South Australian borders could stay closed until September, premier says

The South Australian premier has indicated he will be keeping SA's borders closed for as long as his state's medical officer deems it necessary, which could be until after winter - which would make it September, the same as Queensland, and yet he doesn't seem to be facing the same "bring down the borders" chant from the feds.

I wonder what the difference could be?

Updated at 12.11am BST

11.37pm BST

'Parochialism won't help the Queensland economy'

David Littleproud,  in a chat to Sky News this morning, warned Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk not to "politicise" the Covid-19 response, and turn the border closure into an election issue.

The federal Queensland Liberal MP says the Queensland government shouldn't be listening to just its own health advisers.

I think the premier in Queensland has to be very careful about this, not to turn this into a political sideshow, leading up to a state election around parochialism, state parochialism.

We've got to predicate our decisions on the best medical advice, not just from the Queensland medical officer,  but from the chief medical officer of the country and I think that needs to be transparent around where all those officials see the risk ... we now have a greater understanding of this disease, this virus, than what we had previously, so I think now with the tracing app, there is opportunity for us to look at this more pragmatically.

I think the premier needs to understand parochialism won't help the Queensland economy, if we can do it safely, with the tracing app and understanding where people are and what we have put in place, then, we shouldn't put ourselves in cotton wool for too long, because it is only going to destroy much of the tourism sector - and in particular, outback Queensland, that would have 50,000 to 60,000 visitors there right now, we will be destroying their economies as well, so if it can be done safely, and the medical advice is telling us that, not just from Queensland, but from around the country, then I think we need to have that honest conversation."

Updated at 12.12am BST

11.24pm BST

Meanwhile, in the midst of a pandemic, and released late last night, the government has revealed its new emissions reduction measures.

Adam Morton has the first take on that hefty decision, here.

Received this from the govt at 8.30 last night - this is a first take. There's a bit in it. Initial impression: changes to the safeguard mechanism and what the govt does with ARENA & the CEFC are likely to prove more consequential than support for CCS. https://t.co/80ycSXSinp

- Adam Morton (@adamlmorton) May 18, 2020

Related: Coalition reveals new emissions reduction measures, including paying polluters to stay under cap

Updated at 11.31pm BST

11.18pm BST

David Littleproud  will hold a press conference on China's decision to level an 80% tariff against Australian barley, but Simon Birmingham says it is all about diversification at the moment.

We will have to work very hard with our barley producers here in Australia to find new market opportunities for them. China can, at any stage, choose to lift these duties, and we'll certainly continue to try to engage with them, to convince them that they should do so," he told the Nine network.

11.09pm BST

It will be 'common for schools to be shut down temporarily', NSW premier says

Gladys Berejiklian on schools returning to face-to-face learning:

Having been through this process of staged introduction of face-to-face learning, again we've used that time to prepare our schools for a Covid-safe environment.

I'm very pleased we have been able to use that time to do it properly, because from now on, we don't ever want to see a situation where all schools are closed.

We want to make sure that face-to-face time in the classroom is what maintains and sustains learning through the pandemic.

But I do say it will be common, common for schools to be shut down temporarily. It will be common for a specific area to be on high alert.

It will be common for a particular school to take extra measures if there's a community breakout in that community with cases.

And we just have to accept that.

But I think, given how we've seen the education department and our officials and the health officials deal with incidents in the past, we can have confidence that moving forward, if there's a case in a school, if there's a particular community that's had a high number of cases, that schools have the ability to take extra steps, or else, of course, we'll shut those schools down if there's a case identified in the school community.

Updated at 12.16am BST

11.02pm BST

NSW reports two new Covid-19 casesNSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and minister for education Sarah Mitchell brief the media on the easing of restrictions during a press conference in Sydney on Tuesday.Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian  says from 5,300 tests, there were just two positive results in the last 24 hours.

That's part of the reason schools are going back, back.

From 25 May, all students will be back to on-site learning.

That is the same date as Queensland.

Updated at 12.17am BST

11.00pm BST

Federal tourism minister says it's time for Australia's domestic borders to open

With the tourism industry continuing to suffer and many operators on the brink of collapse, the push to reopen the state borders is getting stronger.

Gladys Berejiklian  has been one of the most vocal "bring down the borders" proponents, but the federal government is now getting on board. Both WA and Queensland have warned they will keep borders up for as long as they believe is necessary to protect the health of their residents. WA has put no date on it. South Australia has no plans to reopen. Yesterday, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk s aid the restrictions could stay in place until September.

Simon Birmingham told the Nine Network it was time for the internal borders to come down.

We need people moving across this country again when it's safe to do so.

There is no national cabinet this week, so that is a discussion that will have to wait until the next meeting.

*An earlier version of this post was incorrectly headlined 'international borders' instead of 'domestic borders'. It is most definitely domestic borders we are talking about here

Updated at 2.02am BST

10.47pm BST

Good morning and welcome to our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic in Australia.

Here are the main developments you might have missed yesterday and overnight:

•China has put punitive tariffs of more than 80% on barley imports from Australia as more than 110 countries backed a push for an international coronavirus inquiry. Trade minister Simon Birmingham said Australia was "deeply disappointed with China's decision" and may appeal the decision.•Australia reported its 99th confirmed death of a coronavirus patient•NSW premier expected to announce students will return to classrooms full-time from 25 May•Twelve McDonald's outlets in Melbourne's north and west have been shut due to a delivery driver testing positive for coronavirus•New strict transport rules in NSW will mean a maximum of 12 people on a bus at one time, 32 in a train carriage, and 45 on a ferry•Labor leader Anthony Albanese has backed reducing jobseeker below its current level but higher than the former newstart payment.

China has put punitive tariffs of more than 80% on barley imports from Australia as more than 110 countries backed a push for an international coronavirus inquiry. Trade minister Simon Birmingham said Australia was "deeply disappointed with China's decision" and may appeal the decision.

Australia reported its 99th confirmed death of a coronavirus patient

NSW premier expected to announce students will return to classrooms full-time from 25 May

Twelve McDonald's outlets in Melbourne's north and west have been shut due to a delivery driver testing positive for coronavirus

New strict transport rules in NSW will mean a maximum of 12 people on a bus at one time, 32 in a train carriage, and 45 on a ferry

Labor leader Anthony Albanese has backed reducing jobseeker below its current level but higher than the former newstart payment.

Birmigham told ABC radio he still hasn't heard from China's commerce minister, and reiterated his disappointment, but said he would not allow emotions to "cloud his judgement".

The government has also started tackling the "misinformation linking 5G and the coronavirus" as that conspiracy takes a stronger hold in the mainstream.

Meanwhile, Labor has begun campaigning in Eden-Monaro, despite there not being a byelection date set as yet.

We'll bring you all the day's events. You have Amy Remeikis with you for most of the day and the entire Guardian brain's trust at your disposal.

Ready?

111542020-05-19T06:45:00Ztrue2020-05-18T21:48:00Zfalsefalse2020-05-19T23:18:26ZfalseAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/dq4pmfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/e00de17d6ffc917a172bc98e2a53839eb63491e7/0_32_940_564/500.jpgfalseentrueThat's where we will wrap up the Covid-19 live blog for the evening. This is what happened in Australia on Tuesday 19 May: The Australian death toll related to Covid-19 reached 100 with the 19th death of a Newmarch aged care centre resident. Victoria reports 5,600 fines issued for restrictions breached in the state worth $8m. Qantas is preparing to relaunch domestic flights in mid-June. Australia claims vindication for support for investigation into the origins of Covid-19, which China labelled "nothing but a joke" China puts an 80% tariff on Australian barley The federal government has indicated it could end the free childcare subsidy soon, and plans to keep a report on the success of its childcare industry subsidy under wraps For the latest on the coronavirus pandemic please see our global live blog. We'll be back tomorrow with all the Australian coronavirus news. Until then, please take care. 7NEWS is reporting that people will be allowed to travel to regional parts of NSW again from 1 June. A bit more on the 5,600 fines issued in Victoria for breaching the chief health officer's orders (I'm watching the replay of this morning's hearing). The justice department wasn't aware of anyone challenging the fines in court yet, but the government is confident they would stand up because police were told to use discretion, and because the development of the health orders had a lot of legal advice. Victoria police is in the process of breaking down the fines to local government area-level, which means we will be able to match up the fines with the locations of the most coronavirus cases and see if it has been evenly distributed. Labor is calling on the government to explain why it now thinks the World Health Organisation is best placed to investigate the origins of the coronavirus. The call comes amid expectations a European Union-drafted motion, strongly backed by Australia, is set to be adopted at the World Health Assembly overnight tonight. Labor's Senate leader and foreign affairs spokeswoman, Penny Wong, is seeking to draw attention to the fact that the motion deals with the origin and handling of the coronavirus through potentially different processes. As has been widely reported already, the motion allows for the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, to initiate "a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of lessons learned from the global health response to Covid-19. But the question of origins is not dealt with in that process. A separate clause in the motion urges Tedros to continue to work closely with the World Organisation for Animal Health, the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and countries "to identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population". In a statement issued tonight, Wong said the Labor party was pleased to see broad international support for the resolution, but the government should clarify "how the two reviews will work and explain how they deliver on what Australia has called for". While the resolution calls for an independent review into the response to coronavirus, the review into the source will be carried out by the WHO. The government needs to explain why it changed its mind and now thinks the WHO is best placed to investigate the origins of the coronavirus. Good evening, everyone. Earlier this evening we published this story from me on how Australia's biggest state (population-wise) can't even use the Covidsafe app data yet, despite the heavy push from the government. Add to that several states haven't had cause to use it yet, and it begs the question of why did the government tie it so hard to easing restrictions? On that note I will hand over to Josh Taylor, who will see you through the evening. Stay well and wear long pants in professional video calls, even if no one can see. It's a psychological thing. A strong entry in the field of camera v reality when working from home. Simon is based in London. I don't understand why he's not wearing long pants. You can see more WFH setups (and feel better about angling your webcam away from the pile of laundry every morning) here. This temporary fence has been erected around the Olympic Park oval at the Holden Centre, which is the training and administrative headquarters for the Magpies. AFL players have returned to training, under strict social distancing guidelines, ahead of the season recommencing on 11 June. As someone who attended a lot of music festivals in their youth, I can tell you it's quite easy to get through this type of temporary fence, so this poses more of a deterrent than an actual obstacle. If someone really wanted to get on the oval, they would get on the oval. That is not encouragement. Please do not bust through the fences; leave the footballers to train in infection-free peace. If you're wondering how WA is feeling, take a look at talkback radio. The refusal of states such as Queensland and Western Australia to reopen their borders has become a point of tension in the national cabinet, Ben Doherty reports. Although it's worth noting that we have just heard two Queensland MPs, David Littleproud and Matt Canavan, saying they support the state border. Littleproud says there was a six-month extension to the anti-dumping investigation, which pushed it out to this month. So I don't think it's wise to speculate. It's important that we calmly and methodically work through each of these issues, no matter whether with China or with any other nation that we trade with. And it's a timely reminder to our exporters to make sure that they meet the specifications of those countries that we're exporting to. Otherwise, they have grounds on which to challenge the free trade agreements that we put in place. So we'll continue to work calmly and methodically. We firmly believe that Australian farmers aren't subsidised and we'll continue to prosecute that case. But to try and draw links isn't wise, and speculating isn't wise. We need to work in facts and deal in facts and work calmly and methodically through this. Asked by host Patricia Karvelas if he is offended by China's comments, Littleproud says no. Look, I'm a big boy. The reality is what I want to do is continue to engage with our trading partners to ensure that we understand one another. We understand how we trade with one another. But when we make our own decisions, that we respect each other's sovereignty in a respectful way. And that's what we'll continue to do at a ministerial level, at a government level, and a diplomatic level. Speaking of David Littleproud, he just spoke to the ABC's Afternoon Briefing program about meetings he and the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, have had today in the wake of China's barley tariffs decision. Littleproud says Australia is "not going to get into tit for tat" with China and return tariffs. "That's a retaliation, and we don't retaliate," he says. We've accepted it on face value, China's decision around these exports. But we have made quite clear that we reserve our right to explore that decision through all avenues - firstly domestically back through China - there's a short window for us to appeal this decision - and then we will reserve our right to take it to the WTO. He says the grain industry is "very calm and they're very mature about this", even though the drought means that some farmers have just put in their first barley crop for two or three years. We're tying make sure that not only China, but all our trading partners, appreciate, understand, that Australian agriculture is probably one of the least subsidised agricultural production systems in the world. Unlike his colleague Matt Canavan, Littleproud says we should not read anything into the fact that the barley tariffs have hit at the same time that Australia is having a diplomatic stoush with China over its push for an independent investigation into the coronavirus. Look, I don't think it's wise to speculate on what's been an 18-month protracted process that has simply got to a juncture that coincided with events around the WHO. The Greens have repeated their call for Australia to push for a ban on the global wildlife trade, in the wake of the agriculture minister, David Littleproud, today calling for an investigation into the risks posed by wildlife wet markets. You can read Littleproud's comments here. The Greens environment spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young, says Littleproud's push to investigate wet markets will not come to anything unless the wildlife trade is also halted. She put up a motion in the Senate last week calling for support for a global ban on the wildlife trade, but the motion failed. Says Hanson-Young: The agriculture minister and the PM can wax lyrical about an investigation into wildlife wet markets all they like, but if wildlife continue to be traded for consumption and other purposes, a health risk will remain. The science is well established on the link between wildlife consumption and the transfer of zoonotic diseases to humans. When wildlife is traded, it brings animals in contact with humans and other species in horrendous conditions leading to the spread of disease. The Australian government has an opportunity to really lead on this issue and help end the cruelty and reduce the risk of another pandemic like coronavirus in the future. Right now it seems they're not really serious about leading a global effort to reduce the risks for disease to emerge and spread. Canavan says the Queensland premier's decision to keep the state borders closed until possibly September is sensible, given the continued spread of the coronavirus in Victoria and NSW. He says "the decision to close state borders has been proven the right one". It seemingly has helped constrain the virus in some states. And I myself have thought we should have had stronger processes or restrictions on regional travel here in Queensland. We just had a case in Rockhampton, where I'm talking to you now, which seems to have come from travel between Brisbane and Rockhampton. I'm not against [state borders]. However, Canavan says he would like to see a "more responsive timeframe". I don't know if we need to set September as a hard marker if conditions in NSW continue to decline as they seem to have or are doing. Surely let's reopen earlier. Still on barley, the Labor MP Ed Husic is also on the ABC describing the barley tariffs as "a $500m kick in the guts to us, to our country". Husic says Labor will support the government taking the issue to the World Trade Organization. The Queensland LNP senator Matt Canavan says the Chinese embassy's claim that it was "nothing but a joke" for Australia to say its push for an independent investigation into the origin of the coronavirus had been vindicated by widespread global support, is "clearly" a provocative comment. Asked if China's decision to impose tariffs is "clearly economic retaliation", Canavan says: I wouldn't use the word clearly, I'd say it's most likely... I think it's hard to explain otherwise. The chief executive of Grain Trade Australia, Pat O'Shannassy, has been on ABC24 talking about the impact on Australian farmers of China's decision to impose an 80% tariff on barley imports. O'Shannassy says the tariffs amount to a $500m hit to the Australian grains industry, and the industry is disappointed by China's decision. We know that the allegations and what has been claimed through this case is unsubstantiated and not true. We're refuting that. It is disappointing but we have to work with what is in front of us. O'Shannassy says Australia has been working on its malt and barley trade with China since the 1960s, and there are varieties of barley grown in Australia that have been bred specifically for the Chinese market. Other markets can be developed, but that takes time. He says farmers will not necessarily be "abandoning barley" and switching to other grains. Unfortunately, barley growers are in the middle of their planting season now and going at it. For many, it's perhaps a little too late to adjust their plans. The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, has warned against "cheap politicking", after the Chinese embassy in Canberra declared it was "nothing but a joke" for Australia to claim vindication over the growing global support for an international review into the handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Asked on Sky News about the comments, Birmingham said: Australia is not going to engage in cheap politicking over an issue as important as Covid-19. Birmingham signalled his displeasure with the "provocative" comments. He said just as with the trade dispute, Australia would not engage in a "tit for tat" retaliation. We're not going to escalate rhetoric. Labor has released a joint statement from its shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, employment spokesman, Brendan O'Connor, and industrial relations spokesman, Tony Burke, on the ABS data released today that showed 730,000 jobs have been lost since the coronavirus outbreak began. The ABS data showed the impact on the Covid-19 outbreak on employment and wages, sourced from single touch payroll data. It showed a 7.3% decline in payroll jobs overall and the loss of one out of every four payroll jobs in accommodation and food services. The Labor frontbenchers said the Morrison government "botched" the rollout of the jobkeeper program, which meant support "arrived too late or not at all". Too many Australians are left out and left behind, some accidentally but many deliberately. Since the outbreak of the virus, the biggest job losses have been concentrated in hospitality and the arts, with young Australians hardest hit. They said those workers would not be able to "snap back" in September, when jobkeeper and the expanded jobseeker payments are due to expire. Meanwhile in the Covid-19 Senate inquiry, Kristina Keneally is asking about the education minister's offer to give non-government schools early funding if they reopen by 1 June. Alex Gordon, the deputy secretary of schools, has explained the two payments of 12.5% of their funding were first for returning to classroom learning in term two, and then to have a plan to reach 50% of in-person attendance by 1 June. Keneally asks what sort of checks will be applied. Gordon confirms the department "won't be checking" if schools reach 50% attendance, because the requirement was to "have a plan" not to achieve that target. She said: We haven't required them to provide a plan. It's a bringing forward of funding they'd get in July, so it was deemed a low risk. Schools have to provide an assurance that they have a plan, to declare to us that they have a plan for classroom learning. Gordon said the department "won't check every school" but it will apply its "assurance framework re the requirements of the act on an ongoing basis". Calla Wahlquist will guide you through the next little while. Thank you again for joining me today. Take care of you. The NRL has worked out where it will be playing: The heads of the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, the Caribbean Community, and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat have come together to create a joint statement on the Covid response. It is very worried about the economic and social challenges to its member states and wants debt relief: We are gravely concerned about the potentially dire consequences to the economies and livelihoods of our member states. While welcoming the recent decision of international creditors such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank to provide debt relief to low income countries, we call for this relief to include the most vulnerable economies in the world, including our member states.... We acknowledge the potentially dire consequences to the economies and livelihoods of our member states, and the exacerbation of inequalities in our societies. Determined to protect the lives and livelihoods of our people, we also call on our development partners and relevant multilateral organisations - the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the United Nations (UN), the World Bank Group (WBG), the World Food Programme (WFP), and the World Health Organization (WHO) - to put in place the needed short, medium, and long-term emergency response programmes, in coordination with our regional institutions, to assist developing countries to address the consequences of the Covid-19 pandemic. It also calls for greater coordination of health resources and equipment - and then moves on to this kicker: We recognise that while Covid-19 is the most urgent threat facing humanity today, climate change remains the greatest threat in the longer term. We also call on all countries to ensure that the economic recovery measures to tackle Covid-19 align with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The transboundary nature of this pandemic reinforces the importance of multilateralism to address our common challenges. Labor's Murray Watt is asking education officials about the government's $18bn funding guarantee and shift towards short courses. Rob Heferen confirms the $18bn is a guarantee on funding such that, even if domestic student enrolments fall, universities will still get their government funding. But he doesn't have a figure on domestic enrolments. On short courses, Heferen confirms there is no extra funding but argues the benefit universities get is "flexibility" about how they allocate their places to bachelor and sub-bachelor courses, which is "extremely valuable" to some universities. Labor's Tanya Plibersek seizes this evidence to argue there is no funding in the relief package at all: twitter.com/tanya_plibersek/status/1262596236336484352 Which is not quite true... There is a separate $100m of fee relief, but that is shared with the whole tertiary sector. Asked if universities have warned of insolvency, Heferen replies: "Insolvency? No. Challenges? Definitely." The department is aware that hundreds of casuals have been let go, for example. So, to repeat, that is WA, SA and the NT all saying they'll be keeping their borders closed, until their health authorities say it is OK. South Australia's Liberal premier Steven Marshall spoke about his reluctance on ABC radio this morning: I want to open the borders but I want to open them when they're safe and I just don't think there's any chance that we'll be opening them anytime soon - there's still too many cases interstate. I think that they will open this year but we'll only do it once the other states get themselves into a good position as well. But so far, it is only Queensland which is under pressure to open up, despite the Queensland government using the same line as the other jurisdictions - only when the health officials say it is safe. WA premier Mark McGowan says Simon Birmingham "can say what he likes" but the borders with the east will be staying up for as long as the state's health authorities believe it to be necessary. We understand and we support our businesses across the state. We understand that a lot of them are doing it tough. As soon as we can bring the borders down, we will, inside Western Australia. The border with the east will stay up for a period longer. The border with the east will stay up for as long as is necessary to protect the health of Western Australians. Mr Birmingham can say what he likes, we're gonna keep the borders in place for as long as is required to protect the health of the citizens of Western Australia. The South Australian government, I note, has a similar approach to the Western Australian government, as does the Northern Territory. And you might note that the Northern Territory and South Australia have very low rates of infection, just like Western Australia. So our borders with the east are an important part of our defence mechanism against the introduction of the virus into our state. We'll keep 'em up as long as is necessary. As the 'this is not a trade war' back and forth continues, it might be worth pointing out that the Nationals lost the trade portfolio after almost 60 years in 2013, when Tony Abbott decided to shift it to the Liberals in his cabinet, as part of an "aggressive free trade and foreign investment strategy". There was a bit of a push to get the trade portfolio back following Scott Morrison's election win a year ago, but obviously, the Nationals lost that, as Simon Birmingham, who is very much a Liberal, got the job. But the barley biff will have those rumblings starting up again. Suddenly, not even Bondi looks that bad. Rob Heferen acknowledges that universities are experiencing "the most extreme instance of financial difficulty we could imagine" but said their financial position is "pretty solid" because many have large cash reserves. James Paterson's questioning established that about one-fifth of international students were unable to enter Australia (120,000 out of 626,000) and universities are still receiving all their government funding. He therefore rejected the claim universities have been "abandoned". Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi asks if the department has done any modelling of potential job losses in the sector. Heferen says, no, they haven't, because universities can decide for themselves whether to respond to decreased revenue through reduced staff, capital projects or dipping into reserves. Michele Bruniges, the education department secretary, backs Heferen, that it is not possible for the department to do modelling because universities are autonomous. On the topic of schools, officials reveal that about 670 non-government schools applied for early funding by meeting Dan Tehan's conditions of resuming in-person teaching and a plan for 50% attendance by 1 July. Meanwhile, Donald Trump has threatened to permanently cut the US's funding to the World Health Organisation. Liberal senator James Paterson is asking the Department of Education about universities' eligibility for jobkeeper. Rob Heferen, the deputy secretary of higher education, research and international, has said that although universities are eligible for the wage subsidy, "so far as we're aware no university has qualified". Heferen said universities had to meet the same turnover tests as other businesses to qualify - a 30% decline in revenue for those earning less than $1bn or 50% for those earning more - but there were "a couple of variations" to the rules affecting universities. Universities have to count their commonwealth grants and Help funding (which will make it harder to meet the downturn test) and measure revenue declines over 6 months, not one. Heferen has set out other supports for university, including $100m of fee relief (shared with the tertiary sector) and a guarantee on commonwealth funding, even if enrolments drop. The Department of Education is up before the Covid-19 Senate committee. So far, officials have said they will not release a full report on the first four weeks of the free childcare policy, arguing it is cabinet-in-confidence and contains commercially confidential information. A summary showed a quarter of services found the relief package had not helped their financial viability. Ros Baxter, the deputy secretary of early childhood and child care, says the program is on track to cost the $1.6bn estimated for the 12 weeks from 6 April to 28 June. She says that childcare subsidies cost $8.3bn last year - a figure suggesting the government will spend less this quarter than normal - but Baxter warned against a simple comparison because numbers vary through the year. When the relief package was announced, the department believed it was on track to spend $1.3bn over the same period because of a 30% decline in attendance. So on that figure the relief package did add $300m to the sector. Baxter says many providers were "on the brink of collapse" if it weren't for the relief package and that if they had been allowed to fall over, the commonwealth would have owed much less in childcare subsidies. Labor's Katy Gallagher is now probing the fact the department estimated that a third of workers in the sector would be ineligible for the jobkeeper wage subsidy. The government is only providing 50% of childcare fees, and providers are expected to apply for jobkeeper to make up the difference. Understandably, providers with a lot of staff who are ineligible for jobkeeper were among the biggest critics of the package. Baxter is noting there is a fund for "exceptional circumstances" to make up the difference. A quick update on the situation in Victoria. We now have three aged care homes that are being managed as active outbreak sites. The first is the Villa Maria aged care home in Bundoora, reported yesterday. You'll recall that a resident at that home had an inconclusive test result, then tested negative, but the Victorian Health Department's protocol is to manage all inconclusive cases as if they are a positive case. That is also what happened at the Hammond Care facility in Caulfield, which was reported today. A resident produced a positive test result, and subsequently tested negative, but the outbreak is being managed as if it were a positive result because aged care homes are so high-risk. So the facility is closed to visitors for 14 days. The third aged care facility is Lynden Aged Care in Camberwell. A resident of that home tested positive while being treated in a hospital in Melbourne, and remains in that hospital. This has not been reported as an inconclusive result - it's a true positive. All of their close contacts have been told to quarantine for 14 days and all residents and staff at the home will be tested. There was also a new case associated with the Cedar Meats cluster, bringing the total number of cases to 100. There are no new cases linked to the Maccas cluster. In all there were seven new cases reported overnight, but the state's total has only gone up by six (to 1,573) because another case was removed due to "reclassification". This usually means either a) a case that was part of Victoria's total is now counted in some other state's total, or b) a case that was inconclusive has now been deemed negative and struck off the list. The ACT remains (known) active Covid case-free. Just in case there are any Melbourne radio 3AW listeners on the blog. Victoria Health has also just released its official update: There are seven new cases since yesterday - one case was removed from the overall total due to reclassification. Today's new cases include: A single case of coronavirus in a resident of the Lynden aged care facility in Camberwell. The resident was diagnosed at a metropolitan hospital, where they are being treated. Residents and families are all being informed and we're working closely with the facility to ensure appropriate public health actions have been taken, including isolation, quarantine, cleaning and contact tracing. Close contacts have been ordered into home quarantine and all residents and staff at the home will be tested. A single case of coronavirus was notified in a resident of the HammondCare facility in Caulfield. A subsequent test has since come back negative. As per the policy of the public health team, even when a subsequent test result comes back negative the case is still managed as though it is a positive. This is a precautionary approach designed to minimise potential spread as quickly as possible. Because of the high-risk setting, the aged care facility will continue to be managed as if it were an outbreak site. Both aged care facilities will remain closed to visitors for 14 days as a precaution. One new case linked to the Cedar Meats outbreak - with the total number of cases now linked to this cluster at 100, made up of 64 staff and 36 external to the facility. One case of a returned traveller in hotel quarantine. Three other cases are under investigation. There were no further cases linked to the McDonald's Fawkner outbreak, with the total number of cases in that outbreak remaining at 12. Just catching up on the Victorian situation (there can be multiple press conferences on at the same time, so reviewing the information can take some time) and there have been more Covid cases diagnosed in aged care homes. The deputy chief medical officer in Victoria, Annaliese van Diemen, says there has been a Covid case identified in the Hammond aged care home in Caulfield. There has been another case identified at the Lyndon aged care facility in Campbellwell. That's on top of the Villa Maria aged care facility in Bundoora reporting a case yesterday. Both the HammondCare facility and the Villa Maria centre are in lockdown as a precaution. This was the whole Anthony Albanese quote on the impact of the US deal with China when it comes to barley exports: I've said before, there's nothing remarkable about suggesting that there should be an inquiry into the origins and the spreading that occurred with the coronavirus. We have a coronial inquiry into a single death in this country and that is a significant thing that we do and it is normal practice. There's more than 300,000 people who have died due to this crisis globally and, of course, there should be an inquiry. With regard to trade, it would appear that this is unfair treatment of Australian barley farmers by China and the government should be giving that consideration. And Labor would support taking action at the WTO, the World Trade Organisation, to hold China to account on this. The imposition of 80% tariffs is an extraordinary decision. And we need to also - the Australian government should be pursuing with the US what the circumstances are behind the agreement between China and the US for access to China for US agriculture, and whether that has disadvantaged Australia, and we should be pursuing that on behalf of our farmers. Victoria has recorded six new positive Covid-19 tests in the past 24 hours. The death of a 93-year-old woman, who had been diagnosed with Covid-19, takes Australia's official Covid-19 death toll to 100. The woman had been a resident at Newmarch House, the aged care home in western Sydney which has been the site of a heartbreaking cluster. The woman was the 19th resident to die after contracting the virus while living in the facility. The Reserve Bank has released its minutes from the 5 May meeting, explaining its outlook for the Australian economy (a 10% decline in GDP over the first half of 2020). Some interesting details: Household consumption was expected to contract by about 15% over the first half of 2020, despite a spike in retail spending in March as households stocked up on groceries, pharmaceuticals, home office and home exercise equipment. Overall, the peak-to-trough decline in total hours worked was expected to be around 20%, with a weak labour market to lead to wage freezes or even cuts. The unemployment rate was expected to peak at around 10% in the June quarter - the number is being suppressed by people on the jobkeeper wage subsidy not counting as unemployed, but may rise as requirements to seek work are reapplied to jobseekers. Covid-19 is expected to have a "very large" impact on prices, with inflation as measured by CPI expected to fall by around 2.25% in the June quarter, driven by the decline in petrol prices and the removal of childcare fees. Interest rates, including for home mortgages, are now at record lows. Commercial property is particularly vulnerable. With more people working from home, vacancy rates are expected to rise and rents to fall. The RBA summarised its decision: In considering the policy decision, members recognised that the global economy was experiencing a very severe downturn as countries sought to contain the Covid-19 outbreak through restrictions on activity. Many countries were likely to experience their biggest peacetime economic contractions since the 1930s and labour markets were very weak. The outlook remained uncertain, although if infection rates continued to decline and restrictions were eased, a recovery could be expected to start later in 2020, supported by both the large fiscal packages and the monetary policy response. The bank is planning for both an upside scenario, that as restrictions are eased economic activity returns, and a downside scenario where restrictions need to be reimposed due to a second wave of infections. But there's not a lot of language explaining which is considered more likely. The Australian Bureau of Statistics has released new data showing total payroll jobs fell by 7.3% and total wages paid fell by 5.4% in the seven weeks from mid-March (when Covid-19 restrictions were introduced after Australia reached 100 cases) and early May. The head of labour statistics at the ABS, Bjorn Jarvis, said: The latest data shows a further slowing in the fall in Covid-19 job losses between mid-April and early May. The largest net job losses over the seven weeks of the Covid-19 period, in percentage terms, were in Victoria and New South Wales, where the falls in payroll jobs were around 8.4% and 7.7 %. The accommodation and food services industry had lost around a third of payroll jobs (33.3%) by the week ending 11 April, and a subsequent increase in jobs saw this reduce to around 27.1% by the week ending 2 May. Breaking down the statistics by demographic: Women have had a bigger hit to jobs (down 7.1% compared with 6.9% for men) but a smaller hit to wages (down 1.9% compared with 7.6% for men). People under 20 have had the biggest cut to jobs (down 14.6%). And straight after the statement from the Chinese embassy calling Australia's claims of "vindication" in terms of calling for a Covid origins inquiry "nothing but a joke", David Littleproud has released a statement claiming "the setting up of this scientific review has vindicated our efforts". The minister for agriculture, David Littleproud, is pleased to see the strong international support which he led last month at the G20 to investigate wildlife wet markets as part of the broader review of Covid-19. Minister Littleproud said his call for the expert review to look into the wildlife wet markets which he led at the G20 last month will provide a greater understanding of how to prevent another devastating event like Covid-19. "Since 1980, two pandemics have been linked to wildlife wet markets and a further two linked to unsustainable wildlife practices - this is acknowledgment we need to work globally to protect us from these risks. "We have long known about the risks associated with wildlife wet markets and the potential for pandemics they pose but they also are a risk to agriculture and food security," minister Littleproud said. "That is why I worked with Australia's chief veterinary officer, Mark Schipp, to push for global reforms underpinned by a scientific review. "It's fair to say I was the outlier at that time, but with calm and methodical work, the setting up of this scientific review has vindicated our efforts. "It will take a global effort to reduce the risks for disease to emerge and spread, and the threat to agriculture that the mix of wildlife, domestic animals and humans provide in wildlife wet markets. "The review will be a joint WHO, OIE, FAO collaboration. Together we can gather information that will contribute to the betterment of all nations. "Let's hope the outcomes of the review finds ways to protect human life and the agriculture that underpins global food security." Add Tasmania to the list of states - South Australia, Western Australia and Queensland - that are pushing back against opening borders. As we were pointing out yesterday, the World Health Assembly motion which is under discussion was put forward by the EU, not Australia - Australia was a co-sponsor. But the motion is different to what Australia wanted, in that it allows for the World Health Organization to lead the inquiry, which was the main thing Australia did not want. Things are going really well. Anthony Albanese says Australia needs to know what the agreement is between China and the US in terms of trade, so it knows what the playing field looks like as it negotiates the barley tariff decision. Last week, China said it would immediately allow more imports of barley from the US. Donald Trump has been playing a very hard trade deal with China, but no one seems to know what the state of play is, and how it is impacting other trading nations. Albanese is the one of the first to raise that issue today - and it is a pretty big point, given Australia's response is to tell China, not so subtly, it will look to other markets to sell barley. AAP has an update on the Victorian rental situation, since the Covid measures were put in place: Victorian tenants who have struck agreements with their landlords to drop their rent amid the effects of coronavirus are paying 31% less on average. Attorney general Jill Hennessy has revealed the average decrease while being grilled at a parliamentary inquiry investigating the state government's response to Covid-19. During the pandemic, Victorian tenants seeking rent reductions, their landlords and agents have been encouraged to reach agreements and register them with Consumer Affairs Victoria. Emergency laws passed in the state on 29 March also introduced a new dispute resolution process for when parties can't come to an agreement independently. That will last until September. Hennessy said more than 15,000 people had contacted Consumer Affairs making inquiries about residential tenancies during the pandemic. More than 6,800 changed rental agreements have been struck without any need for dispute resolution. Almost 1,270 others were reached after assistance teams stepped in to help resolve disputes, with that process taking about six days on average. Where an agreement has been struck, weekly rent has decreased by an average of 31%, or about $184. There are still cases were agreement has not been reached, with 81 residential tenancy matters referred to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. Since 12 May, when a chief resolution officer has been able to accept disputes referred by Consumer Affairs Victoria, 216 matters have also been sent their way. Speaking from Tumbarumba in New South Wales, which is part of the Eden-Monaro electorate, Anthony Albanese says he'll leave it to the states to decide when they reopen their borders: No one wants any restriction to be in place for one day more than necessary. But state governments are making decisions based upon the health advice. I haven't been critical of any of the state governments, be they New South Wales, where we're now, or any of the other states. They'll make their decisions based upon the advice they receive. It looks like Qantas is preparing for domestic travel to resume from 12 June - it has loaded information on its "fly well" program onto its website, outlining its new procedures: Pre-flight Information sent to all customers before they fly, so they know what to expect. Contactless check-in (via online/app) and self-serve bag drop strongly encouraged, including use of Q Bag Tags. Hand sanitising stations at departure gates. Temporary changes to Qantas Lounges, including increased physical distancing, hand sanitising stations, enhanced disinfection of surfaces and adjustments to food and drink service. Working with airports on other safeguards in the terminal, including regular disinfection of security screening points and installing hygiene screens at airline customer service desks, wherever practical. Onboard Masks provided to all passengers on each flight - while not mandatory from a safety point of view, they are recommended to be worn in the interests of everyone's peace of mind. Enhanced cleaning of aircraft with a disinfectant effective against coronaviruses, with a focus on high contact areas - seats, seatbelts, overhead lockers, air vents and toilets. Sanitising wipes given to all passengers to wipe down seat belts, trays and armrests themselves, if preferred. Simplified service and catering to minimise touchpoints for crew and passengers. Passengers asked to limit movement around cabin, once seated. Sequenced boarding and disembarkation to minimise crowding. In addition, the air conditioning systems of all Qantas and Jetstar aircraft are already fitted with hospital-grade HEPA filters, which remove 99.9% of all particles including viruses. Air inside the cabin is refreshed on average every five minutes during flight. All airline employees are required to follow strict personal hygiene protocols, for the benefit of themselves and others. All passengers are encouraged to download the Australian Government's CovidSafe app as part of improving the ability of health authorities to contain the spread of coronavirus. In line with public health advice, anyone with cold and flu-like symptoms should stay at home. Queensland has announced part of its Covid-19 stimulus response. The key takeaways: A $400m accelerated works program to deliver new road, bridge and pavement sealing works across the state; A further $200m in 2020-21 for a works for Queensland program to support jobs and fund productive building projects; and An $11.25m expansion of the household resilience program in cyclone-affected areas. $50m for tourism infrastructure and more funding towards a domestic tourism campaign; Redirecting $50m of industry attraction funding under the Making it for Queensland initiative to continue to expand manufacturing capacity for PPE, hand sanitiser and medical supplies to respond to Covid-19; and A $10m package to support international students and safeguard Queensland's global education brand. $20m for free online training which includes training in safety and hygiene standards to keep Covid-19 contained; A further $14.8m to support project development of the CopperString 2.0 project that will connect the North West Minerals Province with the national electricity market; and $20m towards construction of a Queensland apprenticeships centre in renewable hydrogen at Beenleigh. Small businesses will also have access to grants of up to $10,000. Sorry folks - just saw an incorrect headline on the blog (it has been a long week) and yes, the push is for domestic border restrictions to be scrapped, not international (which obviously would be much bigger news than a blog post, at this point). Sorry for the confusion - it should be fixed now, and if it's still showing, just reload the page. Meanwhile, Simon Birmingham again singles out Queensland for not opening up its borders, while ignoring that South Australia, where he lives and which he represents and is currently standing in, has also indicated it will be keeping its borders closed to other states, possibly until the end of winter. Which would be September. The Queensland premier yesterday suggested that borders could be shut all the way through to September. If we continue to see the national success in containing Covid-19 as things like restaurants and pubs reopen and we get things gradually back to normal with appropriate social distancing, then there's no reason, if all of those next steps are successful, that we can't see borders reopen well before September. It doesn't sound like Australia is rushing off to the World Trade Organisation just yet, and instead hopes "other avenues" will offer a solution. Australia is not interested in a trade war. We don't pursue our trade policies on a tit-for-tat basis. We will continue to operate as we always do. We acknowledge that China has a right to use anti-dumping laws and rules. We use those laws and rules at times as well. But it is a case where China, we think, in this case, has made errors of both fact and law in the application of those rules. Question: What about the issues that the Chinese present about subsidies and how they use the context of the farm allowance payments... How do they come to those conclusions? And how have we not been able to set them straight on that? Simon Birmingham: It's completely ridiculous to be listing things like the Murray-Darling Basin infrastructure upgrades as some sort of subsidy to barley exporters when the bulk of that barley comes out of Western Australia or South Australia and is firmly dryland farming. The Murray-Darling basin is nowhere near Geraldton or other parts of the barley-growing world and I think it demonstrates the absence of factual analysis in the decision that's been made by China. We will continue to mount the case, and we hope that - through whatever appeal mechanisms we determine to use - that we find a hearing that takes greater account of the facts of the argument. Simon Birmingham, as the more senior minister, can at least acknowledge the elephant in the room, which David Littleproud, could not. Q: So you believe this is not in any way related to Australia's push for an investigation into how Covid-19 started? Birmingham: I can understand why people draw those links - particularly given the unhelpful comments of the Chinese ambassador to Australia a few weeks ago. In the end, China denies there's a link. The only thing we can do in defence of our farmers is engage in the process as constructively as we can. That's what we've done with Australian industry to date and we now enter a new phase in terms of analysing how we can appeal, what steps we can take, and we're going to do that with the same determination we've shown in defending rights of our farmers up until now.... The decision was always due by today. So from the minute it started, 18 months ago, the deadline for a decision was today, so there is some coincidence that exists around the timing. As I say, others can debate whether or not there's a linkage. As Australia's trade minister, my job is to put the best foot forward in defence of our farmers and exporters and that's what we're going to do in terms of continuing to defend their behaviour, their work and their hard work and to make sure that we stand up for Aussie farmers and Aussie jobs. Simon Birmingham says Australia will take some time to examine the Chinese government tariff decision, but says on the outset it does not make sense; China's decision is one that does concern us deeply, because it appears to have been based, without a proper understanding of the facts or the evidence. It just doesn't stack up in terms of any analysis of Australian farming and our barley production to suggest that our exporters engage in dumping of products or unduly subsidised. We're going to take some time to talk with industry while, together with the farming sector, we thoroughly analyse the details of this case and the determination that China's made, so that we construct the best pathway forward to appeal the decision, to get the decision reversed and we want to make sure that is done in a calm way with the best interests of all parts of Australian farmers, but in particular our barley-producers. In the meanwhile, we're going to work damn hard with those barley-producers to make sure we find alternative markets for them, to make sure that when this year's crop is harvested, they're able to get it out onto the world market as they always do so successfully, and we have our new free trade agreement coming online with Indonesia on July 5. It provides some opportunities. We have sent a message to our trade and diplomatic posts around the world to make sure that they continue their efforts, as they do, to find new market opportunities for Australian farmers. Simon Birmingham should be holding his press conference closer to 10.30. But his lines will be very similar to what he was saying this morning as he did the breakfast rounds. Here he is talking to the Seven network, but it was all pretty much the same - Australia won't apologise for calling for an independent investigation into the origins of Covid, but insists there is no trade war: Outside of what we've seen, in terms of decisions around four meat processing plants and some of the usual ebbing and flowing we see in terms of commodity trades, I'm not getting any signals of that [other sectors being impacted] I hope and trust that we can continue to see, in total, the benefits of the two-way trade we have with China continue to flow for both countries. You know, this barley decision is bad for Australian farmers but it's also bad for Chinese breweries and other customers of Australian barley in China who will end up paying more for product or getting substandard product from around the world. And so we hope that China will reconsider this at some point and we'll continue to work with them where we can. This number is huge - Victoria social distancing fines have hit $8m. Queensland has recorded no new cases of Covid-19 in the last 24 hours. But, as with every other jurisdiction, the economic impact has been profound. Annastacia Palaszczuk says the health response meant Queensland avoided a potential worse case scenario of 30,000 deaths, but came with a "much greater economic toll". The Queensland government plans on revealing its stimulus plan, when parliament sits. In the meantime, Australia will be picking up the phone to the Middle East, particularly Saudi Arabia, as well as Indonesia and India to see if they want some more barley. David Littleproud: So we'll pursue other markets as quickly as we can. We're not saying we'll never come back to China, but we'll make sure that we have this conversation and this dialogue constructively to work through to make sure that if we can get to an agreement, understanding of what's happened, an appreciation of our point of view, then those markets will continue, as do other agricultural markets into China. China is pretty into beer, which is why Australian barley has been so popular. So there will be domestic implications within China, with the subtle threat from Australia being "maybe our barley won't be there for you when you want it back". Diplomacy is a tricky bish. Neither Simon Birmingham or David Littleproud had any warning about the decision, based on their public comments this morning, which would point to the CCP still not picking up the phone to the Australian ministers. They found out about it around 9pm last night, when it was announced. So, in short, China is still not taking our calls. That isn't new - China banned Australian ministers from visiting under the Turnbull administration as well - you may remember Steve Ciobo couldn't get a visa there for a bit while he was trade minister. But given the sensitivities around the pandemic, and the world trade situation as it stood even before the pandemic, there isn't exactly an easy diplomatic fix to this. The Australian assertion that the Chinese government's decision to impose an 80% tariff on Australian barley has nothing to do with the Australian push for an independent inquiry into the Covid pandemic origins and response is completely at odds with the very public assertion of the Chinese ambassador that there would be questions over Australian products, including higher education, if the investigation push continued. I mean, there were cranky diplomatic phone calls over the comments, which first appeared in the Australian Financial Review last month. But that will be the public line. Privately, it is something very different. So the message from the federal government is - this has nothing to do with Australia's calls for an independent inquiry into Covid, Australia will diversify its export markets, Australia will be "calm and methodical" in its response, and everything else is cool beans. Shorter version - calm your farms. Except, exporters are rightly worried, and this won't be the end of it. Question: But are Australian farmers paying the price for that? David Littleproud: No. Because unless you have evidence to the contrary to say that this barley decision is predicated on that, then you can't make those assertions. They are dangerous assertions to make. This is a process that started 18 months ago, well before Covid-19 came into place, and this was the juncture, coincidentally, of when it had to come to a decision. So I think you're trying to speculate wildly. They have given reasons, which we are working through now, and if we do not agree with those reasons, we'll take it to the umpire. That's what you do, calmly and methodically. There is no trade war. Everyone needs to take a deep breath, take a cold shower and understand that we produce the best food and fibre in the world and we have marketplaces that we'll be able to send our barley and other produce into other markets if our producers wish to do so. Question: Should your government apologise to Australian farmers for them getting caught up in this diplomatic stoush? David Littleproud: No. Australians will always stand up for our sovereign right to make a determination. We did, in no way, ask for confrontation. It was an investigation that we asked for. And I think the world, last night, accepted that view. This wasn't about persecution. This was about understanding of a pandemic that 300,000 souls lost their lives to. That is the responsible thing to do as a good global citizen. The fact that Australia led the way, and asked for that, for that review to take place, we should be damn proud as a nation that we led the world, not only on understanding what the WHO has done, but understanding what wildlife wet markets' role is in these pandemics. We should be damn proud Australia is now leading the world. The reality is they are separate. These are issues in which the Chinese officials raised on barley 18months ago. This wild speculation is dangerous. The facts remain that we'll calmly and methodically work through it with our trading partners and what we believe, as a nation, around something that affects us as a global citizen is important to continue and we will continue to stand up for that every day of the week. David Littleproud repeats that there is no trade war, and he has no reason to think the tariff decision was linked to Australia's call for an independent investigation into the origins and original response to the coronavirus pandemic: There's no trade war. In fact, even today, I think you have seen that there's increased demand for iron ore out of China. The reality is they have used a process, quite fairly, around a belief that we have not been fair in our trade. We prosecute the case, quite strongly, that that is not the case. We will now reserve our right - and probably go to the independent umpire to make that determination. That's... That's what you do in a fair trading system. You use the rules. China has been well within their rules in what they have done. We continue to trade openly on a number of other commodities, not only in agriculture, but in minerals and also services. This will not change. But we will continue to make sure that everything is done on a fair and equitable basis and when we believe that it isn't, then we'll have the independent umpire make that assessment. David Littleproud says Australia will continue to do what it can to work with China to rectify the barley decision, and will "probably" go to the World Trade Organisation to appeal the tariff imposition, but says there is no trade war with China. In the meantime, can I say to barley-producers around the country we will not take our foot off the accelerator in finding other markets. We have already - only in the last week - opened up greater access into India in getting some of their... in some of their conditions eased to allow easier access into India. We now have a free trade agreement that starts on 5 July with Indonesia and also within the Middle East - Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are also interested. So we'll continue to work with our trading partners, but we'll continue to prosecute our case that Australian barley-producers and producer of any commodity here in Australia are not subsidised. We hold that view strongly. We'll continue to prosecute that calmly and methodically, work with China as best we can to ensure that we understand one another better. My door is always opened and my phone is always on to my Chinese counterpart and my department, who are ensconced in Beijing, are working continuously with government officials there to ensure there is better understanding in the future. Australian farmers can take comfort in the fact that our produce is the best in the world and there is demand for it in other parts of the world and we will pursue those markets vigorously. Simon Birmingham will hold a press conference at 10am. He's got a lot to talk about today. The ACT, which remains (known) active Covid-19 case free, is looking at further relaxing of its physical distance restrictions. The ABC reports chief minister Andrew Barr has released the territory's "roadmap" (the new favourite political buzzword, along with "Covid-safe") towards reopening. If things stay as they currently are, gatherings of up to 20 people would be allowed from 30 May, which would also allow gyms, cinemas, beauticians and tattoo studios to reopen (think stage two restrictions). If that goes well, from 19 June, then stage three could be put into place, which would see gatherings of up to 100 people, meaning - pubs would be back. The Senate select committee looking at the government's Covid-19 response will hold a hearing today, from 1pm. It's on education, skills and training today The ACCC has opened up discussion on its concept paper on how to make the digital media space a little fairer: The ACCC has released a concepts paper seeking views on each of the issues to be covered in a mandatory code to address bargaining power imbalances between Australian news media business and each of Google and Facebook. We welcome all interested parties to make a submission in response to the questions set out in this concepts paper. With 157 newsrooms closing in Australia in the last year, Buzzfeed, 10 Daily and (possibly) Australian Associated Press among them, as well as the loss of crucial regional media outlets, despite massive audience jumps in an age where people need more information than ever, it's a review which is beyond time. You'll find it here. The National Farmers' Federation is "frustrated and deeply concerned" with China's decision to place an 80% tariff on Australian barley. NFF CEO Tony Mahar released a statement saying that from today, Australian barley exports face a dumping margin of up to 73.6% as well as a subsidy margin of up to almost 7%, making exporting barley to China "very difficult to say the least". "China is Australia's largest barley market, almost 50% of our barely worth about $917 million is exported to China each year," he said. "The new tariffs will significantly curtail and, most likely stop, exports of Australian barley to China by artificially increasing the price, until the situation can be can resolved." Maher rubbished the Chinese government's claims that Australian growers were subsidised. Australian grain growers are amongst the least subsidised in the world. They operate in a free and competitive global market. The idea that Australian barley has been 'dumped' in China doesn't match the realities of Australian grain production. Export sales are made at prices above the purchase value offered to farmers, which in turn surpasses their cost of production. He wants Australia to appeal the decision at the World Trade Organisation, which Simon Birmingham has already floated, and urged the government to try and reopen talks with the CCP. More than two-thirds of Australia's agricultural production is exported, and up to 30% of that goes to China. Our relationship with China has gone from strength to strength since the coming into force of ChAFTA in 2015. China is an important market for Australian wool, red meat, cotton, dairy, wine, horticulture and seafood. Australia's barley trade relationship with China goes back to the 1960s. It is the NFF's strong hope that a resolution that is satisfactory to both parties can be reached sooner rather than later, to avoid unnecessary detriment to Australian farmers and Chinese consumers - who value our barley. The South Australian premier has indicated he will be keeping SA's borders closed for as long as his state's medical officer deems it necessary, which could be until after winter - which would make it September, the same as Queensland, and yet he doesn't seem to be facing the same "bring down the borders" chant from the feds. I wonder what the difference could be? David Littleproud, in a chat to Sky News this morning, warned Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk not to "politicise" the Covid-19 response, and turn the border closure into an election issue. The federal Queensland Liberal MP says the Queensland government shouldn't be listening to just its own health advisers. I think the premier in Queensland has to be very careful about this, not to turn this into a political sideshow, leading up to a state election around parochialism, state parochialism. We've got to predicate our decisions on the best medical advice, not just from the Queensland medical officer, but from the chief medical officer of the country and I think that needs to be transparent around where all those officials see the risk ... we now have a greater understanding of this disease, this virus, than what we had previously, so I think now with the tracing app, there is opportunity for us to look at this more pragmatically. I think the premier needs to understand parochialism won't help the Queensland economy, if we can do it safely, with the tracing app and understanding where people are and what we have put in place, then, we shouldn't put ourselves in cotton wool for too long, because it is only going to destroy much of the tourism sector - and in particular, outback Queensland, that would have 50,000 to 60,000 visitors there right now, we will be destroying their economies as well, so if it can be done safely, and the medical advice is telling us that, not just from Queensland, but from around the country, then I think we need to have that honest conversation." Meanwhile, in the midst of a pandemic, and released late last night, the government has revealed its new emissions reduction measures. Adam Morton has the first take on that hefty decision, here. David Littleproud will hold a press conference on China's decision to level an 80% tariff against Australian barley, but Simon Birmingham says it is all about diversification at the moment. We will have to work very hard with our barley producers here in Australia to find new market opportunities for them. China can, at any stage, choose to lift these duties, and we'll certainly continue to try to engage with them, to convince them that they should do so," he told the Nine network. Gladys Berejiklian on schools returning to face-to-face learning: Having been through this process of staged introduction of face-to-face learning, again we've used that time to prepare our schools for a Covid-safe environment. I'm very pleased we have been able to use that time to do it properly, because from now on, we don't ever want to see a situation where all schools are closed. We want to make sure that face-to-face time in the classroom is what maintains and sustains learning through the pandemic. But I do say it will be common, common for schools to be shut down temporarily. It will be common for a specific area to be on high alert. It will be common for a particular school to take extra measures if there's a community breakout in that community with cases. And we just have to accept that. But I think, given how we've seen the education department and our officials and the health officials deal with incidents in the past, we can have confidence that moving forward, if there's a case in a school, if there's a particular community that's had a high number of cases, that schools have the ability to take extra steps, or else, of course, we'll shut those schools down if there's a case identified in the school community. NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian says from 5,300 tests, there were just two positive results in the last 24 hours. That's part of the reason schools are going back, back. From 25 May, all students will be back to on-site learning. That is the same date as Queensland. With the tourism industry continuing to suffer and many operators on the brink of collapse, the push to reopen the state borders is getting stronger. Gladys Berejiklian has been one of the most vocal "bring down the borders" proponents, but the federal government is now getting on board. Both WA and Queensland have warned they will keep borders up for as long as they believe is necessary to protect the health of their residents. WA has put no date on it. South Australia has no plans to reopen. Yesterday, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the restrictions could stay in place until September. Simon Birmingham told the Nine Network it was time for the internal borders to come down. We need people moving across this country again when it's safe to do so. There is no national cabinet this week, so that is a discussion that will have to wait until the next meeting. *An earlier version of this post was incorrectly headlined 'international borders' instead of 'domestic borders'. It is most definitely domestic borders we are talking about here Good morning and welcome to our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. Here are the main developments you might have missed yesterday and overnight: China has put punitive tariffs of more than 80% on barley imports from Australia as more than 110 countries backed a push for an international coronavirus inquiry. Trade minister Simon Birmingham said Australia was "deeply disappointed with China's decision" and may appeal the decision. Australia reported its 99th confirmed death of a coronavirus patient NSW premier expected to announce students will return to classrooms full-time from 25 May Twelve McDonald's outlets in Melbourne's north and west have been shut due to a delivery driver testing positive for coronavirus New strict transport rules in NSW will mean a maximum of 12 people on a bus at one time, 32 in a train carriage, and 45 on a ferry Labor leader Anthony Albanese has backed reducing jobseeker below its current level but higher than the former newstart payment. Birmigham told ABC radio he still hasn't heard from China's commerce minister, and reiterated his disappointment, but said he would not allow emotions to "cloud his judgement". The government has also started tackling the "misinformation linking 5G and the coronavirus" as that conspiracy takes a stronger hold in the mainstream. Meanwhile, Labor has begun campaigning in Eden-Monaro, despite there not being a byelection date set as yet. We'll bring you all the day's events. You have Amy Remeikis with you for most of the day and the entire Guardian brain's trust at your disposal. Ready?67049falsefalseJosh Taylor (now) and Calla Wahlquist and Amy Remeikis (earlier)Temporary fencing has been erected at the AFL home base of the Collingwood Magpies in Melbourne.The temporary fencing around Olympic Park oval.NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and minister for education Sarah Mitchell brief the media on the easing of restrictions during a press conference in Sydney on Tuesday.