The head of Australia's powerful home affairs department has rejected claims the country's foreign policy has been taken over by security hawks, amid ongoing concerns about the deteriorating relationship with China.

Mike Pezzullo, the home affairs secretary, said the idea that security hawks were now driving the terms of Australia's engagement with the world was "a shorthand, it's a slogan, it's a trope that has emerged which is a deflection from the real issue".

In a new Lowy Institute podcast, Pezzullo acknowledged that Australia had "in many cases" been willing to move before other countries - such as in banning the Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei from the 5G network in 2018.

But he played down the diplomatic risks associated with acting early, and insisted that cabinet's national security committee considered each issue on its merits.

"Those issues aren't dealt with on the basis of how can we have a hawkish stance on this matter or a hawkish stance on that," Pezzullo said.

"I can assure all listeners of this interview that each of those issues are dealt with on their merits."

This week, the Chinese government launched an investigation into alleged trade distortions posed by Australian wine imports, following on from actions against Australian barley and red meat - the latest sign of increasing strains in the relationship.

The question of how Australia engages with a rising China, its largest trading partner, and balances that with the longstanding security alliance with the United States has been an active debate in foreign policy and security circles for years.

But while acknowledging the increasingly assertive actions of the Chinese government, some Australian observers have questioned the growing emphasis on security matters in driving policy.

Gareth Evans, the former Labor foreign affairs minister, warned in a June op-ed of growing "anti-China sentiment" in Australia and accused the government and opposition of showing "excessive deference" to the recommendations of the national security and intelligence community.

During a wide-ranging interview, Pezzullo, who once worked as an adviser to Evans, said the idea of a security hawk takeover of foreign policy doesn't reflect the current state of the world.

"What we have today is a world where geostrategy, geoeconomics and geopolitics have to be considered as a job lot, and they have to be considered in a very integrated fashion," Pezzullo told the Lowy Insitute's executive director, Michael Fullilove.

Without specifically naming the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Pezzullo said: "The idea that there's only one department or one agency that has got a preeminent or singular role in relation to our international geopolitical, geostrategic affairs is just antiquated.

"It's not a question of whether the hawks have taken over or the doves have been set in their place - those somewhat pejorative trope-like references should be set aside. The real discussion is how do we integrate social policy, strategic or national security policy and economic policy."

Pezzullo, whose Department of Home Affairs spans a wide range of policy areas including national security, law enforcement, immigration and cyber threats, said the rise of China had meant that it was "present in many debates, challenges and issues that any nation has to deal with".

Australia banned high-risk vendors such as Huawei from the 5G network in 2018, the same year it introduced new laws to counter foreign interference - both issues that sparked tensions with the Chinese government.

This year, Australia moved to toughen its foreign investment regime with a focus on national security risks and has explicitly rejected China's maritime and territorial claims in the South China Sea.

"I do accept the proposition that Australia in many cases [has been] willing to take a decision that others have not yet taken," Pezzullo said.

"I know that for a fact because we're often approached by partners, colleagues and allies who say, 'We're looking at this issue as well, we're very interested in how you came to that view, can you send someone over, can we have a dialogue, can we have some communication?'"

The Labor party has largely maintained bipartisanship on foreign and security policy, although it has been critical of the government's management of the China relationship and says senior ministers have too often left a void for outspoken backbenchers to fill.

The opposition also argues the government should have secured support from more international partners before going public with its call for a global inquiry into the origins and handling of Covid-19 - a move that angered Beijing.