Scott Morrison has used a speech to the British Policy Exchange to call for a more nuanced appreciation of national interest, and more flexibility, when countries pursue relationships with America and China, because “stark choices are in no one’s interests”.

In a section of his speech outlining the challenges of navigating Australia’s fraught relationship with China  in an era of escalating geopolitical competition, Morrison on Monday night said “greater latitude will be required from the world’s largest powers to accommodate the individual interests of their partners and allies” because “we all need a bit more room to move”.

Australia’s prime minister said the global competition between China and the United States was presenting new challenges for nation states in the Indo-Pacific, and “our preference is not to be forced into binary choices”.

He said the diplomatic difficulties Australia was navigating were “a foretaste for so many others around the world, including the United Kingdom and Europe  ”.

Morrison said Australia’s relationship with Washington was “anchored in our shared worldview, liberal democratic values and market-based economic model” and Australia also wanted an open and transparent relationship with China where there were “strong people-to-people ties, complementary economies and a shared interest in regional development and wellbeing, especially in the emerging economies of Southeast Asia”.

Australia’s prime minister welcomed the economic rise of China as good for the global economy saying Australia had “never been in the economic containment camp on China”.

But he said it was difficult for a middle power such as Australia to pursue complex and nuanced national interests in the middle of sustained strategic competition between the United States and China.

Charting a sovereign course, Morrison said, was not straightforward, and it was “made more complex by the assumptions cast on Australia’s actions”.

“Our actions are wrongly seen and interpreted by some only through the lens of the strategic competition between China and the United States – it’s as if Australia does not have its own unique interests or views as an independent sovereign state,” Morrison said.

“This is false and needlessly deteriorates relationships.”

Morrison said a nuanced appreciation of how countries were pursuing their relationships was necessary “to avoid a new era of polarisation”.

He said international institutions also had an important role to play as “circuit breakers, to provide the space and frameworks for meaningful and positive interaction to be maintained, as a bulwark against any emerging divide”.

The prime minister said the collective efforts of like-minded liberal democracies could make a difference in an atmosphere of geopolitical tumult, and “alliances and structures of collective security are so important”.

Morrison addressed the British Policy Exchange virtually on Monday night after being awarded the inaugural Grotius Prize, in recognition of his work in support of the international rules based order.

The British prime minister Boris Johnson addressed the forum before Morrison. The Australian prime minister praised Johnson for his generous remarks when conferring the Grotius prize, and for his “many enthusiasms”.

Morrison praised Johnson’s “ambitious new economic plans” post Brexit, including greater engagement in the Indo-Pacific through direct bilateral trade ties and, potentially, the Trans Pacific Partnership 11.

The British government has a significantly more ambitious climate policy  than Australia’s, and Morrison recently implicitly rebuked Johnson  after he raised a net zero emissions reduction target during a private conversation. But Australia’s prime minister said he was “pleased to partner with the UK on our shared task to create a pathway to net zero emissions driven by practical, scalable and commercially viable technologies, not economy destroying taxes”.

Morrison said on Monday night “Boris and I share an ambition to chart a course on emissions reduction” because “ as I said to the G20 this week , effective action in this area is no longer about if or when, but how”. He looked forward to working with the UK to make Cop26 “a major step forward in dealing with the challenge of climate change”.

The prime minister’s reflections on great power competition comes as the Biden administration continues preparations for a transition to government despite Donald Trump’s refusal to concede the election loss, and amid a significant diplomatic dispute between Canberra and Beijing.

After months of rhetorical back and forth, and intermittent trade sanctions, late last week a senior official from the Chinese embassy in Canberra warned that Chinese government ministers won’t start answering phone calls  from their Australian counterparts unless Canberra stops treating Beijing as a strategic threat.

The current diplomatic crisis began following Australia’s call in April for an independent international inquiry  into the origins and handling of Covid-19 – which the Chinese government interpreted as unfairly targeting it, but which Australia said was driven by the “unremarkable” desire to ensure that the world was prepared for the next pandemic.

Morrison noted on Monday night relations with China were “further complicated by having to deal with the stresses and strains that Covid has brought to global politics”.

The Australian prime minister emphasised this was a moment in history “for concerted leadership and action by like-minded liberal democracies”.

He said to achieve common goals, “we must strengthen and reinforce existing networks and build new habits of cooperation and partnerships” including by strengthening institutions like the World Trade Organization, the G7 and the G7-plus, and the OECD.

Morrison also noted that the five-eyes security partnership was a contribution that had “never been more consequential”.