Simon Birmingham has warned China's "unpredictable" trade interventions may force Australian producers to sell to other markets and diversification is to be encouraged given the "risk" of trade with China.

The trade minister told ABC's Insiders on Sunday that Australia reserves its right to take China to the World Trade Organisation, and revealed he is still yet to hear back from his Chinese counterpart about the growing trade dispute. He said his call "ought to be returned".

After Australia called for an independent investigation into the origins of Covid-19, the Chinese ambassador in Australia, Cheng Jingye, threatened a consumer boycott against Australian goods.

Since then, China has raised an 18-month-old dispute relating to Australia's barley exports and imposed            a ban on beef from four abattoirs.

On Sunday Birmingham said that he can understand why - given the ambassador's "very unhelpful remarks" - links have been drawn and questions asked about whether the issues are related.

But Birmingham said Australia will "take at face value" China's claims the trade disputes are genuine and respond in good faith.

"Our government has now lodged a comprehensive response in Beijing to the Chinese authorities in relation to their claims of dumping of barley in the Chinese market," he said.

Birmingham said Australian barley producers "operate free of government subsidy", rejecting the claim that government upgrades to "irrigation infrastructure in the Murray-Darling Basin in any way impacts on barley prices in China".

He noted Australian barley is "largely a product of dry land irrigation ... it's not coming out of the irrigated areas of the Murray-Darling Basin".

Birmingham said there was "no justification for duties to be applied on any of the barley products", rejecting the suggestion Australia could settle for a tariff on low-grade barley.

Birmingham defended Australia's growing reliance on trade with China, noting it was the largest economy in the region, had grown dramatically in recent decades, and it was a commercial decision of Australian businesses to trade with China.

"Now they need to balance the risk and reward of whom they trade with.

"I would, of course, encourage businesses, where they can see equal reward or similar reward, by spreading their risk across numerous markets, to do so. And that that would be wise business practice."

"I would expect that many Australian businesses off the back of some unpredictable regulatory interventions, such as those we've seen in the last couple of weeks, would start to consider whether the risk profile has changed. And may, therefore, look at other markets."

Birmingham said although Australia is open for dialogue and government to government communication is still occurring, China is yet to accommodate his request for a call with his counterpart.

"The call ought to be returned ... it's not a reflection upon the Australian government," he said. "We are open to have that discussion, even where there are difficult issues to be discussed at any time."

The trade minister said Australia will consider China's rationale if it does impose duties on Australian goods and "based on that, we'll decide the next steps, which may involve a WTO dispute".

"This is about using the system that we strongly support of rules-based international trade, to ensure that where we think that things are operating outside of those rules, we call them out and we seek a resolution through the independent umpire."

Birmingham said that for many Australian products the Chinese market "functions very much as a market economy" but anti-dumping disputes are decided on a case by case basis. He declined to describe China overall as a market economy.