block-time published-time 12.27am GMT

Berejiklian: 'please wear a mask'

NSW authorities have not introduced mandatory rules around wearing face masks, but health minister Brad Hazzard is advising everyone in greater Sydney to wear a mask.

It may well be wise to wear those masks going through Christmas, New Year in the greater Sydney area.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian reiterated the advice, and said it should apply across NSW:

If you are going grocery shopping anywhere in New South Wales please wear a mask. If you are going to a place of worship anywhere in New South Wales please wear a mask. If you’re going into an indoor setting or anywhere where social distancing can’t be maintained, please wear a mask.

Obviously if you are exercising with your household group, etc, that is not necessary. However, in those settings where we have said you should be wearing a mask these do so.

block-time published-time 12.25am GMT

Chant urged anyone with any symptoms to get a test, even if they have not attended any of the venues or been in the suburbs listed by NSW heath , because they wanted to ensure they could detect any seeding event.

She said it would also help identify the source of the outbreak.

We also haven’t mapped out the exact path by which this infection seeded the Northern Beaches. And because of those levels of uncertainty it is critical that anyone with symptoms across New South Wales for testing if they have the most minor of symptoms.

block-time published-time 12.23am GMT

NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant said the two unidentified cases in the 30 new cases reported overnight are in people who live in the northern beaches in “very close proximity to many of the sites in Avalon, the centre of the clusters”.

In terms of the Covid cases linked to the Avalon cluster, they have visited many locations throughout Sydney and I urge residents across the state to monitor the website.

Obviously for those sites that have had good records we will be contacting you through the usual means but, please, take the initiative. If you have been out and about please check that website regularly.

We also updated guidance in relation to a number of venues and you can imagine that as new cases come to light we have to change that. So, again, if you looked at the website please keep refreshing your view because as information comes to light.

Chant said health authorities were looking to test anyone who was at the Anytime Fitness gym from 23 November to 7 December – before  the first known exposure at that venue – because they were trying to identify the source.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian and NSW chief medical officer Dr. Kerry Chant at Sunday’s press conference in Sydney. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

Let me explain why we have that last statement about the individuals getting tested and self-isolating. That is because we are doing upstream testing. We are looking at potential sources and, hence, we ask anyone who attended the gym between Monday November 23 and Monday December 7 to be tested and self isolate until they receive a negative test.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.29am GMT

block-time published-time 12.19am GMT

Berejiklian says there’s concern that people who had travelled to the northern beaches to attend one of the identified events could return home and spread the virus to new areas.

I know that so many of you cancelled arrangements you had last night, cancelled arrangements that you had in the next few days, and we deeply appreciate this. If we continue to work together and see things improved, obviously we will be able to reassess these settings moving forward.

I will confirm that the  health experts and others will advise government on Wednesday morning as to these setting s and what we do post the current designated lockdown period.

So we will learn on Wednesday whether lockdown orders and other restrictions will extend past midnight on Wednesday.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian and health minister Brad Hazzard at Sunday’s press conference. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

Berejiklian thanked the NSW health team and the contact tracers for their work in being able to connect so many new cases to the Avalon cluster.

To be able to do that in that amount of time is demonstrating the capability we have here and the people in whom we have absolute trust and confidence. Again I thank everybody for your patience. I think this is the last thing any of us wanted this time of the year but, as we know, we are in a pandemic and all of us must make changes. We are all in this together and I am confident we will get through this as long as we all stick together and stick to the advice provided.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25am GMT

block-time published-time 12.14am GMT

New restrictions for greater Sydney

New restrictions will apply across the greater Sydney region until midnight on Wednesday 23 December — so while the northern beaches lockdown is in place.

The greater Sydney region includes the Blue Mountains and the Central Coast.

From today, people have been told  not to have more than 10 people in their homes, in addition to whoever lives there.

All indoor hospitality venues, places of worship, will be placed back on the four square metre rule.

Venues will be capped at a maximum of 300 patrons.

Dancing has been banned, again, apart from 20 people at a wedding party.

Singing and chanting is again banned, except for places of worship where up to five people can sing or chant.

block-time published-time 12.09am GMT

Residents who were in the northern beaches from 10 December have also been asked to follow the stay at home orders, even if they are no longer at their home and have left the area.

So if you live in that area but left on 12 December to go for a holiday you are asked to obey the lockdown orders.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11am GMT

block-time published-time 12.08am GMT

Gladys Berejiklian on today's numbers

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian said the two cases which have not yet been linked to the Avalon cluster are in people who live in the northern beaches.

So while the numbers are higher today than yesterday, the one positive is we still have not seen evidence of massive seeding outside the northern beaches community and our aim, of course, is to keep that in place.

Berejiklian thanked everyone in the northern beaches for cooperating with public health orders.

More than 28,000 tests were conducted in the past 24 hours.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12am GMT

block-time published-time 12.05am GMT

NSW records 30 new coronavirus cases

NSW has recorded 30 new locally acquired coronavirus cases in the 24 hours to 8pm yesterday.

Twenty-eight have been directly linked to the Avalon cluster, including the case believed to be the origin of the outbreak.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08am GMT

block-time published-time 12.03am GMT

While we are waiting for Gladys Berejiklian, a reminder of how far we have come in a year.

Slightly dreading the incident map for Christmas 2021.

enltrSydney Christmas 2019 vs Sydney Christmas 2020: @shishberg #COVID19nsw pic.twitter.com/ra4IKEiHiH

— Byron Kaye (@byronkaye) December 19, 2020

block-time published-time 11.58pm GMT

Please send the healthcare workers in your life a very good present.

enltrIt’s 2am in Sydney and a friend is currently at the covid testing clinic at Mona Vale Hospital waiting to be tested. They told her they have tested 3500 people today. They usually test about 100 per day. God bless these front line health workers.

— Vicki Simpson (@vickiasimpson) December 19, 2020

block-time published-time 11.53pm GMT

NSW premier to give a Covid-19 update at 11am

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian will give a press conference at 11am to give an update on the northern beaches outbreak, with health minister Brad Hazzard  and chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant.

The deputy commissioner of NSW police, Gary Worboys, will also be there.

Reading the tea leaves that means there is likely to be an update on restrictions, or on enforcement of public health orders.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.56pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.45pm GMT

Health authorities in New South Wales have released new opening times for testing locations.

enltr**UPDATED OPENING TIMES FOR COVID-19 TESTING CLINICS ON THE NORTHERN BEACHES** NSW Health continues to increase COVID-19 testing options for the Northern Beaches community. pic.twitter.com/iGOfvxxHrA

— NSW Health (@NSWHealth) December 19, 2020

It also reminded people to wear a mask when going for a test.

There have been long queues at testing sites in Sydney over the past few days, with many reporting queuing for hours only to be told the clinic had closed for the day. There are more than 300 testing sites in Sydney, NSW health said. The full list of testing locations is here.

block-time published-time 11.41pm GMT

If you missed it earlier, the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, introduced strict tier 4 lockdown conditions in London, south-east and eastern England, forcing a third of England’s population to cancel their Christmas plans and stay at home.

The exodus from London on the M4 before the lockdown came into force. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA

It was a sharp U-turn from Johnson who had previously resisted suggestions that people would need to be locked down over Christmas. The strict new measures were introduced in reaction to a new Covid strain believed to be up to 70% more transmissible than previous variants.

Read more:

Related:  Johnson U-turn leaves nation’s plans for Christmas in tatters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.44pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.02pm GMT

NSW adds to list of Covid hotspots

NSW health authorities added to the list of Covid-19 hotspots in Sydney overnight. Worryingly, the alert for Anytime Fitness in Avalon has been pushed back to 23 November. The origin case for the North Sydney outbreak has yet to be identified but it had been linked through genomic testing to a case in hotel quarantine on 1 December.

The latest advice includes:

•Anyone who attended Anytime Fitness on Avalon Pde in Avalon on or after Tuesday 8 December should get tested immediately and self-isolate for 14-days after they were last at the gym.•Anyone who was at the gym between 23 November and 7 December should get tested and self-isolate until they get a negative result.•Anyone who dined-in at Oceana Traders Seafood Merchants restaurant in Avalon beach from 14 to 17 December must get tested immediately and self-isolate for 14 days after they were last at the venue, and anyone who got takeaway from the restaurant on those dates should get tested and isolate until they get a negative result.•Anyone who was at Nomad restaurant in Surry Hills for more than an hour between 12.45pm and 2pm on 16 Decembe r; at Cafe Toscano in Forster from 6pm to 7.45pm on 16 December ; or at the Strawberry Hills Hotel in Surry Hills between 3.30pm and 6pm on 16 December has been told to get tested immediately and self-isolate until 30 December.•Anyone who was at the above restaurants on the listed times for less than an hour should monitor themselves for symptoms.•Anyone who was at the Avalon RSL on 14 December from 6pm to 8pm ; at the Sands in Narrabeen on 15 December from 6pm to 8pm ; Salon for Hair in Turramurra from 9.30am to 3.30pm on 17 December ; the Rose of Australia in Erskineville from 7pm to 8.45pm on 15 December ; Sydney Trapeze School in St Peters from 10am to 12pm on 15 December, should get tested and isolate for 14 days regardless of a result.

Anyone who attended Anytime Fitness on Avalon Pde in Avalon on or after Tuesday 8 December should get tested immediately and self-isolate for 14-days after they were last at the gym.

Anyone who was at the gym between 23 November and 7 December should get tested and self-isolate until they get a negative result.

Anyone who dined-in at Oceana Traders Seafood Merchants restaurant in Avalon beach from 14 to 17 December must get tested immediately and self-isolate for 14 days after they were last at the venue, and anyone who got takeaway from the restaurant on those dates should get tested and isolate until they get a negative result.

Anyone who was at Nomad restaurant in Surry Hills for more than an hour between 12.45pm and 2pm on 16 Decembe r; at Cafe Toscano in Forster from 6pm to 7.45pm on 16 December ; or at the Strawberry Hills Hotel in Surry Hills between 3.30pm and 6pm on 16 December has been told to get tested immediately and self-isolate until 30 December.

Anyone who was at the above restaurants on the listed times for less than an hour should monitor themselves for symptoms.

Anyone who was at the Avalon RSL on 14 December from 6pm to 8pm ; at the Sands in Narrabeen on 15 December from 6pm to 8pm ; Salon for Hair in Turramurra from 9.30am to 3.30pm on 17 December ; the Rose of Australia in Erskineville from 7pm to 8.45pm on 15 December ; Sydney Trapeze School in St Peters from 10am to 12pm on 15 December, should get tested and isolate for 14 days regardless of a result.

The full list is here.  It is extensive – there are 26 alerts for exposure events that require people to immediately self-isolate and get tested, and 45 exposure sites requiring people to monitor for symptoms. Nineteen public transport routes have also been affected.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.38pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.01pm GMT

Hello and welcome to today’s coverage of coronavirus news from around the world. We’re expecting new restrictions to be announced in Sydney, Australia, today as case numbers rise, while strict new restrictions have been introduced in the UK and in parts of Europe.

Here’s the latest developments via my colleague Nicola Slawson:

•More than 75.06 million people have been reported to be infected by the novel coronavirus globally and 1,679,707 have died, according to a Reuters tally.•A new coronavirus strain, which has been discovered in South East England, could be up to 70% more transmissible. It doesn’t seem to be more dangerous but does seem to spread more easily and could increase the R by 0.4 or more.•From midnight tonight, London, the south-east and the east of England will enter tier 4 - the toughest level of restrictions, similar to the last national lockdown in November. The relaxation of rules for Christmas has been scrapped for much of south-east England and cut to just Christmas Day for the rest of England.•Scotland announced a strict travel ban with the rest of the UK, festive bubbles will only be allowed on Christmas Day and level 4 restrictions from Boxing Day. Meanwhile Wales will be placed under lockdown from midnight tonight with all festive relaxation plans limited to Christmas Day only.•Distribution of the Moderna vaccine will begin to more than 3,800 sites across the United States this weekend, after it was approved on Friday by the medicines regulator, the Food and Drug Administration.•Health authorities in Thailand reported 516 new cases of coronavirus on Saturday, by far the biggest one-day jump in a country that had previously brought the epidemic largely under control, according to Reuters.•People in Italy will only be allowed to leave their homes once a day to visit friends or relatives over the Christmas and new year period, and travel between regions is to be banned, according to AFP.•In Australia, Sydney’s northern beaches community is in lockdown, with the rest of the city on standby in case infection spread leads to broader restrictions. The NSW premier has flagged a possible return to tighter measures in Sydney.•Benjamin Netanyahu has become the first person in Israel to get vaccinated against the coronavirus, as the country begins it inoculation rollout on Saturday night.•Brazil has now registered 37,730 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the total to 7,200,708 cases. Deaths in the country have risen by 555 to 186,205.

More than 75.06 million people have been reported to be infected by the novel coronavirus globally and 1,679,707 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

A new coronavirus strain, which has been discovered in South East England, could be up to 70% more transmissible. It doesn’t seem to be more dangerous but does seem to spread more easily and could increase the R by 0.4 or more.

From midnight tonight, London, the south-east and the east of England will enter tier 4 - the toughest level of restrictions, similar to the last national lockdown in November. The relaxation of rules for Christmas has been scrapped for much of south-east England and cut to just Christmas Day for the rest of England.

Scotland announced a strict travel ban with the rest of the UK, festive bubbles will only be allowed on Christmas Day and level 4 restrictions from Boxing Day. Meanwhile Wales will be placed under lockdown from midnight tonight with all festive relaxation plans limited to Christmas Day only.

Distribution of the Moderna vaccine will begin to more than 3,800 sites across the United States this weekend, after it was approved on Friday by the medicines regulator, the Food and Drug Administration.

Health authorities in Thailand reported 516 new cases of coronavirus on Saturday, by far the biggest one-day jump in a country that had previously brought the epidemic largely under control, according to Reuters.

People in Italy will only be allowed to leave their homes once a day to visit friends or relatives over the Christmas and new year period, and travel between regions is to be banned, according to AFP.

In Australia, Sydney’s northern beaches community is in lockdown, with the rest of the city on standby in case infection spread leads to broader restrictions. The NSW premier has flagged a possible return to tighter measures in Sydney.

Benjamin Netanyahu has become the first person in Israel to get vaccinated against the coronavirus, as the country begins it inoculation rollout on Saturday night.

Brazil has now registered 37,730 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the total to 7,200,708 cases. Deaths in the country have risen by 555 to 186,205.