block-time published-time 3.08pm GMT

Closing summary

Wall Street has opened near record highs, amid hopes of more fiscal stimulus. The major European stock markets are also pushing higher, while the FTSE 100 index in London is flat.

Bitcoin, the world's best-known cryptocurrency, jumped more than 8% to a new all-time high  of $48,481 after Bank of New York Mellon said that it will begin financing bitcoin and other digital currencies.

AstraZeneca expects to double monthly production of its Covid-19 vaccine to 200m by April, from more than 100m now. Its target is to make 3bn doses this year, with India's Serum Institute manufacturing a big chunk for poorer countries. Unlike some rivals such as Pfizer, AstraZeneca is supplying the vaccine at cost during this pandemic.

Britain's biggest drugmaker and Oxford university want to adapt the vaccine to tackle new Covid-19 strains and hope to have a new jab available by the autumn. The vaccine remains effective against the original virus and at least one variant, first discovered in Kent, England. But preliminary findings in a small-scale trial prompted South Africa to limit its use  while it ascertains its efficacy against the variant that emerged there.

AstraZeneca also released strong 2020 results , with sales hitting nearly $27bn, boosted by its cancer treatments.

Related:  AstraZeneca says vaccine against new Covid variants may take six months

The European Commission said it sees "light at the end of the tunnel"  after a tough winter. It is predicting  that the euorozone and EU economies will return to their pre-crisis levels of output earlier than expected in the autumn, assuming that the rollout of coronavirus vaccines will allow governments to relax restrictions in the spring.

But Brexit will damage the economic recovery, costing the EU 0.5% of economic growth  and the UK more than four times as much, 2.25%, by the end of next year, Brussels warned.

Royal Mail delivered more parcels than ever during the Christmas quarter of the year amid lockdowns across the UK, but the company apologised for disruptions to service  that it blamed on Covid-19 absences.

Related:  Royal Mail delivers record parcel numbers as Covid cuts despatch of letters

Shell has vowed to accelerate its plan to become a net-zero carbon energy company by 2050, but will continue to grow its gas business by more than 20% in the next few years.

Related:  Shell to expand gas business despite pledge to speed up net-zero carbon drive

More than a quarter of adults in the UK have been left financially vulnerable as the fallout from Covid-19 drives more people into debt, according to the UK's financial regulator.

Related:  Covid fuels huge rise in Britons at financial risk, warns regulator

Thank you for reading. We'll be back tomorrow. Stay safe! - JK

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.12pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.42pm GMT

Wall Street has opened higher, near record highs, amid hopes of more fiscal stimulus, while the FTSE 100 index in London is flat, and European markets are pushing higher.

•Dow Jones up 31 points, or 0.1%, at 31,469•S&P 500 up 10 points, or 0.27%, at 3,920•Nasdaq up 75 points, or 0.54%, at 14,048•UK's FTSE 100 up 0.01% at 6,524•Germany's Dax up 0.73% at 14,034•France's CAC up 0.17% at 5,680•Italy's FTSE MiB up 0.34% at 23,343

Dow Jones up 31 points, or 0.1%, at 31,469

S&P 500 up 10 points, or 0.27%, at 3,920

Nasdaq up 75 points, or 0.54%, at 14,048

UK's FTSE 100 up 0.01% at 6,524

Germany's Dax up 0.73% at 14,034

France's CAC up 0.17% at 5,680

Italy's FTSE MiB up 0.34% at 23,343

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.55pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.30pm GMT

Bitcoin hits new record high; BNY Mellon to offer bitcoin services

Bitcoin, the world's best-known cryptocurrency, has jumped more than 8% to a new all-time high of $48,481 after Bank of New York Mellon said that it will begin financing bitcoin and other digital currencies. It has formed a new division to help clients hold, transfer and issue digital assets.

enltrBNY Mellon to offer bitcoin services, a validation of crypto from a key bank in the financial system https://t.co/L4Wvd1Lhl

- CNBC (@CNBC) February 11, 2021

block-time published-time 2.19pm GMT

Opec cuts oil demand forecast again

Global demand for oil will bounce back more slowly than expected this year, the Opec oil cartel predicted today in its monthly report. Demand is now forecast to rise by 5.79m barrels per day to 96.05m bpd, 110,000 bpd lower than a month ago.

The prospect of weaker demand has already prompted the oil cartel and its allies, a group known as Opec+ that includes Russia, to slow plans to increase output. Iraq said yesterday that Opec+ is likely to stick to current production cuts in March.

Like the International Energy Agency, which also released a report his morning, Opec expects demand for crude to recover in the second half of the year, assuming successful vaccination campaigns allow governments to ease coronavirus restrictions.

Opec said in the report:

While the global economy is showing signs of a healthy recovery in 2021, oil demand is currently lagging, but is forecast to pick up in the second half of 2021.

block-time published-time 1.46pm GMT

Claims remain above their 665,000 peak hit during the financial crisis and great recession of 2007-2009. They are, however, well below the record 6.867m reported last March when the coronavirus pandemic hit the United States.

Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell acknowledged yesterday that the "improvement in labor market conditions stalled" in the past few months because of a resurgence in coronavirus infections, which weighed heavily on restaurants and shops.

Other government data last Friday (non-farm payrolls) showed that the economy created only 49,000 jobs in January after losing 227,000 in December.

Reuters reports:

But there is cause for cautious optimism. Reported new coronavirus cases in the United States dropped 25% last week, the biggest fall since the pandemic hit the nation. Infections have now fallen for four consecutive weeks, according to a Reuters analysis of state and county reports.

Should the trend continue and the distribution of vaccines broaden out, that could allow more businesses to reopen.

President Joe Biden's proposed $1.9 trillion recovery package on top of nearly $900 billion in additional pandemic relief provided by the government in late December could also support the labor market. The economy has recovered 12.3 million of the 22.2 million jobs lost during the pandemic.

The Congressional Budget Office has estimated employment would not return to its pre-pandemic level before 2024. Millions of jobless Americans are experiencing long spells of unemployment.

block-time published-time 1.36pm GMT

The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefits edged lower last week, according to data from the US Labor Department.

Initial jobless claims in the US fell to 793,000 in the week to 6 February, compared with 812,000 in the previous week, while the overall number of claims remained high at 4.54m. Wall Street had forecast a reading of 757,000.

enltrUS JOBLESS CLAIMS FELL TO 793,000 FEB 6 WEEK (CONSENSUS 757,000) FROM 812,000 PRIOR WEEK (PREVIOUS 779,000)

- Axel Karlsson (@NordnetAxel) February 11, 2021

enltrUS jobless claims dip to 793,000 but layoffs remain high with economy still under pressure from virus - @AP

- Fox12Oregon (@fox12oregon) February 11, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.03pm GMT

Lunchtime summary

The stock markets are flat to slightly positive, amid fears about the spread of new Covid-19 strains.

AstraZeneca, which has developed a coronavirus vaccine with Oxford University and been involved in 'vaccine wars' with the EU over supply issues, said today that it expects to double monthly vaccine production to 200m by April, from more than 100m now.

Britain's biggest drugmaker and the university want to adapt the vaccine to tackle new Covid-19 variants  and hope to have a new jab available by the autumn. A straZeneca also released strong 2020 results , with sales hitting nearly $27bn, boosted by its cancer treatments.

The European Commission sees "light at the end of the tunnel"  after a challenging winter. It is predicting  that the euorozone and EU economies will return to their pre-crisis levels of output earlier than expected in the autumn, as the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines will allow governments to ease restrictions in the spring.

But Brexit will damage the economic recovery, costing the EU 0.5% of economic growth  and the UK more than four times as much, 2.25%, by the end of next year, Brussels warned.

Shell has vowed to accelerate its plan to become a net-zero carbon energy company  by 2050, but will continue to grow its gas business by more than 20% in the next few years.

More than a quarter of adults in the UK have been left financially vulnerable  as the fallout from Covid-19 drives more people into debt, according to the UK's financial regulator.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.22pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.52am GMT

EC: Brexit to cost EU 0.5% of GDP and UK 2.25% by end 2022

Brexit will damage the EU's economic recovery over the next couple of years, the European Commission also said - but the impact will be felt far more acutely by the UK.

Reuters reports:

Britain's exit from the European Union will cost the bloc around 0.5% of economic growth over the next 24 months, but Brexit will be more than four times more painful for the United Kingdom, the European Commission said on Thursday.

Britain left the EU at the end of January last year, but kept its full access to the 27-nation bloc's single market until the end of 2020, when it was replaced by a trade agreement.

"For the EU on average, the exit of the UK from the European Union on Free Trade Agreement terms is estimated to generate an output loss of around 0.5% of GDP by the end of 2022, and some 2.25% for the UK," the Commission said.

The EU-UK trade deal covers goods, services, investment, competition, subsidies, tax transparency, air and road transport, energy and sustainability, fisheries, data protection, and social security coordination. In goods trade, the agreement sets zero tariffs and zero quotas on all goods complying with the appropriate rules of origin - a more trade-friendly option than standard trading terms under World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules.

"Compared to the 'WTO assumption' that was modelled in the autumn forecast, the EU-UK FTA reduces this negative impact for the EU on average by about a third and for the UK by about a quarter," the Commission said.

But the Commission also said that while there were no tariffs and quotas on goods, there were significant non-tariffs barriers for trade in both goods and services.

"In sum, while the FTA improves the situation as compared to an outcome with no trade agreement between the EU and the UK, it cannot come close to matching the benefits of the trading relations provided by EU membership," the Commission said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.14pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.42am GMT

And Paolo Gentiloni, Commissioner for Economy said:

Europeans are living through challenging times. We remain in the painful grip of the pandemic, its social and economic consequences all too evident. Yet there is, at last, light at the end of the tunnel.

As increasing numbers are vaccinated over the coming months, an easing of containment measures should allow for a strengthening rebound over the spring and summer. The EU economy should return to pre-pandemic GDP levels in 2022, earlier than previously expected - though the output lost in 2020 will not be recouped so quickly, or at the same pace across our Union.

This forecast is subject to multiple risks, related for instance to new variants of COVID-19 and to the global epidemiological situation. On the other hand, the impact of Next Generation EU should provide a strong boost to the hardest-hit economies over the coming years, which is not yet integrated into today's projections.

block-time published-time 11.42am GMT

Valdis Dombrovskis, who chairs the Commissioners' Group on an Economy that Works for People, said:

Today's forecast provides real hope at a time of great uncertainty for us all. The solid expected pick-up of growth in the second half of this year shows very clearly that we are turning the corner in overcoming this crisis.

A strong European response will be crucial to tackle issues such as job losses, a weakened corporate sector and rising inequalities. We will still have a great deal to do to contain the wider socio-economic fallout. Our recovery package will go a long way to supporting the recovery, backed up by vaccination roll-out and a likely upswing in global demand.

block-time published-time 11.39am GMT

Brussels sees 'light at the end of the tunnel,' lifts forecasts

The European Commission sees "light at the end of the tunnel" after a challenging winter, with European remaining in the grip of the coronavirus pandemic.

It is predicting  that the euorozone and EU economies will return to their pre-crisis levels of output earlier than expected in the autumn, as the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines will allow governments to ease restrictions in the spring.

The Winter 2021 Economic Forecast  projects that the euro area economy will grow by 3.8% in both 2021 and 2022. The forecast projects that the EU economy will grow by 3.7% in 2021 and 3.9% in 2022.

After strong growth in the third quarter of 2020, economic activity contracted again in the fourth quarter as a second wave of the pandemic triggered renewed containment measures.

With those measures still in place, the EU and euro area economies are expected to contract in the first quarter of 2021. Economic growth is set to resume in the spring and gather momentum in the summer as vaccination programmes progress and containment measures gradually ease. An improved outlook for the global economy is also set to support the recovery.

block-time published-time 10.49am GMT

In Greece, the unemployment rate dropped to 16.2% in November from 16.7% the month before.

block-time published-time 10.32am GMT

IEA: Opec+ to unwind oil output cuts from hl

Global oil supply still outstrips demand for crude because of coronavirus lockdowns and the spread of new Covid-19 strains, which have led to sharp economic slowdowns, the International Energy Agency said this morning.

But thanks to vaccination campaigns, which should allow governments to ease coronavirus restrictions in the coming months, oil demand should recover and enable producers to pump more crude later this year. The oil cartel Opec and its allies, including Russia, a group known as Opec+, have cut output because of lower demand during the pandemic. The IEA said:

With demand forecast to rise strongly and still modest growth in non-Opec supply expected, a rapid stock draw is anticipated during the second half of the year. That sets the stage for Opec+ to start unwinding cuts.

Oil prices are trading lower today, with Brent crude falling 0.73% to $61.02 a barrel. The global benchmark had risen in the previous nine sessions, its longest streak of gains since January 2019.

A fuel tank truck drives past a 'Druzhba oil pipeline' signboard near Samara, Russia. Photograph: STAFF/Reuters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.50am GMT

block-time published-time 10.08am GMT

Here is our full story:

Related:  AstraZeneca says vaccine against new Covid variants may take six months

block-time published-time 10.03am GMT

Soriot is wrapping up the press conference now following the publication of AstraZeneca's 2020 results.

What we have today is a vaccine that has provided 100% protection against severe disease, a vaccine that is well tolerated and has more than 70% efficiency after one dose.

block-time published-time 10.01am GMT

Menelas Pangalos, executive vice-president of BioPharmaceuticals research & development at AstraZeneca, said "it's quite possible" that the current Covid-19 vaccine can protect against severe disease caused by the new Covid strains - such as the Kent and South African variants. But to protect against milder symptoms, the vaccine will need to be adapted, he said.

Pascal Soriot, the chief executive, said the company is aiming to make the new vaccine available in the autumn.

Pangalos also said that the company expects to publish data from the late-stage US trial of its current vaccine in older age groups before the end of March.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.43am GMT

block-time published-time 9.44am GMT

During the press conference, AstraZeneca said it is making more than 100m doses of its Covid-19 vaccine every month, and will ramp this up to over 200m a month from April.

block-time published-time 8.47am GMT

Here is Reuters' take on the AstraZeneca results.

enltrAstraZeneca sees growth picking up, even without COVID-19 vaccine https://t.co/nJqKM5VKGJ pic.twitter.com/eRqE6iIfQi

- Reuters (@Reuters) February 11, 2021

block-time published-time 8.40am GMT

Shell has vowed to accelerate its plan to become a net zero carbon energy company by 2050, but will continue to grow its gas business by over 20% in the next few years, our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose reports.

Shell's oil production reached a peak in 2019, and will continue to fall by 1-2% a year, but the fossil fuel giant plans to expand its capacity for exporting gas by 7 million tonnes a year by the middle of the decade.

Shell has capacity to export 33.3 million tonnes of liquefied natural gas (LNG) on super-chilled tankers every year, meaning its near-term plan to grow the business will increase its LNG capacity by over a fifth within a crucial decade for avoiding a climate catastrophe.

The fossil fuel giant plans to offset its own carbon emissions, and the carbon emissions from the fossil fuels it sells, by accessing carbon capture projects  and "nature-based solutions" such as planting trees or restoring natural habitats.

Shell is currently involved in three carbon capture projects, of which one is operational, which will be able to capture 4.5 million tonnes of carbon a year once complete. It hopes to directly access enough projects to capture another 25 million tonnes of carbon a year by 2035.

A Royal Dutch Shell sign at a petrol station in Sint-Pieters-Leeuw, Belgium. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.41am GMT

block-time published-time 8.38am GMT

Royal Mail delivered more parcels than ever before during the Christmas quarter of the year amid lockdowns across the UK, but the company apologised for disruptions to service  that it blamed on Covid-19 absences, my colleague Jasper Jolly reports.

The company delivered 496m parcels during the last three months of 2020, 30% higher than the same period in 2019, it said on Thursday.

Royal Mail has kept on 10,000 out of the 33,000 seasonal workers who joined for the Christmas peak to deal with increased traffic during the latest lockdowns.

Related:  Royal Mail delivers record parcel numbers as Covid cuts despatch of letters

block-time published-time 8.25am GMT

In other news, Amsterdam overtook London as Europe's largest share trading hub last month in the aftermath of Brexit, the Financial Times reports.  It says:

An average 9.2bn shares a day were traded on Euronext Amsterdam and the Dutch arms of CBOE Europe and Turquoise in January, a more than fourfold increase from December. The surge came as volumes in London fell sharply to 8.6bn, dislodging the UK from its historic position as the main hub for the European market, according to data from CBOE Europe.

The shift was prompted by a ban on EU-based financial institutions trading in London because Brussels has not recognised UK exchanges and trading venues as having the same supervisory status as its own.

Without this so-called equivalence to ease cross-border dealing, there was an immediate shift of 6.5bn of deals to the EU when the Brexit transition period concluded at the end of last year. It was about half of the amount of business that London banks and brokers would normally handle.

enltrSlow puncture in the City pic.twitter.com/WNvKRzW7zr

- Lionel Barber (@lionelbarber) February 11, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.43am GMT

block-time published-time 8.20am GMT

Richard Hunter, head of markets at interactive investor, says:

The company's status as a global brand has been enhanced by its Covid-19 vaccine where, despite some concerns on efficacy from some quarters, an endorsement from the World Health Organization has allayed those fears.

But for the company, aside from the pandemic, the core business continues to grow...

New medicines are responsible for over half of revenues and emerging market sales jumped by 53%. Less positively, the effects of the pandemic have had other effects on the company's more traditional drug sales. Fewer hospital visits and important surgical procedures have impacted sales for some of its drugs which are usually used.

This image provided by AstraZeneca in May 2020 shows a pill of company's medication Tagrisso. Photograph: AP

block-time published-time 8.13am GMT

AstraZeneca shares rose 1.7% to £73.73 this morning but went through a rough patch after the $39bn acquisition of Alexion  in mid-December, its biggest deal ever, as analysts feared that the company was overpaying for the rare diseases specialist. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, says:

For a company that has been at the forefront of leading the fight against Covid-19 the performance in the AstraZeneca share price has been very underwhelming, with the shares at ten-month lows.

A lot of this may have to do with the fact that AstraZeneca, along with Oxford University is producing the vaccine at cost, along with tweaks to any possible variant, in a move that hasn't been replicated to the same extent by its peers in the industry.

In terms of PR, it probably seemed like a smart move at the time, however given the flak it has received over the slightly slower rollout to production of the vaccine in the European Union, they would probably be forgiven for thinking that no good deed goes unpunished.

The joint venture with Oxford University has a slightly lower efficacy rate than its peers, and isn't a messenger RNA vaccine unlike the Pfizer and Moderna jabs, however it has caused quite a storm in Europe, after the company said it needed to streamline its European operations, in order to be able to increase the plants longer term productive capacity, thus delaying the rollout, citing the slower ratification process by the EU in approving the dose.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.29am GMT

block-time published-time 8.10am GMT

European stock markets have opened cautiously higher.

•UK's FTSE 100 up 8.5 points, or 0.13%, at 6,532•Germany's Dax up 0.2%•France's CAC up 0.3%•Italy's FTSE MiB up 0.2%

UK's FTSE 100 up 8.5 points, or 0.13%, at 6,532

Germany's Dax up 0.2%

France's CAC up 0.3%

Italy's FTSE MiB up 0.2%

block-time published-time 8.07am GMT

Here is some reaction.

Sebastian Skeet, senior analyst at the global research firm Third Bridge, says:

On a human level AstraZeneca's vaccine saga has been disappointing; the clash with the EU, new data demonstrating a lack of efficacy in preventing mild to moderate infection caused by the South African variant, and the decision by German authorities to limit vaccinations in persons under 65 years old. Ultimately, this does represent a share price overhang too.

However, the opposite can be said for AstraZeneca's core business. The company is arguably the poster child for big pharma turnarounds, with CEO Pascal Soriot rebuilding the pipeline and establishing the necessary growth drivers. This is exemplified by AstraZeneca's recent performance. which demonstrated double digit revenue growth, improved profitability and core EPS growth of 18% at constant exchange rates."

The oncology portfolio, AstraZeneca's crown jewels, has grown 23% year-on-year driven by Tagrisso, Lyparza and Imfinzi. Historically muted sales for Calquence, and even Imfinzi by comparison to its peer group, have either been buoyed by recent trial results, or have more on the way. AstraZeneca's $39bn bid for Alexion is still raising questions, with some investors yet to warm to the idea given a heavy reliance on a two drugs, Soliris and Ultomiris, and potential competitors lining up.

Backed by a rich pipeline including Tezepelumab, and with Enhertu gaining FDA approval in breast and gastric cancer, top line growth is looking strong. That being said, the impact of the pandemic has been felt and we could see a hangover effect on patient volumes in the coming quarters.

block-time published-time 7.57am GMT

Pascal Soriot, the chief executive, said:

The performance last year marked a significant step forward for AstraZeneca. Despite the significant impact from the pandemic, we delivered double-digit revenue growth to leverage improved profitability and cash generation.

The consistent achievements in the pipeline, the accelerating performance of our business and the progress of the Covid-19 vaccine demonstrated what we can achieve, while the proposed acquisition of [rare-diseases specialist] Alexion is intended to accelerate our scientific and commercial evolution even further.

block-time published-time 7.55am GMT

AstraZeneca received a significant boost yesterday when its Covid-19 vaccine was recommended by a World Health Organization  panel for use in all adults - despite limited data on the jab's efficacy for older people, which has caused some countries in Europe to rule out its use in the over-65s.

The vaccine is important for poorer countries because it is much cheaper than rival jabs (at $3 to $5 a dose) and easier to transport and store, at fridge temperature.

Related:  WHO backs use of Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine for adults of all ages

It also announced yesterday that it would build a new vaccine manufacturing facility in partnership with IDT Biologika at the German firm's Dessau site, in a move aiming to speed up production and defuse a row with the EU over supplies.

Related:  AstraZeneca to build new Covid-19 vaccine facility in Germany

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.33am GMT

block-time published-time 7.51am GMT

Introduction: AstraZeneca to develop jabs for new Covid strains

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business.

Britain's biggest drugmaker AstraZeneca plans to adapt the Covid-19 vaccine it developed with Oxford University to new disease strains within six to nine months. It said:

In collaboration with the University of Oxford, AstraZeneca is focused on adapting C19VAZ to new disease strains if required and hopes to reduce the time needed to reach production at scale to between six to nine months, by utilising existing clinical data and optimising its established supply chain.

The news comes after a small-scale trial last week showed that the vaccine is less effective against the South African variant.

Related:  Oxford Covid vaccine has 10% efficacy against South African variant, study suggests

AstraZeneca has also shrugged off the pandemic with better-than-expected sales and profits. It made total revenues of $26.6bn last year, including $7.4bn in the final quarter, both up 10% year-on-year. The pandemic has led to fewer hospital visits and cancer diagnoses, but its cancer drugs, led by Tagrisso, Imfinzi and Lynparza , still contributed 23% revenue growth in 2020. Profits before tax jumped to $3.9bn in 2020 from $1.5bn the previous year.

AstraZeneca made $2m of sales from the Covid vaccine. It has said it will provide the jab at cost basis, at roughly $3 to $5 a dose, during the current pandemic (and to poorer countries "in perpetuity) - unlike US rival Pfizer, which expects to rake in $15bn in sales this year from its Covid-19 vaccine, developed with Germany's BioNTech.

We are are expecting a quiet start in European stock markets ahead of US jobless claims data this afternoon. Most Asian markets rose, with Hong Kong's Hang Seng gaining 0.45% while Japan's Nikkei was closed after finishing at a 30-year peak the day before.

Jerome Powell, the head of the Fed, reiterated the bank's commitment to supporting the economy through the pandemic in a speech last night. David Madden, market analyst at CMC Markets UK, says:

The Fed won't even consider removing stimulus until the country is really through the pandemic. Lately there have been growing concerns that higher inflation is in the pipeline but Powell said that an increase in inflation readings in the months ahead won't mean much in terms of influencing policy. It is worth noting the US CPI rate remained at 1.4% in January so it is not like inflation is even a problem now.

He said the US labour market remains a long way from a full recovery and "achieving and sustaining maximum employment will require more than supportive monetary policy".

The US jobless claims reading, out at 1.30pm GMT, is forecast to be 757,000 for last week, which would be a fall from the previous week's 779,000 - the lowest reading in nine weeks. Continuing claims are predicted to be 4.49m, down from 4.59m.

The Agenda

•9:00am GMT: International Energy Agency oil market report•10:am GMT: Greece unemployment rate for November (previous: 16.7%)•1:30pm GMT: US Initial Jobless Claims (forecast: 757,000)•4:00pm GMT: Fed Monetary Policy Report

9:00am GMT: International Energy Agency oil market report

10:am GMT: Greece unemployment rate for November (previous: 16.7%)

1:30pm GMT: US Initial Jobless Claims (forecast: 757,000)

4:00pm GMT: Fed Monetary Policy Report

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.21am GMT