block-time published-time 1.49am GMT



Australia's triumph in reining in Covid-19 while infections spiral up in many parts of the world is making the country a "victim of our own success," as Australians overseas want to come home, a cabinet minister said on Sunday. Reuters: Australia closed its borders in March to all but citizens and residents, and the government has kept entries capped and put those allowed into the country in a two-week mandatory quarantine. "With what's happening with COVID-19 in other parts of the world, we're almost becoming a victim of our own success here in Australia, with more people wanting to come back," Education Minister Dan Tehan told Sky News television on Sunday. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Friday that with a growing number of Australians wanting to return, there are not enough quarantine facilities for others, such as thousands of international students. "Within the existing caps, priority has to be given to returning Australians," Tehan said on Sunday.

He said, however, that states and territories have been asked to submit plans for a safe return of international students. With foreign students contributing A$35 billion ($25 billion) a year to the Australian economy, Canberra had hoped to slowly allow their return in 2021. Australia has recorded about 27,700 infections of the new coronavirus and 907 Covid-19 deaths, a fraction of what many other developed nations have seen, thanks to an impressive early response and strict measures that included sending Melbourne, the country's second-largest city, into months-long lockdown.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.52am GMT

block-time published-time 1.39am GMT

Mexico passes 1m cases

Mexico has registered more than 1 million total coronavirus cases and nearly 100,000 test-confirmed deaths, though officials agree the number is probably much higher. Health Director General Ricardo Cortés Alcalá said late Saturday the number of confirmed cases had reached 1,003,253, with at least 98,259 deaths from Covid-19. How did Mexico get here? By marching resolutely, even defiantly, against many internationally accepted practices in pandemic management, from face mask wearing, to lockdowns, testing and contact tracing.

Commuters wait for the subway as the coronavirus outbreak continues in Mexico City, Mexico November 11, 2020. Photograph: Carlos Jasso/Reuters

What is more, officials in Mexico claim science is on their side. Assistant Health Secretary Hugo López-Gatell says any wider testing would be "a waste of time, effort and money." Face masks, López-Gatell says, "are an auxiliary measure to prevent spreading the virus. They do not protect us, but they are useful for protecting other people."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.47am GMT

block-time published-time 1.28am GMT

No flights, no planes, no crew, no fares - November! Late autumn is, even on easyJet's standard aviation calendar, quite the worst time of any year, but 2020 has been something else.

On Tuesday, the airline unveils its annual results from what it can only hope are the depths of the Covid-19 abyss. A trading update last month warned on much of the misery - losses of up to £845m, not counting "non-headline items" such as a £145m bad bet on fuel hedging, and the immediate £120m cost of laying off about a third of its staff. The cash burn of around £50m a week over summer "compared favourably" with the previous three months, it said:

Related:  Even with hope of a vaccine in the air, life isn't simple for easyJet

block-time published-time 1.20am GMT

Tesla Inc Chief Executive Officer Elon Musk said on Saturday he "most likely" has a moderate case of Covid-19, as he continued to question the accuracy of the tests. "Am getting wildly different results from different labs, but most likely I have a moderate case of covid. My symptoms are that of a minor cold, which is no surprise, since a coronavirus is a type of cold," Musk wrote in a tweet.

enltrAm getting wildly different results from different labs, but most likely I have a moderate case of covid. My symptoms are that of a minor cold, which is no surprise, since a coronavirus is a type of cold.

- Elon Musk (@elonmusk) November 14, 2020

block-time published-time 1.11am GMT

South Korea reports 208 new Covid-19 cases, 8th day of triple-digit rises

South Korea reported 208 new coronavirus cases as of Saturday midnight, marking the eight straight day of triple-digit increases, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Sunday. That was slightly higher than the previous day's 205 new infections and the highest since early September. Of the cases, 176 were domestically transmitted and 32 imported. Nearly 70% of the locally transmitted cases were from Seoul and Gyeonggi province, a densely populated area near the capital.

Police officers wearing face masks to help protect against the spread of the coronavirus rest as workers hold a rally to demand better working conditions in Seoul, South Korea, Saturday, 14 November 2020. Photograph: Ahn Young-joon/AP

On Saturday, President Moon Jae-in urged authorities and local governments to raise their awareness of the spread of the coronavirus, reinforcing thorough supervision of safety guidelines such as mandatory mask wearing. South Korea began fining people who fail to wear masks in public on Friday, as the nation's daily infections continued to creep higher. The latest tally takes the country's total infections to 28,546, with 493 deaths, according to the KDCA.

block-time published-time 12.58am GMT

More now on Australia's success in handling the pandemic: When the premier of Queensland held her regular Covid-19 update on Friday she couldn't help letting a smile creep across her face.

"Now, here's a good one," Annastacia Palaszczuk told reporters. "I think all Queenslanders are going to be happy about it."

She went on to announce that Brisbane's Suncorp stadium would host a capacity 52,500 crowd for the forthcoming State of Origin rugby league decider against New South Wales next week.

"The cauldron can be filled to 100% capacity," she said.

In the midst of the pandemic, the idea of responsible leaders encouraging citizens to gather in large crowds to sit or stand shoulder to shoulder with strangers might seem to be a case of extreme recklessness.

But in Australia, where the Covid-19 pandemic has largely been controlled after months of lockdowns, border closures and strict limits on gatherings, moments like these are becoming more and more common.

Last month, footage from a packed nightclub in Western Australia went viral, offering a surreal image of pre-Covid normality even as countries in the northern hemisphere began to return to lockdowns amid surging case numbers. In Sydney, about 40,000 fans were present for the rugby league grand final last month.

The country has reason to be bullish about its successes. On Friday, Australia recorded no new cases of the virus for the fifth day in a row. In Victoria, where a second-wave spike of the virus forced Melbourne into a months-long lockdown and left hundreds dead, Friday marked the 14th day in a row with no new cases.

The closely watched downward trend of the virus has even sparked a new phrase, the "donut day", meaning a day with no new Covid-19 infections, which has become synonymous with the country's success in tackling the pandemic:

Related:  Packed crowds and euphoric leaders: Australia revels in Covid-free days

block-time published-time 12.51am GMT

Australian state of New South Wales reports no new cases

In case you missed this earlier, Australia's most populous state - New South Wales - has also recorded no new cases in the last 24 hours.

The state has reported nine cases in overseas travellers in hotel quarantine, which brings the total in NSW to 4,306 cases since the beginning of the pandemic.

NSW conducted 17,226 tests reported, a slight increase on the prior day.

The state's health authorities are warning residents not to drop their guard.

With the weather becoming warmer and people starting to attend more social gatherings, NSW Health is calling on the community to maintain the COVID safe behaviours that have been key to stopping the spread of the virus. Though there have been no locally acquired cases in NSW in recent days, now is not the time to drop our guard. Everyone needs to continue to be alert to the ongoing risk of transmission of COVID-19, to keep practising physical distancing and good hand hygiene, and most importantly to get tested and isolate if they feel unwell.

block-time published-time 12.47am GMT

Australian state of Victoria marks 16 days with no new infections

The state of Victoria again recorded no new cases and no new deaths for the 16th consecutive day. Victoria's death toll from coronavirus remains at 819, while the total number of deaths from Covid-19 in Australia is 907.

Victoria has just three active coronavirus cases.

Deputy Chief Health Officer Allan Cheng on Saturday described Victoria's more than two weeks with no new cases as "about as good as it can get", AAP reports.

"What we're still concerned about... is that there may still be the potential for hidden trains of transmission out there; obviously that chance is decreasing as time goes on," he said.

"And then obviously the potential for an incursion of cases from outside, from New Zealand or NSW."

People are seen at a farmers? market in Torquay, Victoria, Saturday, 14 November 2020. Photograph: Erik Anderson/AAP

The final step of easing restrictions is a week away - starting on 22 November.

From then, people will be allowed to visit a home and public gatherings will grow to 50 people outdoors, while the cap on weddings and funerals will be increased to 100 and organised contact sports will resume for all ages.

The state of South Australia will re-open its border with Victoria on December 1, while New South Wales will open it's border with the state earlier on November 23.

There will be no requirement for travellers to quarantine in hotels or at home.

block-time published-time 12.37am GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coronavirus coverage.

My name is Helen Sullivan and I'll be bringing you global updates - including a fair bit of Australian news.

As always, it would be great to hear from you - find me on Twitter @helenrsullivan or email me: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com

The US has again broken the world record for a number of cases confirmed by one country in 24 hours, with 177,000 new infections and 1.138 deaths added for Friday, 13 November, according to Johns Hopkins university (these are the most recent case data).

A note that Johns Hopkins appears to have revised its earlier case total for Friday down from 184,000.

In the Australian state of Victoria, which had one of the world's longest and strictest lockdowns, there have been 16 days in a row without a single new locally acquired coronavirus infection.

Here is a summary of the global developments from the last few hours:

•The global death toll climbed above 1.3 million and more than 53 million have been infected worldwide by Covid-19, as the virus runs rampant through America and Europe.•In Australia, the news is much better. The state of Victoria again recorded no new cases and no new deaths for the 16th consecutive day. Victoria's death toll from coronavirus remains at 819, while the total number of deaths from Covid-19 in Australia is 907. Australia's two other most populous states, NSW and Queensland, also recorded no new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases.•Ten people have died after a fire broke out in a Covid-19 intensive care ward in Romania, as prosecutors opened a criminal investigation into events. The blaze, which was "most likely triggered by a short circuit", spread through the ward at Piatra Neamt Regional Emergency hospital on Saturday afternoon, critically injuring seven people.•462 more people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 in the U.K, raising the official death toll to 51,766. This number is up from 376 on Friday, government data shows. In Bristol, police made 14 arrests after protesters defied a ban on an anti-lockdown rally. One of the arrested men was Jeremy Corbyn's brother, vision appears to show.•Record high case numbers were recorded in Russia and Ukraine. Russia reported 22,702 new infections and 391 deaths. Ukraine registered 12,524 new cases. Poland recorded a record new 548 deaths and 25,571 cases. The record number of deaths takes Poland's toll above 10,000.•Iran has announced strict new lockdown restrictions from next Saturday., after recording 452 deaths, a near record. President Hassan Rouhani said non-essential businesses and services will be shut and cars will not be allowed to leave or enter Tehran and 100 other towns and cities•Lebanonhas started a new two-week lockdown after coronavirus infections crossed the 100,000 mark. Beirut's roads were largely empty and police checkpoints were set up at several locations.•Greece and Austria have set out plans to tighten lockdown restrictions. Austria is planning to impose a full lockdown from Tuesday. Greece has announced the closure of nurseries and primary schools until the end of November as its death toll surpassed 1,000.

The global death toll climbed above 1.3 million and more than 53 million have been infected worldwide by Covid-19, as the virus runs rampant through America and Europe.

In Australia, the news is much better. The state of Victoria again recorded no new cases and no new deaths for the 16th consecutive day. Victoria's death toll from coronavirus remains at 819, while the total number of deaths from Covid-19 in Australia is 907. Australia's two other most populous states, NSW and Queensland, also recorded no new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases.

Ten people have died after a fire broke out in a Covid-19 intensive care ward in Romania, as prosecutors opened a criminal investigation into events. The blaze, which was "most likely triggered by a short circuit", spread through the ward at Piatra Neamt Regional Emergency hospital on Saturday afternoon, critically injuring seven people.

462 more people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 in the U.K, raising the official death toll to 51,766. This number is up from 376 on Friday, government data shows. In Bristol, police made 14 arrests after protesters defied a ban on an anti-lockdown rally. One of the arrested men was Jeremy Corbyn's brother, vision appears to show.

Record high case numbers were recorded in Russia and Ukraine. Russia reported 22,702 new infections and 391 deaths. Ukraine registered 12,524 new cases. Poland recorded a record new 548 deaths and 25,571 cases. The record number of deaths takes Poland's toll above 10,000.

Iran has announced strict new lockdown restrictions from next Saturday., after recording 452 deaths, a near record. President Hassan Rouhani said non-essential businesses and services will be shut and cars will not be allowed to leave or enter Tehran and 100 other towns and cities

Lebanonhas started a new two-week lockdown after coronavirus infections crossed the 100,000 mark. Beirut's roads were largely empty and police checkpoints were set up at several locations.

Greece and Austria have set out plans to tighten lockdown restrictions. Austria is planning to impose a full lockdown from Tuesday. Greece has announced the closure of nurseries and primary schools until the end of November as its death toll surpassed 1,000.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.41am GMT