block-time published-time 4.39am GMT

Japan to declare state of emergency for greater Tokyo

Japan is to declare a state of emergency in the greater Tokyo area later today, after a record number of coronavirus cases were reported in the capital and across the country. The prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, has come under pressure from his own health experts to take action, as the country battles a third wave of infections far more serious than those seen earlier in the pandemic. Tokyo reported a record 1,591 new infections on Wednesday, while nationwide cases exceeded 6,000, also an all-time high. The measures, which will go into effect on Friday and end on 7 February, will be less strict than lockdowns seen in other countries, and unlike Japan’s first state of emergency in the spring, schools will not be asked to close. In addition, sports events will be allowed to go ahead, with the cap for spectators revised down to 5,000 people or 50% of capacity, whichever is smaller.

block-time published-time 4.23am GMT

US reports record one-day death toll

As if today was not depressing enough in the US, the country has also suffered a record one-day coronavirus death toll.

The US recorded 3,775 deaths in one day, according to Johns Hopkins University , the fourth time the toll in the world’s worst-affected country has exceeded 3,500. Each of the four days has occurred in the last three weeks.

The total US death toll is 361,063. The number of cases is stands at 21,294,092.

block-time published-time 3.46am GMT

Japanese cheerleaders danced and cheered on commuters outside a Tokyo rail station on Thursday in a bid to lift spirits with the capital heading into another state of emergency over the Covid-19 pandemic. Reuters: “Let’s go, fight!” the four-person squad shouted out to passers-by in front of Shimbashi Station, with their protective face shields fogging up in the chilly Tokyo morning as they waved gold pom poms. Japan is planning a one-month state of emergency for the greater Tokyo area beginning Friday to contain a record surge in coronavirus infections.

Cheerleaders dance to cheer people up in Tokyo amid the coronavirus pandemic. Photograph: Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters

Head cheerleader Kumi Asazuma said the group had been performing for more than 10 years to help energise morning commuters, but their mission had taken on new meaning during the pandemic. “Especially now, the spread of the coronavirus isn’t stopping, people have lost their jobs... I think this is a period where people are really suffering a lot,” Asazuma, 37, who works as a freelance event emcee and presenter, told Reuters. “We want to deliver a smile to cheer people up. We’re doing this hoping that people can feel even a little bit better.”

block-time published-time 3.20am GMT

Podcast: How the Covid surge has left the NHS on the brink

Boris Johnson has announced a new national lockdown amid fears the NHS could be overwhelmed within weeks with Covid patients. Denis Campbell and Dr Samantha Batt-Rawden describe a service already at breaking point:

Related:  How the Covid surge has left the NHS on the brink – podcast

block-time published-time 3.08am GMT

Interrupting this coronavirus coverage to bring you coverage of the Other Thing – here is what we know so far about the Capitol attacks and everything that has happened since:

enltrwhat we know so far about what happened at the Capitol today https://t.co/REIWIRs96C

— Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) January 7, 2021

block-time published-time 2.39am GMT

China reports highest local cases since July as travel to Hebei province blocked

China reported 63 new Covid-19 infections on Thursday – the highest single-day tally since July – as authorities try to stamp out an outbreak of the virus in a city of 11 million near Beijing.

A recent outbreak in northern Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, has seen cases spike and prompted mass testing, school closures and travel links being cut into the province.

On Thursday, there were 51 more cases reported in the province, the National Health Commission reported - plus another 69 asymptomatic cases.

State broadcaster CCTV showed a small crowd gathered outside a railway station in Shijiazhuang being directed by medical staff in full hazmat suits and protective wear.

Police officers and staff members in protective suits inspect vehicles at a checkpoint on the borders of Gaocheng district on a provincial highway, following a coronavirus outbreak in Hebei province, China. Photograph: China Daily/Reuters

Major highways leading into the city of Shijiazhuang, around 300 kilometres (200 miles) south of Beijing, have been closed and inter-city bus travel halted in an attempt to prevent the virus spreading beyond the city.

The state-run Global Times reported that railway tickets from Hebei to the capital Beijing were no longer being sold in a bid to halt the spread of the virus.

One district in Shijiazhuang - which has a population of 11 million - has been declared high risk and sealed off, and authorities said tens of thousands have already been tested for the virus.

There were also 11 imported cases and one other domestic case in northeastern China confirmed Thursday.

block-time published-time 2.32am GMT

Mexico reports record one-day case rise

Mexico has reported a new high for a daily increase in coronavirus cases, with 13,345 newly confirmed infections reported Wednesday for the previous 24 hours. Officials also reported a near-record of 1,165 deaths related to Covid-19. The country has now seen about 1.48 million infections and almost 130,000 deaths so far in the pandemic. A low testing rate means that is an undercount, and official estimates suggest the real death toll is over 180,000. Mexico’s vaccination effort continues at a glacial rate, with about 7,500 shots administered Wednesday, a rate similar to previous days. In Mexico City, the current center of the pandemic in the country, 88% percent of hospital beds are full.

block-time published-time 2.30am GMT

A reminder that you can get in touch or follow me on Twitter (where I am mainly tweeting about the Capitol attack, let’s be honest) @helenrsullivan.

block-time published-time 2.07am GMT

US inflation expectations rose on Wednesday in anticipation of more fiscal stimulus after Democrats secured control of the Senate. With control over both legislative houses now secured, Democrats have more power to advance President-elect Joe Biden’s agenda. New York Senator Chuck Schumer on Wednesday said sending most Americans $2,000 checks would be a top priority in the new Congress. Still, with the Senate divided down the middle, compromise with Republicans and rightward-leaning Democrats will be necessary for Biden to make substantial changes. The breakeven inflation rate on the 10-year Treasury Inflation Protection Security (TIPS) - which is typically in line with market expectations of inflation - rose to an intra-day high of 2.092%. It was last at 2.069%, ending the day at its highest level in more than two years. But the rate was nevertheless just a hair over the Federal Reserve’s target average 2% rate and only slightly larger than moves higher on Monday and Tuesday. The move in inflation expectations came as the benchmark 10-year Treasury yield broke through 1%, out of recent trading ranges, to its highest since March.

block-time published-time 1.46am GMT

Hair loss surges in NYC minority communities during pandemic

Pandemic stress may be causing people to lose their hair, according to a new study. By mid-summer, rates of a hair-shedding condition called telogen effluvium (TE) had surged more than 400% in a racially diverse neighborhood in New York City, researchers report in the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, Reuters reports.

From November 2019 through February 2020, the incidence of TE cases was 0.4%. By August, that rate had climbed to 2.3%, they found. “It is unclear if the increase in cases of TE is more closely related to the physiological toll of infection or extreme emotional stress,” said coauthor Dr. Shoshana Marmon of Coney Island Hospital.

The increase was due primarily to TE in persons of color, particularly in the Hispanic community, “in line with the disproportionately high mortality rate of this subset of the population due to Covid-19 in NYC,” the authors said.

TE rates rose in smaller non-white minorities as well, but not among Blacks, who also were severely impacted by Covid-19.

Dr. Adam Friedman of George Washington School of Medicine and Health Sciences, who was not involved in the research, said he too is seeing increases in TE “and the timing makes plenty of sense, as the onset of shedding is typically three months following the traumatic event,” which would correspond to the rise of the pandemic.

block-time published-time 1.09am GMT

Michael Ryan, the WHO’s emergencies director, said there had been a wave of expectation when vaccines began to trickle on stream last month, but people could not breathe a sigh of relief and slacken their vigilance against the disease.

“We’re all a year into this. It’s a really, really long battle,” he said.

“We’ve got another three or six months of hard, hard road ahead of us. But we can do it.

“The cavalry is coming, the vaccines are coming - but they’re not here yet, for most people in the world.”

South African health ministry officials collect tracing forms from international travellers at Johannesburg’s OR Tambo airport Monday 21 December 2020. Photograph: Jérôme Delay/AP

As for the new mutations of the virus detected in Britain and South Africa, while there appears to be an increase in transmissibility, there is no apparent change in disease severity, said Van Kerkhove.

The faster-spreading mutation is “not catastrophic, in the sense that it means it’s out of control and there’s nothing we can do”, the US expert said, because the existing basic measures to stop the virus spreading would still work.

Ryan said there was “absolutely no indication” that the vaccines as developed would not work against the new variations.

But, he added, “even if there was a change in that, it is relatively straightforward to tweak the vaccines”.

When viruses mutate, they “can become more infectious but they rarely become more severe, because it’s not in their interest”, he explained.

block-time published-time 12.53am GMT

WHO warns of ‘hard road ahead’ to beat pandemic

World Health Organization experts warned Wednesday there could be six months of “hard, hard road ahead” in 2021 before vaccines turn the tide against the coronavirus pandemic.

Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said that in many countries, the situation was very worrying - and would get worse.

“A handful of countries are really seeing incredibly intense transmission,” notably in Europe and North America, with “some really scary numbers in terms of cases, hospitalisations and admissions to intensive care units”, she said.

Social mixing of households over the Christmas and New Year period will result in a further rise in case numbers in January, she told a live event on WHO social media channels.

“We are starting to see it now; we will see it in the coming weeks. In many countries, we will see the situation will get worse before it gets better,” she said.

block-time published-time 12.34am GMT

Arizona is Covid-19 ‘hot spot of the world’, health officials warn

Arizona has become the Covid “hot spot of the world”, public health experts have warned five months after president Donald Trump held up the US state’s pandemic response as exemplary.

“It’s way worse than July already, and it’s going to continue to get worse. We’re probably two weeks behind LA in terms of our situation,” Will Humble, head of the Arizona Public Health Association, said referring to Los Angeles County, where a coronavirus surge has created a shortage of oxygen.

The situation has led ambulance crews to stop transporting patients they can’t revive in the field, with one out of every 119 people in the state testing positive in the past week.

Arizona , which now has the worst coronavirus diagnosis rate in the country, has seen a triple-digit number of new virus-related deaths for the second day in a row and more than 7,200 daily cases, according to health officials.

As hospitals increasingly face being overwhelmed, pressure is mounting for the introduction of more forceful control measures such as mandatory statewide masks.

But Humble said he doubts Republican Gov. Doug Ducey- who has rejected calls for tighter curbs by claiming they would risk jobs- will change anything.

Under current rules, indoor dining is allowed and gyms are open at limited capacity. Ducey has dismissed a proposal to have all public schools switch to virtual learning for two weeks after the holidays.

block-time published-time 12.17am GMT

The British army  says it is on track to meet its annual recruitment target for only the second time in eight years amid tentative signs that the pandemic crisis has acted as a “rallying cry to serve”.

With nearly three months to go before the recruiting year ends in March, a total of 7,719 young people have signed up. That represents 78% of the numbers required, giving army chiefs confidence that the goal will be achieved.

Formally, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) is not yet ready to declare that Covid-19 has helped with recruitment, but one defence source has said they believed the near-year-long crisis was among the factors persuading young people to join.

Applications often rise during periods of economic weakness, and the army offers a secure career at a time when many other employment opportunities have been curtailed. Another reason cited was the obvious need to help out around the UK in establishing Covid testing and vaccination sites. “It’s clear there is a rallying cry to serve,” the source added:

Related:  British army recruits rise as Covid seems to act as 'rallying cry'

block-time published-time 11.49pm GMT

England sees record hospitalisations

The scale of the health emergency now facing the UK was laid bare on Wednesday night as figures showed that more than 1,000 people had died from the virus in the previous 24 hours and hospitals reported treating a record 30,000 Covid patients.

The alarming rise in fatalities came two days after the prime minister ordered a draconian new lockdown, which was endorsed overwhelmingly in a Commons vote on Wednesday.

The daily death toll for the UK of 1,041 people  was the worst since the first wave of the virus last spring, and the number of new cases hit a fresh high of 62,322.

Boris Johnson was forced to defend his handling of the Covid pandemic as:

•3,587 people were admitted to hospitals in England known to be suffering with Covid – surpassing the previous record high hit last weekend•Manchester city council leader Sir Richard Leese warned that Greater Manchester hospitals were “at serious risk of falling over”•Care home providers warned that rates of infection are rising as they await delivery of the vaccine, with one home in Sussex losing half its residents over Christmas•Headteachers warned that some schools are “rammed”, despite the lockdown.

3,587 people were admitted to hospitals in England known to be suffering with Covid – surpassing the previous record high hit last weekend

Manchester city council leader Sir Richard Leese warned that Greater Manchester hospitals were “at serious risk of falling over”

Care home providers warned that rates of infection are rising as they await delivery of the vaccine, with one home in Sussex losing half its residents over Christmas

Headteachers warned that some schools are “rammed”, despite the lockdown.

The PM urged the public to stay at home on Monday, almost a fortnight after the government’s Sage committee warned that the new variant of the disease meant it was unlikely to be possible to bring it under control without tougher measures, including the closure of schools:

Related:  Covid: scale of emergency facing UK laid bare as 1,000 die in 24 hours

block-time published-time 11.33pm GMT

Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic, an unprecedented global crisis totally dwarfed by US politics.

What a day.

My name is Helen Sullivan  and as always, you can get in touch with me on Twitterhere.

In pandemic news, Uk prime minister Boris Johnson was forced to defend his handling of the Covid pandemic in the House of Commons as 3,587 people were admitted to hospitals in England known to be suffering with Covid – surpassing the previous record high hit last weekend.

Meanwhile Arizona has become the Covid “hot spot of the world”, public health experts have warned, as the US state saw a triple-digit number of new virus-related deaths for the second day in a row.

•France is unlikely to avoid the new and more contagious “UK variant” of the coronavirus, the government’s chief scientific advisor on the epidemic said as it was reported the country already had about 22 confirmed cases of the UK variant.•Tunisia recorded 2,820 new confirmed coronavirus cases- the most since the start of the pandemic -the health ministry said on Wednesday. Seventy more deaths were reported, taking the death toll to more than 5,000.•European Medicines Agency approves Moderna coronavirus vaccine. The EMA has approved the Moderna vaccine , making it the second coronavirus shot to be cleared for general use across the EU, as tensions continued to rise over the slow progress of vaccination programmes in the bloc.•Japan’s daily coronavirus cases hit record as state of emergency looms. Japan’s Covid-19 cases reached a new daily record of at least 6,001 on Wednesday, as the government faced mounting pressure from health experts to impose a strict state of emergency for the Tokyo greater metropolitan area.•Peru and Bolivia see hospitals overflow and cases rise as fears of second wave grow. The critical care wards of major hospitals in Peru and Bolivia stand at or near collapse after end-of-year holidays, reflecting wider regional public health capacity concerns as much of Latin America struggles to secure adequate Covid-19 vaccine supplies.•Portugal extends state of emergency amid record daily Covid cases. The daily number of Covid-19 cases in the nation of around 10 million people reached a record high of 10,027, putting increasing pressure on the health system.•Ireland tightens Covid-19 lockdown by closing schools and construction. Ireland has ordered the closure of most schools and construction sites for at least three weeks in an effort to curb a sharp rise in Covid-19 infections, tightening a lockdown that has already closed most hospitality and retail outlets.•China stalls WHO mission to investigate origins of coronavirus. China has attempted to downplay concerns over23 its refusal to authorise a fact-finding mission to the country by the World Health Organization to study the origins of Covid-19, saying it is still negotiating access with the UN body.•Greek churches open for Epiphany despite coronavirus lockdown. In what had been described by some as a rebellion, by others a declaration of war, churches across Greece opened their doors on Wednesday –25 defying nationwide lockdown measures – to mark one of the holiest days in the Orthodox calendar.

France is unlikely to avoid the new and more contagious “UK variant” of the coronavirus, the government’s chief scientific advisor on the epidemic said as it was reported the country already had about 22 confirmed cases of the UK variant.

Tunisia recorded 2,820 new confirmed coronavirus cases- the most since the start of the pandemic -the health ministry said on Wednesday. Seventy more deaths were reported, taking the death toll to more than 5,000.

European Medicines Agency approves Moderna coronavirus vaccine. The EMA has approved the Moderna vaccine , making it the second coronavirus shot to be cleared for general use across the EU, as tensions continued to rise over the slow progress of vaccination programmes in the bloc.

Japan’s daily coronavirus cases hit record as state of emergency looms. Japan’s Covid-19 cases reached a new daily record of at least 6,001 on Wednesday, as the government faced mounting pressure from health experts to impose a strict state of emergency for the Tokyo greater metropolitan area.

Peru and Bolivia see hospitals overflow and cases rise as fears of second wave grow. The critical care wards of major hospitals in Peru and Bolivia stand at or near collapse after end-of-year holidays, reflecting wider regional public health capacity concerns as much of Latin America struggles to secure adequate Covid-19 vaccine supplies.

Portugal extends state of emergency amid record daily Covid cases. The daily number of Covid-19 cases in the nation of around 10 million people reached a record high of 10,027, putting increasing pressure on the health system.

Ireland tightens Covid-19 lockdown by closing schools and construction. Ireland has ordered the closure of most schools and construction sites for at least three weeks in an effort to curb a sharp rise in Covid-19 infections, tightening a lockdown that has already closed most hospitality and retail outlets.

China stalls WHO mission to investigate origins of coronavirus. China has attempted to downplay concerns over23 its refusal to authorise a fact-finding mission to the country by the World Health Organization to study the origins of Covid-19, saying it is still negotiating access with the UN body.

Greek churches open for Epiphany despite coronavirus lockdown. In what had been described by some as a rebellion, by others a declaration of war, churches across Greece opened their doors on Wednesday –25 defying nationwide lockdown measures – to mark one of the holiest days in the Orthodox calendar.