The press conference given by the World Health Organization's investigative team in Wuhan is unlikely to silence the most conspiratorial of the conspiracy theorists who took their lead from the fever dreams of the former Trump administration.

Indeed, the first and very partial findings in what was always going to be a long and drawn-out process have not told us much we did not already know about the origins of the coronavirus pandemic.

Except, that is, to confirm what has long been a broadly held scientific consensus: that the virus did not escape from a Wuhan laboratory  as suggested by Donald Trump's allies and their cheerleaders.

The questions that remained open before the visit, however, still remain largely unanswered. It is still not known the precise path of the disease from animals to humans, even what species of intermediary host linked bat coronaviruses to the human variant Covid-19.

It is also unclear whether the disease spilled over in the Huanan wet market associated with the first significant outbreak in Wuhan or whether it came into the market perhaps from elsewhere in China as some scientists have suggested.

None of which is terribly surprising. Even eight years after the Mers outbreak, understanding of the route from bat to dromedary to human in that virus remains only partially understood.

What was striking, however, was the detail both from the WHO team and their Chinese colleagues about the slow and complex nature of the work that was being undertaken and where it might lead in tracking the source of both live and frozen produce, wild and farmed, that had been sold by traders at the Huanan market.

The study too of cases of respiratory disease in China, and where possible identifying and sequencing samples, also suggests a widening of the net to see whether the disease emerged outside of Wuhan and if the market was effective in spreading it.

The coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan itself appears to have begun quite quickly in December, the distribution of cases largely typical for outbreaks.

Also interesting, if not entirely new from outbreaks in China and elsewhere related to frozen food and meat packing plants, was whether coronavirus is able to survive and be transmitted in colder conditions in food cold storage chains, something China has pushed.

"We know the virus can survive in conditions that are found in these cold, frozen environments, but we don't really understand if the virus can transmit to humans," said Peter Ben Embarek, a WHO specialist in animal diseases leading the independent group of experts.

Embarek said it would be worthwhile to explore whether a frozen wild animal in a market setting with the right conditions could be conducive to rapid spread of the virus. He said that work to identify the origins of coronavirus pointed to a natural reservoir in bats, but it is unlikely that they were in Wuhan, the city where the outbreak was first identified in late 2019.

Emabarek and his team said it was unlikely the virus had escaped from one of two labs in the Wuhan area.

In the end the significance may be in the relative insignificance of the briefing, pointing to a forensic and ongoing process.