block-time published-time 11.17pm BST

Summary

Here's a rundown of Saturday's events. We'll be back tomorrow for all Sunday's news.

•Calls for nationwide sickout as Arizona school district cancels reopening. Arizona public school district forced to abandon plans after more than 100 teachers and staff members called in sick•Pelosi vows to protect USPS and accuses Trump of 'openly working to destroy' it. House speaker said president is actively trying to 'sabotage' agency's ability to deliver mail-in ballots in time for election•Trump says he will 'take a look' at pardon for Edward Snowden. President said at press conference he did not know much about whistleblower's case•Fights break out during protest near Confederate memorial in Georgia. Several dozen rightwing demonstrators, many wearing military gear, faced off against counter-protesters in Stone Mountain•Iran calls US defeat over UN arms embargo a 'humiliation'. Hassan Rouhani triumphant after only two countries vote in favour of prolonging embargo

Calls for nationwide sickout as Arizona school district cancels reopening. Arizona public school district forced to abandon plans after more than 100 teachers and staff members called in sick

Pelosi vows to protect USPS and accuses Trump of 'openly working to destroy' it. House speaker said president is actively trying to 'sabotage' agency's ability to deliver mail-in ballots in time for election

Trump says he will 'take a look' at pardon for Edward Snowden. President said at press conference he did not know much about whistleblower's case

Fights break out during protest near Confederate memorial in Georgia. Several dozen rightwing demonstrators, many wearing military gear, faced off against counter-protesters in Stone Mountain

Iran calls US defeat over UN arms embargo a 'humiliation'. Hassan Rouhani triumphant after only two countries vote in favour of prolonging embargo

block-time published-time 11.08pm BST

The state of the US Postal Service, and its relationship to November's election, came up again in today's briefing. Here's my colleague Sam Levin on the ins and outs of the topic:

Related:  Why is the US Postal Service's role in November's election under scrutiny?

block-time published-time 11.01pm BST

Trump wraps up his briefing with a number of pats on the back for himself about the great job he thinks he is doing.

block-time published-time 10.58pm BST

Trump is asked about a Newsweek article that called into question, falsely, Kamala Harris's citizenship.

Related:  Newsweek apologizes for op-ed that questioned Kamala Harris' citizenship

The article was reminiscent of the "birther" conspiracy theories around Barack Obama when he ran for president, and Trump helped circulate. Trump calls the article's author a "brilliant lawyer" but says"I know nothing about [the article]". He adds that Harris's citizenship is not "something that bothers me" and he wont pursue the matter.

Harris is a US citizen and was born in Oakland, California.

block-time published-time 10.53pm BST

Trump says "we've done it right" when it comes to Covid-19. He says the US, which has the most deaths in the world from Covid-19, is doing "very well" on Covid-19.

block-time published-time 10.51pm BST

Trump is asked if the postmaster general is purposely cutting postal services to hurt mail-in voting.

Trump says DeJoy is "trying to streamline the postal service and make it great again". Again, Trump has admitted admitted last week that he opposed aid for the USPS because he believed extra money would help the delivery of mail-in ballots.

block-time published-time 10.45pm BST

Trump is asked about allegations the US postmaster general, a Trump supporter, is damaging the US Postal Service in order to hurt mail-in voting, something Trump opposes.

He says Louis DeJoy is a "brilliant businessperson" and blames Democrats for failure to get funding sorted for the USPS.

Related:  Why is the US Postal Service's role in November's election under scrutiny?

Trump admitted last week that he opposed Democrats' demand for $25bn in government aid to the USPS because he believed it would support the delivery of mail-in ballots.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.49pm BST

block-time published-time 10.41pm BST

To reporters' questions. Trump is asked about the US's failure to get an embargo against Iran for arms extended. "We'll be doing a snapback of sanctions" against Iran, says Trump.

Related:  Iran calls US defeat over UN arms embargo a 'humiliation'

block-time published-time 10.39pm BST

It's not exactly clear what the point of this briefing is, apart from for Trump to tell America how great a job he thinks he is doing, while he trails Joe Biden in the polls.

Talking of Biden, he says China "will own the United States" if Biden becomes president. He then says he wants college football to come back after several large conferences cancelled their seasons due to Covid-19. He then gives an in-depth analysis of the Clemson quarterback Trevor Lawrence. It's true that Trevor Lawrence is very good at football, but quite how Trump's scouting report helps the thousands of people who have had their lives devastated by Covid-19 is beyond me.

He then takes a shot at the NBA, which has allowed players to kneel during the anthem. He then returns to Lawrence, who he reminds us is good at football (FACT CHECK: Lawrence is indeed good at football ).

block-time published-time 10.34pm BST

Trump is early to the podium, which must be a first.

He says there has been a "steep decline" in Covid-19 cases across the US over the last week. The man who once suggested injecting disinfectant could be a good cure for Covid-19 then says Americans should use "common sense" treatments for the virus. He insists on calling the Covid-19 the "China virus" as is his tiresome and racist custom.

Related:  US unemployment claims dip below 1m for first time in 21 weeks

He also says that the US economy is experiencing the "fastest" recovery in history. He says retail spending is at an "all-time". Economists have said that the US economy is far from back to normal and won't be for some time.

"Jobs for more-skilled workers in business/professional services are making little headway overall and are declining in computer services, management and advertising," Sophia Koropeckyj, economist at Moody's Analytics, wrote in an investor note earlier this week. "These are the secondary effects of the stressed economy."'

There was relatively good news on the jobs front. The latest figures from the US labor department showed 963,000 people filing claims after 20 weeks of claims above 1m. Claims still remain historically high. Before the pandemic, claims were averaging about 200,000 a week and the previous record for claims was 695,000, set in 1982.

block-time published-time 10.27pm BST

Republican senator Lindsey Graham said the United Nations security council made a "major mistake" when it rejected a US request to extend an arms embargo against Iran on Friday. Only two countries - the US and the Dominican Republic - voted for the motion, while 11 abstained and two voted against.

"The United Nations Security Council overwhelmingly rejected an extension of the Iranian arms embargo. This was a major mistake by the UN. It also makes a major conflict with Iran much more likely as they build up their military arsenal," tweeted Graham on Saturday.

Among those who abstained were traditional allies of the US such as the UK and France. Iran's president said the result was a humiliation for the US.

"I don't remember the US preparing a resolution for months to strike a blow at the Islamic Republic of Iran, and it garners only one vote," Hassan Rouhani said in a televised speech. "But the great success was that the US was defeated in this conspiracy with humiliation."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.52am BST

block-time published-time 10.10pm BST

Donald Trump 's scheduled 5pm press conference from his Bedminster golf club has been moved to 5.30pm (or in roughly 20 minutes), per the man himself.

It's unclear whether it's related to the delay, but the Secret Service tells NBC News it is investigating a small plane that violated the restricted airspace around Trump National. The plane landed as directed after US military aircraft were launched when it didn't respond to radio.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.13pm BST

block-time published-time 9.41pm BST

Nine University of Oklahoma football players tested positive for coronavirus after returning from a break in preseason camp.

Head coach Lincoln Riley said he was "disappointed" by the news in a Zoom call with media on Saturday.

"We did conduct a Covid test as planned with our players last night, got the results this morning we had nine players tested positive for Covid. We had a couple of other that have been isolated due to contract tracing," Riley said. "Disappointed by the news. We've done such a tremendous job this entire time. You know when (you) give players time, there is risk in that. This isn't the NBA, we don't have a bubble. We all have to continue to work to do a better job by all accounts. We're still confident in the plan that we have."

The entire program had returned only one positive result since the start of workouts on 1 July until Riley announced the one-week break on 8 August. The coach gave players the option of returning home, though most stayed on campus.

An Oklahoma source told the Athletic that "the majority of those who tested positive were players that remained in the local area/community".

The Sooners are part of the Big 12, which is one of three major conferences that said this week they intend to move forward with fall football seasons.

block-time published-time 9.13pm BST

The Food and Drug Administration on Saturday granted emergency use authorization to Yale School of Public Health's saliva test to detect Covid-19, after a trial on National Basketball Association players and staff.

SalivaDirect, the fifth saliva test approved by the FDA for the disease, requires no swab or collection device and uses spit from people suspected of having the coronavirus, the agency said.

FDA commissioner Stephen Hahn  called the test "groundbreaking" in its efficiency and in being unaffected by crucial component shortages.

SalivaDirect is seen as a cheap, simpler and less invasive testing method that requires no extraction of nucleic acid and can use several readily available reagents.

The NBA has used the test in a program involving asymptomatic players, coaches and staff from various teams, after partnering with Yale in June, the school said in a separate statement.

"We simplified the test so that it only costs a couple of dollars for reagents, and we expect that labs will only charge about $10 per sample," Nathan Grubaugh, assistant professor at Yale School of Public Health said.

The FDA said the test could lower the risk to healthcare workers from collecting samples as it is self-collected under the observation of a healthcare professional.

block-time published-time 8.37pm BST

Number of daily US coronavirus tests drops in threat to contain pandemic

The number of known coronavirus tests administered daily in the United States has fallen for the first tim e in an alarming trend that threatens to undermine the nation's efforts to contain the pandemic.

An estimated 733,000 people have been tested each day this month on average, down from nearly 750,000 in July, according to the independent Covid Tracking Project.

"We're clearly not doing enough," said Dr Mark McClellan, the director of the Duke-Margolis Center for Health Policy and the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration under former US president George W Bush, told the New York Times.

Donald Trump has repeatedly claimed the United States is the "envy of the world" when it comes to testing, which public health experts have described as an essential measure toward reining in the coronavirus in absence of a vaccine.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.50pm BST

block-time published-time 8.14pm BST

A former Minneapolis police officer involved in the arrest of George Floyd admitted he could have been "more observant" as he worked crowd control during the nearly eight minutes his partner held his knee against Floyd's neck.

Tou Thao, one of four former officers charged in Floyd's death, described himself as a "human traffic cone" in a newly released video interview with the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension conducted eight days following the 25 May incident.

The AP reports:

"I don't want anyone to die," Thao told an investigator who asked what his reaction was to Floyd's death. "It was kind of a somber moment, especially for me. My heart kind of sank."

Thao voluntarily participated in the 1hr 40min interview with the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension eight days after Floyd's death. He said that as the bystanders got louder, he became worried they might rush Chauvin and two other officers who were holding Floyd on the ground.

Thao and Chauvin had responded to the scene to help two officers, Thomas Lane and J Kueng, who were attempting to arrest Floyd for allegedly passing a counterfeit $20 bill at a convenience store.

While they were on the way, Thao said that dispatch canceled the backup call. But Thao, who was driving, said he felt compelled to respond because Lane and Kueng were new officers and the intersection was known to be "especially hostile" to police.

Thao said Floyd appeared to be on drugs, resisted arrested and used his legs get out of a squad car. As the officers restrained Floyd on the ground, Thao said he heard Floyd say he couldn't breathe, adding, "but then he was obviously yelling and talking".

Thao also said he has never used the maneuver that Chauvin used to pin Floyd to the ground.

Although a woman who identified herself as a Minneapolis firefighter approached Thao and demanded that officers check Floyd's pulse, Thao told investigators that his job was securing the scene and that he couldn't "be in two places at once".

Thao, Lane and Kueng are charged with aiding and abetting both second-degree murder and manslaughter. Chauvin is charged with second-degree murder, third-degree murder and manslaughter. All four officers were fired and are scheduled for trial in March.

block-time published-time 7.40pm BST

The St Louis Cardinals returned to action for the first time in 17 days on Saturday after their season was derailed by a coronavirus outbreak.

The reigning NL Central champions have played just five games since Major League Baseball started its shortened 60-game season last month.

Star catcher Yadier Molina and infielder Paul DeJong were among 10 players and 18 members of the Cardinals organization overall with confirmed coronavirus cases. The team traveled to Chicago in 41 rental cars ahead of today's game against the White Sox as an added precaution.

"Today feels very much like opening day for the St Louis Cardinals, and there's a lot of excitement right now in that clubhouse," said John Mozeliak, the team's president of baseball operations.

The pandemic forced MLB to delay and truncate the familiar 162-game, six-month season to a 60-game, 67-day sprint with a number of rule changes designed to speed up the game and protect the players and umpires.

Tommy Edman of the St Louis Cardinals puts the ball in play during the fourth inning of Saturday's game against the Chicago White Sox. Photograph: Charles Rex Arbogast/AP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.44pm BST

block-time published-time 7.06pm BST

Anyone can get a coronavirus test at the CentroMed clinic in San Antonio, but on a recent day, the drive-thru was empty, the Associated Press reports.

With hundreds of deaths reported each day, students returning to class, and football teams charging ahead with plans to play, Texas's leaders who have grappled with testing shortages for much of the pandemic are now facing the opposite problem: not enough takers.

"We're not having enough people step forward," Republican governor Greg Abbott said.

The number of coronavirus tests being done each day in Texas has dropped by the thousands in August, mirroring nationwide trends that have seen daily testing averages in the US fall nearly 9% since the end of July, according to the Covid Tracking Project.

The dropoff comes as the US has surpassed 5 million confirmed coronavirus cases and is closing in on 170,000 deaths.

It threatens to put the US even further behind other countries that have better managed the pandemic, in part through more aggressive testing.

The trend worries health experts: Texas embarked on one of the fastest reopenings in the country in May, but retreated weeks later in the face of massive outbreaks, ultimately leading Abbott to impose a statewide mask order after previously saying he wouldn't.

A young man watches as an ambulance prepares to take away his mother, whom family members found unresponsive in their home on 14 August, 2020, in Houston, Texas. With more than 90,000 confirmed Covid-19 cases, Houston's Harris county has the highest number of coronavirus cases in Texas. Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images

At one point, one overwhelmed hospital on the Texas border was airlifting Covid-19 patients hundreds of miles north in search of open beds, and Houston this month began threatening $250 (£190) fines for not wearing face coverings in an effort to drive down infection numbers.

In recent weeks, things have improved, including a nearly 40% drop in hospitalisations since July's peak.

But deaths remain high, and doctors in some parts say they're still stretched.

Texas has been averaging more than 210 reported new deaths a day over the past two weeks, according to the Covid Tracking Project.

On Friday, it reported 313 deaths. Overall, the state has recorded more than 9,600 fatalities.

The rolling average of people who test positive for the virus in Texas is stubbornly elevated at 16%, a figure that itself could be a sign of insufficient testing.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said a positivity rate under 10% is an indicator that a state has robust testing.

Abbott has said that unless Texas gets below that number, bars are likely to stay shut.

Other states in the South clobbered by the virus this summer are also seeing improvements, including Alabama.

Intensive care units remain frustratingly full there, but the average number of new confirmed cases each day has dropped below 1,000, from 1,800 in mid-July.

block-time published-time 6.29pm BST

It was a warning that America chose to ignore, but a moment remembered long after the speeches of career politicians were done and forgotten.

Four summers ago, in the lead-up to the pivotal 2016 US election, Khizr Khan stood before the Democratic national convention in Philadelphia and told how his son, an American Muslim and army captain, died in Iraq. He had a question for Donald Trump, the Republican nominee threatening to ban Muslim immigrants.

"Have you even read the United States constitution?" he demanded, holding a copy aloft, as he delivered a seven-minute tour de force that became the emotional heart of one of the biggest weeks of the election campaign.

When Democrats convene for their 2020 convention next week, albeit virtually, Khan will again be taking part. His darkest fears about Trump and the mortal threat he poses to the constitution have been realised, he says. But he retains faith in America and finds hope in Joe Biden, the Democratic presumptive nominee, who understands what it is to endure the death of a child.

"Losing a family member creates a hole in the parents' and family's hearts which never fills," the 70-year-old lawyer told the Guardian in a phone interview from his home in Charlottesville, Virginia, as he recalled he and his wife, Ghazala, meeting the former vice-president. "We could see that he could feel the hole in our heart and we could feel the hole in his heart, and that connection has been everlasting.

"The president of the United States is a father figure, a figure that must be compassionate to the suffering and pains of the nation. Joe Biden has that element. He has that character. To our disappointment, the current president does not. We had hoped that Trump would find somewhere along the way that element of character. Alas, that never happened, but Joe Biden has that element."

You can read the full article below:

Related:  Khizr Khan: 'Trump may damage American democracy permanently'

block-time published-time 6.14pm BST

Illinois governor JB Pritzker has paid tribute to Jim Thompson, who served as the state's governor from 1977 to 1991, and has died aged 84.

"On behalf of the entire state of Illinois, [my wife] MK and I offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of former Governor Jim Thompson," he said in a statement posted to Twitter. "As the longest-serving governor in Illinois history, 'Big Jim' was known to treat people he encountered with kindness and decency. He dedicated himself to building positive change for Illinois, and he set an example for public service of which Illinoisans should be proud. He will be remembered and revered as one of the titans in the history of state government."

Thompson is survived by his wife Jayne and daughter Samantha.

"The Thompson family is mourning the loss of a wonderful husband, father and grandfather," they wrote on a statement. "Jim Thompson's love and devotion to his family mirrored his lifelong dedication to his beloved State of Illinois. His guiding principle in public and private life was to help people and do what he could so they could have an opportunity to succeed. In that process, he achieved big things for Illinois that matched the life he lived."

block-time published-time 6.01pm BST

As well as the US Postal Service, the climate and voting rights, it appears Donald Trump is dangerous to users of recreational drugs. The Press Association has more:

UK police have issued a warning about a dangerous high-strength batch of Donald Trump-shaped ecstasy pills.

A man in his 30s from Luton has been arrested on suspicion of supplying the orange tablets, which bear the likeness of the US president, said Bedfordshire police.

People in the UK are being warned against the so-called Donald Trump MDMA pills. Photograph: Bedfordshire Police/PA

DS Ryan Barnes said: "Criminals are constantly finding new ways to sell their drugs and make them more appealing.

"We have seen MDMA tablets created to look like a number of culturally popular items before and a recent example of this is the 'Donald Trumps'.

"The Donald Trumps are dangerous tablets that contain extremely high levels of MDMA and could put anyone taking these in serious harm.

"If you come across these or any other type of drug, please do not take them for your own safety, as you can never be sure what these pills contain."

block-time published-time 5.48pm BST

Demonstrations outside home of US postmaster general

Protesters have staged a demonstration outside the Washington DC home of postmaster general Louis DeJoy.

DeJoy is a major Trump donor and has come under heavy criticism for his handling of the US Postal Service, which could in turn affect November's elections.

enltrProtesters say they are outside Postmaster General Louis DeJoy's apartment building to protest his destructive leadership ahead of mass mail-in voting in the 2020 presidential election. @wusa9 pic.twitter.com/i2RXEESefO

- Kolbie Satterfield (@KolbieReports) August 15, 2020

Here's my colleague Sam Levine on why anger is being directed at DeJoy:

In July, the Washington Post and other news organizations reported the agency was banning overtime and instructing postal workers to leave the mail behind if it delayed them on their routes. There are also reports of the USPS removing mail sorting machines from facilities, which could lead to a further slowdown.

Critics suggest Trump and DeJoy are deliberately slowing the mail to make it more difficult to vote by mail. DeJoy has strongly denied any political interference. But on Thursday, Trump openly admitted he was blocking $25bn in proposed aid to the post office because he wanted to make it harder to vote by mail.

Protesters march towards the apartment of postmaster general Louis DeJoy in Washington DC on Saturday. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA

You can read more of Sam's look at the problems at the USPS here:

Related:  Why is the US Postal Service's role in November's election under scrutiny?

block-time published-time 5.33pm BST

While sports leagues,  such as the NBA,  playing in "bubbles" have managed to escape large scale disruption from Covid-19, Major League Baseball is still encountering problems.

Related:  Snitch hotlines, waffles and lots of ping pong: the strange world of the NBA bubble

MLB is playing a reduced schedule of games, but teams are still traveling between cities to face each other. The Miami Marlins and St Louis Cardinals have both had to call off a significant number of games after outbreaks among their staff, and now the Cincinnati Reds and Pittsburgh Pirates have postponed their games against each other this weekend after a Reds player tested positive for the virus.

block-time published-time 5.18pm BST

The Hill reports that Bill Mitchell, a pro-Trump pundit has been permanently suspended from Twitter.

"[Mitchell] has been permanently suspended for violating the Twitter Rules by using one account to evade the suspension of another account," a Twitter spokesperson told the Hill in an email.

Related:  Down the rabbit hole: how QAnon conspiracies thrive on Facebook

Mitchell is the host of YouTube show YourVoice America and is a purveyor of QAnon conspiracy theories. He is also an ardent supporter of the president, and was followed on Twitter by Eric Trump and Donald Trump Jr before his suspension.

Mitchell said on social media channel Parler that he had been suspended for his views on Covid-19.

"Twitter just suspended me for opposing masks. Who knows if I'll ever be back," Mitchell said. "I'm sure their decision wasn't political at all."

block-time published-time 5.01pm BST

New York reports that there are 523 people in hospital in the state due to Covid-19, which NY governor Andrew Cuomo says is the lowest number since 17 March.

Of the 88,668 tests in New York on Friday, 734 were positive. Five people died from the virus in New York on Friday.

enltrGreat news today: Lowest number of hospitalizations since March 17. 8th consecutive day of an infection rate below 1%. Record-high number of tests. https://t.co/tZ1R1LbhCe

- Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) August 15, 2020

Cuomo said on Friday that bowling alleys across the state can reopen with 50% capacity, while a protocol will be announced on Monday for gyms.

block-time published-time 4.53pm BST

My colleagues Kari Paul and Ed Pilkington have had an in-depth look at the rise of Kamala Harris, and what the future may hold for Joe Biden's running mate:

Bancroft Way in Berkeley, California, is quaint and slow, the kind of street where everyone seems to know each other by name. This week, neighbors sat outdoors drinking wine under the evening sun, as they chatted animatedly about their childhood companion who had just become headline news.

It was on Bancroft Way that Kamala Harris spent her formative years with her single mother, Shyamala, and sister, Maya. Today, former neighbors reminisce about her following her selection this week as Joe Biden's Democratic running mate in his bid to evict Donald Trump from the White House.

"I am really proud of her and think she will make a very good vice-president," Kenneth Hunter said. He was standing at the same street corner where he said he and Harris had caught the bus every morning for Thousand Oaks elementary school in north Berkeley as part of efforts to desegregate local schools.

But even here, among her childhood friends, and just days away from the Democratic national convention, where Harris will enter the history books as the first woman of color to be placed on a major-party presidential ticket, there's a note of hesitancy.

Octavia, a third-generation Berkeley resident who lives on the block, said she was worried that criticism of Harris's record as a former prosecutor might dampen enthusiasm among Black voters, who make up a crucial share of the Democratic party's support.

"Not enough Black people are behind her," said Octavia, requesting not to give her last name. "When people say they don't want to vote for her, I ask: 'How many Black or brown women who look like you and me are there in office right now? How could you not vote for her?'"

That's a debate that is likely to rumble on not just in Berkeley and neighboring Oakland, where Harris was born in 1964, but throughout California and across the nation ahead of the US presidential election on 3 November. Just who is Kamala Harris, and what does she represent for future of the Democratic party and, potentially, of the most powerful country on Earth?

You can read the full article below:

Related:  From Oakland to the White House? The rise of Kamala Harris

block-time published-time 4.35pm BST

Although Covid-19 cases in Florida are no longer topping 10,000 a day, the virus is still taking its toll on the state.

Related:  Covid-19 map of the US: latest cases state by state

The Florida department of health reported 204 new deaths from the virus on Saturday, bringing the state's total to 9,345 since the start of the pandemic. The department reported 6,352 new cases on Saturday, the 53rd consecutive day the state has recorded more than 4,000 new cases, according to CNN.

Related:  Flu and Covid: winter could bring 'double-barrel' outbreak to US, experts say

Meanwhile, health experts are warning that flu and Covid-19 represent a "double barrel" threat to Americans this winter.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.36pm BST

block-time published-time 4.18pm BST

Newsweek sorry for 'birther' op-ed on Kamala Harris

Newsweek has apologised for an op-ed it published on Kamala Harris that carried disturbing parallels to the "birther" conspiracy theories directed at Barack Obama during his run for the presidency.

In the column, Chapman University law professor John Eastman suggested that Harris, who was born in Oakland, may have questionable citizenship as both her parents were immigrants.

"Before we so cavalierly accept Senator Harris' eligibility for the office of vice president, we should ask her a few questions about the status of her parents at the time of her birth," he wrote.

Kamala Harris was born in Oakland, California. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP

Donald Trump was asked about the article and said he had "no idea if that's right." He also said that "the lawyer that wrote that piece is a very highly qualified, talented lawyer".

Newsweek resisted calls to take the article down, saying they had decided to leave the article up with a clarification in the interests of "transparency".

"This op-ed is being used by some as a tool to perpetuate racism and xenophobia. We apologize," read a note at the end of the article.

"The essay, by John Eastman, was intended to explore a minority legal argument about the definition of who is a natural-born citizen in the United States. But to many readers, the essay inevitably conveyed the ugly message that Senator Kamala Harris, a woman of color and the child of immigrants, was somehow not truly American.

"The op-ed was never intended to spark or to take part in the racist lie of Birtherism, the conspiracy theory aimed at delegitimizing Barack Obama, but we should have recognized the potential, even probability, that that could happen. All of us at Newsweek are horrified that this op-ed gave rise to a wave of vile Birtherism directed at Senator Harris."

Eastman ran unsuccessfully in the 2010 Republican primary as a candidate for California attorney general. Harris eventually won the election against Republican Steve Cooley.

block-time published-time 3.58pm BST

Some important UFO (or technically UAP) news:

The US department of Defense has formed a new body to investigate what it calls "unidentified aerial phenomena" (UAPs) following reported sightings of what most people call UFOs.

The move is likely to spark wide interest in alien hunters worldwide looking for signs that humanity is not alone in the universe. Although the dry language of the Pentagon's announcement of the new group belied its intent as watchers of the sky for potential first contact.

The Unidentified Aerial Phenomena Task Force (UAPTF) was created by the deputy defense secretary, David Norquist, on 4 August, strengthening an already existing effort that since 2018 has been under the purview of the Office of Naval Intelligence.

"The Department of Defense established the UAPTF to improve its understanding of, and gain insight into, the nature and origins of UAPs. The mission of the task force is to detect, analyze and catalog UAPs that could potentially pose a threat to US national security," the Pentagon said in a statement.

And while we're on the subject, here's a wonderful alien-themed story from our archive if you have time for a Saturday morning read:

Related:  The curious case of the alien in the photo - and a mystery that took years to solve

block-time published-time 3.43pm BST

Republican senator, and regular Donald Trump critic, Mitt Romney has said he does not believe mail-in voting fraud is a problem, despite the president's comments to the contrary.

"I don't know of any evidence that voting by mail would increase voter fraud," Romney said during an interview with the Sutherland Institute on Friday. "My biggest concern, frankly, with regards to voting fraud has been that there would be some kind of hacking of our voting electronic systems, and that voting machines or tabulating equipment would be hacked."

Related:  Could Mitt Romney be Trump's nemesis in the Senate?

Although he did not mention Trump specifically, Romney appeared to be referencing Trump's attack on mail-in voting during another part of the interview.

"When politicians attack a judicial system, attack a voting system... attack a free press, these things threaten the foundation upon which not only our own democracy rests but democracies around the world rest," he said.

block-time published-time 3.27pm BST

The Associated Press reports that a white state trooper has been charged with murder over the fatal shooting of a 60-year-old black man during a traffic stop:

A Georgia state trooper was fired and charged with murder on Friday a week after he shot a 60-year-old man who tried to flee a rural traffic stop, authorities said.

The president of Georgia's NAACP chapter called the slaying of Julian Edward Roosevelt Lewis another chilling example of a Black man being killed unlawfully by a white law enforcement officer. An attorney for Lewis' family said the trooper initiated the traffic stop over a burned-out tail light and Lewis was shot almost immediately after the trooper forced his car into a ditch.

"Mr Lewis never got out of the vehicle and the investigation will show that, mere seconds after the crash, he was shot to death, shot in the face and killed," attorney Francys Johnson said.

Johnson said that information was given to the family by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which arrested 27-year-old Jacob Gordon Thompson on charges of felony murder and aggravated assault Friday. The agency did not include those details in its own statement on Thompson's arrest.

The GBI said Lewis was fatally shot on 7 August after a chase in rural Screven County, about 60 miles northwest of Savannah.

Thompson had tried to pull over a car for a traffic violation when the driver tried to flee, the GBI said in a news release. The agency said the trooper chased the vehicle down several country roads before performing a maneuver that forced the car to come to a stop in a ditch.

At some point afterward, Thompson fired a single gunshot that hit Lewis, killing him, the GBI said. The trooper was not injured.

GBI spokeswoman Nelly Miles confirmed that Lewis was Black and the trooper was white, but she declined to comment further on the case. Richard Mallard, district attorney for the judicial circuit that includes Screven County, did not immediately return a phone message.

block-time published-time 3.17pm BST

Pelosi: Trump 'openly working to destroy the Post Office'

House speaker Nancy Pelosi has written a letter to her Democrat colleagues in which she says Congress's ongoing inability to agree on a stimulus bill during the Covid-19 pandemic is due to "the complete disarray on the Republican side - as President Trump contradicts his own negotiators and his own positions."

She also attacked Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell's role in the stalled negotiations. "Senator McConnell's attitude that states should go bankrupt is shared by the White House and has been a significant obstacle inside negotiations," she wrote.

Pelosi added that Donald Trump's handling of the US Postal Service, and concerns over mail-in voting this November.

"Before our eyes, President Trump is openly working to destroy the Post Office and sabotage its ability to deliver absentee ballots in time to be counted," she wrote. "In the time of pandemic, the Postal System is Election Central. All patriots, Democrats, Independents or Republicans, should reject the President's assault on the Postal System in this election season."

block-time published-time 2.55pm BST

My colleague Sam Levine has taken a deeper look at why the United States Postal Service's part in November's election has come under scrutiny of late:

An unprecedented number of Americans are expected to vote by mail this year because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Over the last few months, states across the US have seen record numbers of Americans request ballots and submit votes by mail in primary and other elections. Mail-in ballots may account for 50% of all of the votes cast this fall, according to an estimate by Michael McDonald, a University of Florida professor who closely tracks voter turnout. That would be a huge increase from 2016 and 2018, when about a quarter of votes came through the mail.

That surge means the USPS is going to play a much bigger role in facilitating an American presidential election than ever before. The agency will be responsible for transporting ballots between election officials and voters. Many states require ballots to arrive at election offices by the close of the polls on election day. Others allow ballot postmarked on or before election that arrive within a specified period. There's concern over whether the USPS, which is already facing a severe financial crisis, will be able get ballots to voters and return them to election offices in time to have them counted.

So what exactly is Trump doing to the USPS?

Over the last few months there have been reports of severe mail delays across the US. In Philadelphia, for example, some residents told the Philadelphia Inquirer they had gone weeks without receiving mail. Concerns over those delays were heightened in early June when Louis DeJoy, a major Republican donor and Trump ally, took over as postmaster general, the top role at the USPS.

In July, the Washington Post and other news organizations reported the agency was banning overtime and instructing postal workers to leave the mail behind if it delayed them on their routes. There are also reports of the USPS removing mail sorting machines from facilities, which could lead to a further slowdown.

Critics suggest Trump and DeJoy are deliberately slowing the mail to make it more difficult to vote by mail. DeJoy has strongly denied any political interference. But on Thursday, Trump openly admitted he was blocking $25bn in proposed aid to the post office because he wanted to make it harder to vote by mail.

You can read the full article below:

Related:  Why is the US Postal Service's role in November's election under scrutiny?

block-time published-time 2.38pm BST

Donald Trump has spent the early part of today retweeting stories that promote the (unproven) theory that mail-in voting is subject to widescale fraud.

The president retweeted allegations of voting fraud in Paterson, New Jersey, along with the comment: "The Democrats know the 2020 Election will be a fraudulent mess. Will maybe never know who won!"

enltrThe Democrats know the 2020 Election will be a fraudulent mess. Will maybe never know who won! https://t.co/tEWKJ5NcUj

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 15, 2020

Studies have concluded that cases of mail-in voting fraud are insignificant. The Washington Post found only 372 cases of double voting or voting on behalf of a dead person in its analysis of 14.6m votes cast in three states. A different study of voter fraud maintained by the conservative Heritage Foundation found 143 cases of criminal convictions involving absentee ballots over the last 20 years. That total is 0.00006% of the votes cast during that period.

As for the Paterson case Trump is referring to, officials there told the Washington Post that they don't believe the problems highlighted by the president and others there are symptomatic of widespread fraud in the area and that it was uncovered by election officials.

However, there what cannot be denied is the fact that an underfunded USPS may struggle to cope with an increase in mail-in voting this November as Americans look to cast their ballots remotely due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Republicans have shown few signs of wanting to spend the estimated $4bn to pay for a competent mail-in service.

block-time published-time 2.17pm BST

Good morning. We start this morning with news that the United States Postal Service's inspector general will investigate claims that recent changes could affect this November's presidential election.

Donald Trump has long issued baseless claims that mail-in voting is ripe for fraud and there are real concerns that cuts to the service could weaken the agency and mail-in ballots may not arrive on time to be counted.

The problem is particularly relevant this year as the Covid-19 pandemic means many people will want to avoid voting in person at crowded polling stations. Earlier this week, the president admitted he is blocking $25bn in proposed aid to the USPS because he wants to make it harder to vote by mail.