Since Covid-19 restrictions began to ease around Australia, musicians and live music aficionados have noticed apparent discrepancies in permitted events.

Sporting matches have jampacked mega-stadiums while live music gigs have languished in 25% or less audience capacity under restrictive physical distancing rules.

“I was thinking we could start classifying events like this as football matches,” pop artist Jack River told the physically distanced crowd at the Great Southern Nights concert at Sydney’s Qudos Bank arena on 28 November. “Gladys, sort it out.”

River was referring to the fact that back in August, the New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, gave the go ahead for the NRL grand final at the ANZ Stadium to achieve 50% capacity in the outdoor venue capable of seating more than 80,000 people.

The Great Southern Nights gig on the other hand was restricted to 25% capacity – later lifted to just under 30% through an exemption by the NSW government.

River hasn’t been the only artist to raise questions. “Did the music community get lost in the numbers game?” the industry magazine Industry Observer asked  after 30,000 people flooded the Gabba in Queensland for the AFL grand final in October, followed by 50,000 football fans pouring into Suncorp Stadium for the State of Origin decider in November.

Singer-songwriter Amy Shark , rock band Powderfinger and the Church guitarist Ian Haug also see a double-standard.

“Is there a magical reason that differentiates how Covid is spread between rugby fans and music fans?” asked electronic duo Peking Duk.

Are their concerns justified? Or is it a bit more complicated?

Different rules for different folk?

The issue is, on the face of it, a simple numbers game about how many people you can pack into a confined space without risking a further wave of of the virus, regardless of whether that crowd is cheering on a football team or a rock band.

But only to a point.

Take NSW, where the rules depend largely on whether a venue is classified as an indoor or outdoor stadium.

NSW’s indoor-outdoor rules explain why the NRL grand final at the ANZ stadium – which is classified as outdoor – was allowed to reach 50% capacity under the previous restrictions, while the Great Southern Nights concert at the Qudos Bank arena – considered indoor – was capped at 25%.

As of December, NSW outdoor entertainment venues, be they for sporting or cultural pursuits, can have 100% capacity for fixed seating, and indoor major recreation facilities can sell tickets for only 75% seating capacity.

If a music promoter was confident it could sell 83,500 tickets to the outdoor ANZ Stadium, there would be nothing preventing the concert from going ahead at full capacity. And this is what the Australian promoter of next year’s Guns N’Roses tour, TEG Dainty, has done, placing 83,500 ticket on sale for its 14 November concert at the venue.

But the 75% rule applies to Qudos Bank Arena, which has capacity for only 21,000 people. The Sydney Kings versus Illawarra Hawks basketball game there on 20 December will have fewer than 16,000 attending.

Not everything happens in a stadium

It is outside the outdoor major recreation facilities framework where the NSW rules start to appear erratic.

“Most live music events happen outside a stadium context – from large parks to vineyards,” Live Performance Australia’s chief executive Evelyn Richardson said.

“It’s just not cost-effective for most [live music acts] to book the large stadiums, but the rules continue to be far more restrictive for alternative outdoor venues … There doesn’t seem to be much logic behind it.”

At the time of writing, an outdoor event outside a stadium setting is capped at 5,000 people in NSW.

This means the traditional Carols in the Domain has had to be reimagined as a largely televised event, yet three weeks later up to 80,000 soccer fans will be allowed to flood into ANZ Stadium for the Sydney FC v Wanderers FC match.

In Victoria, both indoor and outdoor seated entertainment venues can now open for up to 75% of capacity, but with no more than 1,000 people.

Yet Victorian health authorities recently granted a special exemption for up to 30,000 people to attend the Boxing Day Test (India v Australia) at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.

Any outdoor live music event in Victoria over the summer wanting to sell more than 1,000 tickets will have to seek an exemption requiring approval from the chief health officer and the ministerial taskforce, including three government state ministers: health, police and major events.

In South Australia, more than 25,000 spectators are expected to be allowed into the first India v Australia Test at the Adelaide Oval on Thursday.

Yet the Botanic Park has been deemed too risky to allow the Womadelaide four-day music festival to go ahead as usual in March. It has been reduced to a single stage with individually reserved seats in King Rodney Park, with a cap of just 6,000 people per concert.

Then there is the issue of singing.

“We’ve all been told that singing is a Covid-19 health risk, but they’re still singing the national anthem before most large sporting events,” Richardson said.

Live music followers have said the differences between gigs and sporting matches make them feel hard done by.

“As we move forwards into 2021 and governments further lift restrictions across the country, we would like to see alignment between sport and cultural settings,” Richardson said.

“All events require Covid-safe plans and our industry has developed robust guidelines to support our reactivation.

“Ironing out these anomalies will greatly assist the industry in getting our shows back on stage and our people back to work.”