Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. These are the main stories on Saturday 4 April.

Two more deaths as cases exceed 5,500

The number of cases in Australia reached 5,544 on Saturday and the death toll rose to 30. A woman in her 70s died in hospital in Victoria on Friday night and a man in his 80s died at the Canberra Hospital in the ACT on Saturday. NSW recorded an additional 104 cases, Victoria recorded 30 new cases and Western Australia 14, nine of which are Western Australian and five linked to the Artania cruise ship. NSW Health said on Saturday that 110 people in quarantine in Sydney hotels had been tested for coronavirus after showing symptoms. They were expected to receive their results on Saturday.

Masks still not recommended for Australian public

The deputy chief health officer, Paul Kelly, advised the wider public against wearing face masks, in part due to supply constraints, and also because "incorrect use can actually make it more dangerous". He said that authorities were continuing to look at mask use and advice may change in the future.

Largest peacetime maritime operation in Sydney Harbour

New South Wales police conducted the largest maritime operation in Sydney Harbour outside of wartime to move crew and supplies between a series of stranded cruise ships before they depart Australian waters. Guardian Australia understands crew members on four Royal Caribbean ships - Celebrity Solstice, Ovation of the Seas, Voyager of the Seas and Spectrum of the Seas - are being sorted into groups according to their country of origin before the ships depart Australian waters. Crew members have expressed concerns that the effect of the transfers will be to spread the contagion across several ships.

Brad Hazzard called to resign over Ruby Princess disaster

The New South Wales health minister has defended health officials after leaked emails showed the doctor on board the Ruby Princess told authorities on 18 March that people who had presented at the onboard medical clinic with flu-like symptoms had tested negative for influenza. The next day, 2,700 passengers were allowed to disembark and make their way home before test swabs had been analysed by state health authorities. NSW Labor leader Jodi McKay has described the incident as one of the most significant health failures in the state's history and called on Hazzard to stand down.

Changes for temporary visa holders

Changes have been made to some temporary visas to support essential industries during the coronavirus pandemic. International students  working in aged care, as nurses and in supermarkets have had the amount of hours they can work extended to support critical sectors. New Zealanders who are on 444 visas and arrived before 26 February 2001 will have access to welfare payments and the jobkeeper payment. Temporary skilled visa holders who have been stood down, but not laid off, will maintain their visa validity and businesses will have the opportunity to extend their visa as per normal arrangements. They will also be able to access up to $10,000 superannuation this financial year.

In other changes, working holiday makers who work in agriculture or food processing will be exempt from the six-month work limitation with the one employer and eligible for a further visa to keep working in these critical sectors and Seasonal Worker Programme and Pacific Labour Scheme workers can extend their stay for up to 12 months to work for approved employers.

CSIRO puts $220m towards upgrade of biosecurity research facility

Australia's national science agency CSIRO says zoonotic diseases - diseases which pass from animals to humans such as Covid-19 and Sars - now account for almost 75% of human infectious diseases. This morning it announced $220m would be directed to upgrading its containment biosecurity research facility in Geelong , which is currently testing vaccines to combat Covid-19. The facility's rapid work on the disease has also been supported by a further $10m in funding from the government.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers                                      •Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines•Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?•Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions•Full Story podcast: when is it legal to leave your home?•Is Australia flattening the coronavirus curve? Look at the charts...•Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics•Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register•Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home•Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?•Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted•What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?•Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?•How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?•Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?•How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus•Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines

Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?

Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions

Full Story podcast: when is it legal to leave your home?

Is Australia flattening the coronavirus curve? Look at the charts...

Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics

Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register

Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home

Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?

Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted

What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?

Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?

How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?

Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?

How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus

Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.