block-time published-time 11.50pm GMT

International virus sleuths expected to go to China soon: WHO

The World Health Organization said Monday it had received reassurances from Beijing that international experts would soon be able to travel to China to help investigate the animal origins of Covid-19, AFP reports.

“We fully expect and have reassurances from our Chinese government colleagues that the trip to the field... will be facilitated, and as soon as possible,” WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan told a virtual press briefing.

“We need to be able to have the international team join our Chinese colleagues... and look at the results and the outcomes of (their) studies and verify the data on the ground,” he said.

Ryan hailed the “tremendous amount of scientific investigation” done by the Chinese, but said international experts needed to go in “in order that the international community can be reassured about the quality of the science.”

“This is extremely important, and we are continuing to expect that that be the case.”

The blocked entrance to Huanan seafood market, where the coronavirus that can causes Covid-19 is believed to have first surfaced, in Wuhan. Photograph: Aly Song/Reuters

The WHO has for months been working to send a team of international experts, including epidemiologists and animal health specialists, to China to help probe the animal origin of the novel coronavirus pandemic and how the virus first crossed over to humans.

The UN health agency sent an advance team to Beijing in July to lay the groundwork for the international probe, but it has remained unclear when the larger team of scientists would be able to travel to China to begin epidemiological studies to try to identify the first human cases and their source of infection.

Scientists initially believed the killer virus jumped from animals to humans at a market selling exotic animals for meat in the city of Wuhan, where the virus was first detected late last year.

But experts now think the market may not have been the origin of the outbreak, but rather a place where it was amplified.

block-time published-time 11.33pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to our rolling live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.

My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest global updates for the next few hours.

If you would like to say Hi, I’m on Twitterhere.

The World Health Organization said Monday it had received reassurances from Beijing that international experts would soon be able to travel to China to help investigate the animal origins of Covid-19.

“We fully expect and have reassurances from our Chinese government colleagues that the trip to the field... will be facilitated, and as soon as possible,” WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan told a virtual press briefing.

“We need to be able to have the international team join our Chinese colleagues... and look at the results and the outcomes of (their) studies and verify the data on the ground,” he said.

Meanwhile the US suffered more than 10,000 deaths in the last seven days, according to Johns Hopkins. The death toll was 10,575.

Here are the other key developments from the last few hours:

•Daily Covid-19 cases in France at near two-month low. France reported 4,452 new Covid-19 infections on Monday, the lowest daily tally since 28 September, suggesting a second national lockdown is having an impact.•UK aims to inoculate those most at risk from Covid by Easter. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said he hoped almost all Britons at high risk from Covid-19 would be vaccinated against the disease by Easter. He also said people will not be forced to have vaccinations against Covid-19.•Spain’s king self-isolating after virus contact. Spain’s King Felipe VI has started 10 days of quarantine after coming into close contact with someone who later tested positive for Covid-19, the palace said.•Pope says anti-maskers stuck in ‘their own little world of interests’. Pope Francis has12 taken aim at protests against coronavirus restrictions , contrasting them with the “healthy indignation” seen in demonstrations against racism after the death of George Floyd.•New infections in Gaza spiralling out of control. The mounting number of coronavirus infections in densely populated Gaza is spinning out of control, Palestinian health officials warned. Bassem Naim, a senior Hamas official, said the health ministry “expects the worst if the epidemiological situation remains the same” citing “a health system at the end of its rope”, “severe drug shortages” and “extreme overcrowding”.

Daily Covid-19 cases in France at near two-month low. France reported 4,452 new Covid-19 infections on Monday, the lowest daily tally since 28 September, suggesting a second national lockdown is having an impact.

UK aims to inoculate those most at risk from Covid by Easter. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said he hoped almost all Britons at high risk from Covid-19 would be vaccinated against the disease by Easter. He also said people will not be forced to have vaccinations against Covid-19.

Spain’s king self-isolating after virus contact. Spain’s King Felipe VI has started 10 days of quarantine after coming into close contact with someone who later tested positive for Covid-19, the palace said.

Pope says anti-maskers stuck in ‘their own little world of interests’. Pope Francis has12 taken aim at protests against coronavirus restrictions , contrasting them with the “healthy indignation” seen in demonstrations against racism after the death of George Floyd.

New infections in Gaza spiralling out of control. The mounting number of coronavirus infections in densely populated Gaza is spinning out of control, Palestinian health officials warned. Bassem Naim, a senior Hamas official, said the health ministry “expects the worst if the epidemiological situation remains the same” citing “a health system at the end of its rope”, “severe drug shortages” and “extreme overcrowding”.