block-time published-time 6.54pm BST



Evening summary  •There have been a further 38 deaths from coronavirus in the UK, according to the latest figures from the Department of Health and Social Care, taking the total to 41,736.•Senior Tory MPs have publicly urged Boris Johnson to cut the 2 metre distancing rule in England with immediate effect, in interventions underling the scale of discontent about the issue in his party. Pubs, restaurants and hairdressers across the country have been slated to reopen on 4 July, but they do not yet know whether they will have to abide by the 2 metre rule at all times - something many say would mean they will not be viable businesses. Foreign secretary Dominic Raab told the daily Downing Street press conference that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule, in comments likely to be seen as hint that the regulation could be relaxed soon.•The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, has condemned Boris Johnson's plan for a government commission to examine racial inequalities as "written on the back of a fag packet" and intended as a distraction from the government's lack of action over the issue. Lammy accused the prime minister of primarily seeking a culture war by announcing the plan in a comment piece for the Daily Telegraph, which was devoted mainly to reiterating his opposition to removing statues of historical figures.•Boris Johnson has received a boost to plans to secure a trade deal with the European Union by the end of the summer after EU leaders agreed to strive to find early common ground on trade and security to avoid unnecessary economic chaos next year. But there were immediate signs of tensions on the horizon with the president of the EU council, Charles Michel, warning in tweets that the EU would not accept a "pig in the poke" and it would "never accept an agreement that goes against interests of the union".•Long queues of shoppers formed outside some stores around England on the first day that non-essential shops were allowed to reopen for business since the coronavirus lockdown was imposed. Figures showed that between 8am and midday footfall on England's high streets was up by 51.7% on last Monday, while across all retail destinations there were 41.7% more shoppers as shopping centres saw a smaller rise.

There have been a further 38 deaths from coronavirus in the UK, according to the latest figures from the Department of Health and Social Care, taking the total to 41,736.

Senior Tory MPs have publicly urged Boris Johnson to cut the 2 metre distancing rule in England with immediate effect, in interventions underling the scale of discontent about the issue in his party. Pubs, restaurants and hairdressers across the country have been slated to reopen on 4 July, but they do not yet know whether they will have to abide by the 2 metre rule at all times - something many say would mean they will not be viable businesses. Foreign secretary Dominic Raab told the daily Downing Street press conference that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule, in comments likely to be seen as hint that the regulation could be relaxed soon.

The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, has condemned Boris Johnson's plan for a government commission to examine racial inequalities as "written on the back of a fag packet" and intended as a distraction from the government's lack of action over the issue. Lammy accused the prime minister of primarily seeking a culture war by announcing the plan in a comment piece for the Daily Telegraph, which was devoted mainly to reiterating his opposition to removing statues of historical figures.

Boris Johnson has received a boost to plans to secure a trade deal with the European Union by the end of the summer after EU leaders agreed to strive to find early common ground on trade and security to avoid unnecessary economic chaos next year. But there were immediate signs of tensions on the horizon with the president of the EU council, Charles Michel, warning in tweets that the EU would not accept a "pig in the poke" and it would "never accept an agreement that goes against interests of the union".

Long queues of shoppers formed outside some stores around England on the first day that non-essential shops were allowed to reopen for business since the coronavirus lockdown was imposed. Figures showed that between 8am and midday footfall on England's high streets was up by 51.7% on last Monday, while across all retail destinations there were 41.7% more shoppers as shopping centres saw a smaller rise.



That's it from us for today. Thanks for reading.

block-time published-time 6.38pm BST

England will experience a "summer of rave" not seen since 1989 because the government has failed to give "socially starved" young people any clarity on when they can start partying again legally, clubbing experts have warned.

The Guardian's Helen Pidd reports that police forces across England have been struggling to keep up with an explosion of illicit parties in motorway underpasses, parks and industrial estates since Boris Johnson relaxed lockdown restrictions last month.

Related:  Summer of illegal raves expected in England despite coronavirus crisis

Advertised on Snapchat and Instagram, their locations are revealed at the 11th hour by WhatsApp messages, with word quickly spreading as people livestream the event on social media, dropping virtual "pins" on Google Maps for their friends to join them.

Most proceed peacefully, if in contravention of social distancing guidelines. But thousands of people attended two raves in Greater Manchester at the weekend, leaving one man dead of a suspected drugs overdose, one woman reporting a rape, and three separate reported stabbings.

Mess left behind following a rave at Daisy Nook Park in Manchester on Saturday night. Photograph: George Honeybee @georgiadaisy98/PA

block-time published-time 6.25pm BST

The number of confirmed cases of Covid-19 within the prison estate in England and Wales continues to rise, Ministry of Justice figures show.

As at 5pm on Sunday, 500 prisoners had tested positive for the coronavirus across 80 prisons, an increase of 1.6%, while there were 965 infected prison staff across 105 prisons, an rise of just 0.4%.

There are around 79,700 prisoners across 117 prisons in England and Wales, and around 33,000 staff working in public sector prisons.

Figures published in the Guardian on Monday revealed more than 1,000 prisoners were released into homelessness at the height of the coronavirus pandemic in England and Wales.

block-time published-time 5.57pm BST

Raab says nothing 'magic' about two-metre rule in fresh hint it will be relaxed

Here are the main points from Dominic Raab 's press conference.

•Raab, the foreign secretary, said that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule. In comments that will be seen as a strong hint that the review launched by No 10 will lead to the rule being relaxed at some point fairly soon, he said:

Raab, the foreign secretary, said that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule. In comments that will be seen as a strong hint that the review launched by No 10 will lead to the rule being relaxed at some point fairly soon, he said:

There's no magic to one or other particular measure, there will be different levels of risk whether it's at two metres, one-and-a-half metres or one metre. As we bring the incidence and the transmission rate down, depending on the setting, it's something that can be looked at. We are still going to make sure that all of the policy judgments that we rightly as politicians take and are accountable for are underpinned by the science.

And later he said:

The science isn't set in stone. It is constantly evolving. So it is fluid. That's why we need to constantly monitor it.

When  Edward Argar, the health minister, answered a Commons urgent question on this earlier, many Tory MPs called for the two-metre rule to be relaxed, with some saying that decision should be taken immediately.

•Raab defended the government's decision to set up a new review looking at racism, saying that the commission being launched would set a "positive agenda for change" and lead to specific policy recommendations.•He defended the government's decision to withhold parts of a Public Health England report looking at why BAME people are disproportionately at risk of dying from coronavirus. Asked why the government was not publishing this if it was serious about addressing inequalities, he said it was a sensitive issue and that ministers wanted to get it right. He said:

Raab defended the government's decision to set up a new review looking at racism, saying that the commission being launched would set a "positive agenda for change" and lead to specific policy recommendations.

He defended the government's decision to withhold parts of a Public Health England report looking at why BAME people are disproportionately at risk of dying from coronavirus. Asked why the government was not publishing this if it was serious about addressing inequalities, he said it was a sensitive issue and that ministers wanted to get it right. He said:

We do want to get to the bottom of that, we've commissioned more research on it. I think you'd agree that needs to be handled very sensitively but we are making sure we get to the bottom of it and that we've got a clear view before we advise the public...

We want to make sure we've got a clearer understanding so we can communicate it with practical advice for those involved, precisely because it is a very sensitive issue and we want to give clear and reassuring guidance and not to have different people saying different things.

We will release as much evidence as we can as soon as we practically can.

Dominic Raab at the press conference. Photograph: Pippa Fowles/10 Downing Street/AFP/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.01pm BST

block-time published-time 5.55pm BST

YouGov has published some fresh polling this afternoon. It suggests that Sir Keir Starmer has drawn level with Boris Johnson on who would make the best prime minister.

enltrJust six weeks in as Labour leader, Keir Starmer has pulled level with Boris Johnson on our best PM question. Starmer 33% (+1) Johnson 33% (-4) Only twice did Jeremy Corbyn score more highly on this measure than Starmer has https://t.co/Ok6U28zHre           pic.twitter.com/wg80r1XzM2

- YouGov (@YouGov) June 15, 2020

But the Conservatives still have a significant lead over Labour in voting intention, the poll suggests.

enltrLatest Westminster voting intention (11-12 Jun) Con - 45% Lab - 37% Lib Dem - 6% SNP - 5% Green - 4% https://t.co/Ok6U28zHre           pic.twitter.com/YxvtFTvxZN

- YouGov (@YouGov) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 5.42pm BST

Pupils can attend 'check-in' sessions at schools, says government

Secondary schools in England have been told they can invite pupils in for one face-to-face meeting ahead of the summer holidays to check on well-being and progress since lockdown.

The new guidance from the Department for Education comes as pupils in years 10 and 12 who are preparing to sit GCSEs and A-levels next summer begin to return to school this week for limited contact.

The DfE has also confirmed that primary schools can use flexibility to admit more children, in addition to the year groups already allowed back to school, if they have capacity to do so.

The government is under pressure to get more children back into school before the summer holidays amid growing evidence of patchy provision of lessons at home and fears that the attainment gap will widen.

Education secretary Gavin Williamson said: "I want to make sure as many pupils as possible can get back into the classroom and be reunited with their friends and teachers before summer, to support their wellbeing and education."

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, welcomed the idea of a "check-in" session but added: "These changes do not make up for the lack of a long-term, strategic plan for education for the coming months."

block-time published-time 5.30pm BST

Q: When the PM says you need to get infection rates down before the two-metre rule can be relaxed, what does he mean?

Raab says two metres will applies for now. The PM has launched a review. The government will say more than, he says.

Q: What assurances can you give to people in the hospital sector that they will be able to reopen?

Raab says 4 July was always the earliest possible date for reopening. It has to be done in safest possible way, he says.

And that's it. The press conference is over.

block-time published-time 5.27pm BST

Q: In April you said it would not be business as usual with China after coronavirus. How strongly do you take warnings about the danger China could do to the UK economy?

Raab says he thinks his comment may have been over-interpreted. He says it is not necessarily business as usual with any country.

He says they want a balanced approach to China.

Q: When will we see the results of the Huawei review?

Raab says that will be when the full data is back.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.05pm BST

block-time published-time 5.27pm BST

BLM supporter 'very best of Britain', says Patel

Back in the Commons, Priti Patel has been paying tribute to Patrick Hutchinson, the Black Lives Matter demonstrator who was photographed carrying a counter-protester to safety during Saturday's protests in London.

She said:

I think... all members of the house will join me in saying he is the very best of Britain. Our country needs more people like him and his actions this weekend spoke volumes and I pay tribute to him and the way in which he conducted himself and the way in which he stepped in.

Hutchinson spoke to Channel 4 news last night and his comments are worth a read.

Related:  BLM supporter speaks out after carrying counter-protester to safety

block-time published-time 5.24pm BST

Q: Are you taking less notice of the science?

Raab says the science is evolving.

Science and medical experts will continue to attend the press conferences, he says.

But he says other experts will be represented too.

block-time published-time 5.22pm BST

Q: Your colleague Nusrat Ghani said today that you don't need any more BME reviews. You just need to implement what has been recommended already.

enltrAnother commission? Ok, it's welcome. But we have the data on obstacles, prejudice and inequalities. We just need to crack on with real practical solutions which will have a positive impact. pic.twitter.com/pq946ZVxnQ

- Nus Ghani MP (@Nus_Ghani) June 15, 2020

Raab  says the commission is being set up to set a new direction.

But he stressed that a lot of progress has already been made.

He says this commission will come up with actual policies.

Q: Aren't you just kicking the can down the road?

Raab says the government is already following up on things like the Lammy review. (See 1.28pm.)

And he says there is some encouraging Ipsos MORI polling out on this today.

enltrNew survey on race and inequality in Britain: I would be happy for my child to marry someone from another ethnic group (% strongly agree) Jun 2020: 70% Jan 2008: 41% Source: https://t.co/iP4hlTXY1           pic.twitter.com/JUe2yu1X5w

- Ipsos MORI (@IpsosMORI) June 15, 2020

Q: Do you accept that changing the two-metre rule involves a trade-off between safety and business?

Raab says there is nothing absolute about two metres. And he says the scientific evidence is constantly evolving

block-time published-time 5.17pm BST

Q: Do you agree that the way British Airways is treating its workers is a disgrace?

Raab says firms are going through a very difficult time. He would urge them to save as many jobs as possible.

Q: What help is the government offering?

Raab says it has offered a lot of help already. He says his department, the Foreign Office, spent £75m on a charter flight regime that helped airlines.

Q: But what are you doing for British Airways?

Raab says the chancellor is looking at all vulnerable sectors.

block-time published-time 5.14pm BST

Q: [From the BBC's Mark Easton] Instead of announcing a new disparities review, why doesn't the government publish the material from the Public Health England review that was suppressed?

Raab says he does not accept this is just another review. He says the government is making progress on the recommendations from past reviews.

Q: But there are leaks from the report explaining why BAME people are dying more frequently from coronavirus?

Raab says it is a sensitive topic. When the government can release further information, it will do so.

block-time published-time 5.12pm BST

Q: What will the government do to help key workers with childcare over the summer? The normal options - summer camps, grandparents and holidays abroad - aren't available?

Raab says that is a good question. But he says the government will fund summer activities.

block-time published-time 5.10pm BST

Raab is now taking the first question, from Olly in Newcastle.

Q: When will the alert level fall to one, or close to one?

Raab says it is hard to say. They are trying to push it down. But the alert level is not up to politicians, he says.

block-time published-time 5.09pm BST

And here is the slide with the death figures.

Death rates Photograph: No 10

block-time published-time 5.09pm BST

Raab is now presenting the slides.

Here are the figures for tests and news cases.

Testing and new case figures Photograph: No 10      Hospital figures Photograph: No 10

block-time published-time 5.07pm BST

Raab says the government is monitoring the impact of its changes carefully. There is a risk of a second spike, he says.

enltrDominic Raab: "We can't just pretend that coronavirus has gone away or we've eliminated the virus. And we know from the science and also from what we're seeing from international experience, that there is a risk of a second spike, if we're not very careful."

- Matt Honeycombe-Foster (@matt_hfoster) June 15, 2020

He says the government will not move to the next stage before 4 July.

block-time published-time 5.06pm BST

Nick Thomas-Symonds says that we need to see "deeds not words" and that, by launching an inquiry into racism and inequality and failing to act now, "the prime minister just isn't offering the leadership required".

Priti Patel responds that the Black Lives Matter movement and the points they have been making are "important and essential".

She says the aim of the commission is to set out a "positive agenda for change" and that all MPs should welcome that.

block-time published-time 5.04pm BST

Dominic Raab's press conference

Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary and first secretary of state, is taking the UK government press conference.

He summarises the latest moves to ease the lockdown coming into force in England. These are modest and careful steps, he says.

block-time published-time 5.03pm BST

UK records a further 38 deaths

The Department of Health and Social Care has released the latest headline UK death figures. There have been a further 38 deaths, taking the total to 41,736.

This is the figure for people who have tested positive for coronavirus and died. It is not the total for all coronavirus deaths because thousands of people have died from coronavirus without having had a test, ONS figures suggest.

enltrAs of 9am 15 June, there have been 6,866,481 tests, with 93,163 tests on 14 June. 296,857 people have tested positive. As of 5pm on 14 June, of those tested positive for coronavirus, across all settings, 41,736 have sadly died. More info: ?? https://t.co/xXnL3FU15k           pic.twitter.com/blM1e3HgZj

- Department of Health and Social Care (@DHSCgovuk) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 5.01pm BST

Labour's shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds says that this weekend we were "reminded once again" about the professionalism of our front line workers.

He says he was appalled to see the images of a man urinating by the memorial to PC Keith Palmer.

On the issue of damage to memorials, he says:

The prime minister should be clear that we will not allow him to move the focus from the action to address the discrimination people face now. And let us be clear... there should be no attempt to draw comparisons between those intent on violence this weekend and the legitimate cause of the Black Lives Matter campaigners, who have brought attention to the impact that racism and inequality continue to have both here in the UK and across the world.

Nick Thomas-Symonds Photograph: Parliament TV

block-time published-time 4.54pm BST

Patel says she wants to see "these vicious individuals" brought to justice.

She says that large gatherings of people remain unlawful and that she urges people not to attend any future protests to "protect themselves and their loved ones" from the coronavirus.

block-time published-time 4.52pm BST

In total, at least 100 officers have now been injured, says Patel. And at least 280 arrests have been made. "Many of the so-called protesters came with the deliberate intent of causing harm to those around them and to police officers".

Patel says hooliganism is "utterly indefensible". She says that the image of the man desecrating the memorial to PC Keith Palmer, who made the "ultimate sacrifice" during a terror attack, was "the most abhorrent".

block-time published-time 4.49pm BST

Patel says that over 210,000 have attended demonstrations across the country following the death of George Floyd. She says that there were at least 160 separate protests this weekend, the vast majority of which passed peacefully.

But counter demonstrations sparked ugly scenes. This Saturday, 2,000 people staged counter-protests in Westminster with eruptions of violence throughout the day. Racists and far-right hooligans clashed with the police and fights broke out. Smoke bombs, glass bottles were lobbed at the police in shameful scenes. 38 police officers were hurt across the country this weekend, as they were kicked, punched or pelted with missiles.

block-time published-time 4.44pm BST

The home secretary, Priti Patel, is giving a statement to the Commons on the violence in central London this weekend.

She says she was "saddened and sickened by the far-right thugs" who came to London on "a so-called mission" to protect our heritage. They failed to understand that "our heritage is founded on a set of shared values - tolerance, respect for people and property, and adherence to the rule of law", she says.

There is no place for their sickening conduct and hate in our society. They were violent. They were aggressive and abusive towards police officers. they were patently racist.

Priti Patel. Photograph: Parliament TV

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.48pm BST

block-time published-time 4.41pm BST

A sign at the giraffe enclosure in London Zoo, which reopened today. Photograph: Neil Hall/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.09pm BST

block-time published-time 4.38pm BST

Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at the University of Oxford, has told the House of Lords science and technology committee he would be surprised if the UK avoided a second coronavirus wave. The PA Media news agency has his comments:

I think it is possible that we might not have a second wave. But I think given the fact that the lockdown has now been largely released, we're now back in action, and we have still - pretty rapidly declining - but a pretty reasonable level of infections in the community, I would be very surprised if we avoided the second wave.

I think the real question is, are we going to have a number of single outbursts around the country and then a second wave, or are we going to just get a second wave and when will that be?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.43pm BST

block-time published-time 4.37pm BST

This is from David Henig, the British trade specialist and former civil servant who heads the UK trade policy project at the European Centre for International Political Economy, on Boris Johnson suggesting July could be a deadline in the talks process. (See 4.32pm.)

enltrThat instinct to say something silly about EU talks for domestic consumption is still there. Particularly as negotiators already agreed to a round in talks in August. https://t.co/e12bxWcXdt

- David Henig (@DavidHenigUK) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 4.32pm BST

Johnson says he wants breakthrough in UK-EU trade talks by end of July

And here is the quote from the clip Boris Johnson recorded for broadcasters after his talks with the EU where he said he would like to set the end of July as a deadline for getting a breakthrough in the post-Brexit trade talks. (See 3.53pm.) He said:

What we already said today is the faster we can do this the better, we see no reason why you shouldn't get that done in July.

The issue is very clear, we fought an election based on these ideas, the manifesto was very clear.

I certainly don't want to see it going on to the autumn/winter as I think perhaps in Brussels they would like.

Earlier this year Downing Street effectively set June as its deadline for a breakthrough, saying that if the broad outline of a deal was not clear by then, it could walk away and prepare to trade with the EU on WTO terms (ie, opt for a "no-deal" Brexit) from the end of the transition in December. The coronavirus crisis made that deadline unrealistic. Johnson now seems to be reviving it for the end of July, although from his words it is not clear how firm an ultimatum this actually is.

block-time published-time 4.29pm BST

Care homes have been ordered to destroy a batch of faulty Covid-19 test kits after the Department of Health and Social Care discovered the swabs could break off while being used to gather samples from residents' tonsils and noses.

Care home managers were told on Sunday not to use the tests because they had "brittle stems at risk of snapping". The kits were manufactured by Citotest, a company based in China, and were distributed by the government's Covid-19 care home testing programme. It is tasked with providing tests for all staff and residents in care settings, not just people displaying symptoms.

The affected batch should be destroyed or kept in a safe area clearly marked that they should not be used, officials said, adding the problem emerged on Saturday and they were working as quickly as possible to resolve it.

You can read the full story from the Guardian's social affairs correspondent Robert Booth here -

Related:  DHSC tells care homes to destroy batch of Covid-19 tests over safety fears

block-time published-time 4.17pm BST

In the Commons Labour's Richard Burgon says the push from Tory MPs to replace the 2-metre rule with a 1-metre one is an example of the party putting profits ahead of public safety.

Edward Argar, the health minister, says the government is holding a review so it can decide what policy is best.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.26pm BST

block-time published-time 4.13pm BST

Johnson claims UK and EU aren't 'that far apart' in trade talks

Boris Johnson has said that "a bit of oomph" is needed to conclude the UK-EU talks on a post-Brexit trade talks. Speaking from Downing Street, he said:

It's very clear what the UK needs... We can't have the involvement of the European court of justice in this country; we can't have a system whereby we continue to have to obey EU law even when we're out of the EU and we've got to get a great deal for our fish...

It's very clear what we need to achieve, I don't think we're actually that far apart, but what we need now is to see a bit of oomph in the negotiations.

block-time published-time 4.11pm BST

And in the Commons Tobias Ellwood, a Conservative, says 1 metre is the right distance, and now is the right time to announce it.

Argar says Ellwood is making a powerful case. But he says Ellwood must await the outcome of the review.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.26pm BST

block-time published-time 4.10pm BST

More than 1,000 prisoners were released into homelessness at the height of the coronavirus pandemic in England and Wales, figures show, prompting the government to increase funding for accommodation for prison leavers.

Figures released to the Labour MP Lyn Brown - the shadow minister for prisons and probation - show 840 men, 89 women and 85 young adults aged 18 to 24 were released into rough sleeping or other forms of homelessness between 23 March, when the lockdown was imposed, and 30 April.

A further 1,209 men, women and young adults were released with unknown circumstances for accommodation in the same period.

You can read the full story from the Guardian's home affairs correspondent Jamie Grierson here -

Related:  Over 1,000 prison leavers left homeless amid pandemic, MoJ figures show

block-time published-time 4.05pm BST

In the Commons John Redwood, a Conservative, says the government should announce the reduction of the 2-metre rule to a 1-metre rule today. That would help business, he says.

Argar  says he hears what Redwood is saying, but that it is important to carry out a proper review.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.26pm BST

block-time published-time 4.02pm BST

In the Commons the Conservative MP Bob Stewart asks, if the reproduction number is falling, why any social distancing is needed at all.

Argar  says R is still close to 1. He says as it falls, the government will be able to relax lockdown measures.

block-time published-time 3.53pm BST

From ITV's Paul Brand

enltrBREAKING: Boris Johnson says the UK's cut-off date for a Brexit deal is July. "I certainly don't want to see it going on until the autumn/winter as perhaps in Brussels they would like. I don't see any point in that." That allows just 6 weeks to reach a trade deal.

- Paul Brand (@PaulBrandITV) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 3.51pm BST

In the Commons  Iain Duncan Smith, the former Conservative leader, says it could be six weeks (from the liaison committee) before we get the results of this review on the 2-metre rule, even though the facts have not changed. He says the advisers are divided. Government must take a decision, he says. He says livelihoods depend on this.

(Duncan Smith favours a relaxation of the rule.)

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56pm BST

block-time published-time 3.47pm BST

This is intriguing. Boris Johnson is planning to make a Commons statement on "global Britain" tomorrow.

enltrTwo Statements tomorrow (Tuesday): 1. Global Britain - @BorisJohnson /            @Keir_Starmer2. UK-EU negotiations update -            @michaelgove /            @RachelReevesMP

- Labour Whips (@labourwhips) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 3.44pm BST

Review of 2-metre rule will conclude 'as quickly as possible', health minister tells MPs

Greg Clark, the Conservative MP who chairs the science committee, says Boris Johnson told the liaison committee three weeks ago that the government would review the 2-metre rule before today's opening of non-essential shops. And he puts a string of questions to Argar.

Argar  says the review will consider the wider impact of the rule. Economists will contribute, he says.

He says work has been under way on this for some time.

Businesses need guidance as early as possible, he admits.

Argar says it is important that this is done "as quickly as possible".

As for why different countries have different rules, Argar says there is no fixed rule.

In the UK Sage says a 1-metre rule could lead to a tenfold increase in risk.

He says scientists advise. But ultimately ministers will decide, he says.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.47pm BST

block-time published-time 3.39pm BST

Urgent question on 2-metre rule

In the Commons Edward Argar, the health minister, is responding to the urgent question on the 2-metre rule.

He says the government is reviewing the rule. He summarises how that review will work, using almost the same language as that used by Downing Street at its lobby briefing. (See 1.28pm.)

He says he understands why there is so much interest in this. But unless and until the review concludes otherwise, the 2-metre rule stays, he says.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm BST

block-time published-time 3.36pm BST

EU won't 'buy a pig in a poke' in post-Brexit trade talks, says European council president

And this is from Charles Michel, the president of the European council, on the UK-EU talks about the post-Brexit trade negotiations.

He says the EU will not be willing to "buy a pig in a poke". He means Brussels won't sign up to a deal at all costs.

(Or "no deal is better than a bad deal", as someone else once said.)

enltrEU-UK meeting with @vonderleyen           @EP_President &            @BorisJohnsonA broad & ambitious agreement, in line with            #EUCO guidelines, is in our mutual interest. Ready to put a tiger in the tank but not to buy a pig in a poke. Level playing field is essential.            https://t.co/uniMjyXvfb

- Charles Michel (@eucopresident) June 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.51pm BST

block-time published-time 3.19pm BST

A visitor look at the penguins at Chester Zoo after it reopened today. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA

block-time published-time 2.58pm BST

EU and UK agree need for 'new momentum' in post-Brexit trade talks

The EU has just issued the joint UK-EU statement about its meeting with Boris Johnson, my colleague Jennifer Rankin reports.

Both sides agreed that "new momentum" was needed in the post-Brexit trade talks, the statement says. However, the statement does not say much about what might provide this "new momentum". Both sides have already agreed a timetable for talks over the summer. (See 1.37pm.) The statement says both sides want "an early understanding" on the principles behind any potential agreement, but it does not mention a deadline. It has been reported that the UK would like the end of August as a deadline, while the EU is holding out for the end of October.

The EU statement also shows Brussels is confirming that the transition period will end on 31 December.

enltrEU-UK statement after Boris Johnson's meeting with three EU leaders: both sides agreed that "new momentum was required". pic.twitter.com/FoYpnOhzkz

- Jennifer Rankin (@JenniferMerode) June 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.58pm BST

block-time published-time 2.42pm BST

Nicola Sturgeon has denied suggestions that school children in Scotland could still be learning at home in a year's time, and insisted the Scottish government wanted schools to resume full-time teaching as soon as possible.

The first minister told her daily coronavirus briefing she expected Scotland's 32 councils to use "innovation and creativity" to ensure pupils had as much face-to-face learning as possible once schools reopened from 11 August onwards. She said:

It is absolutely not the case that we're planning for blended learning to last a year or anything like it. On the contrary, we don't want blended learning to last a single moment longer than is strictly necessary. [We] want young people to be back having face-to-face teaching for 100% of the school week as soon as it is feasible.

Educationalists have warned that the wholesale closure of schools has damaged the education and prospects for a generation of children; some councils warn they do not have the money or space to provide socially distanced learning

John Swinney, the Scottish education secretary, told BBC Scotland on Sunday it was "unlikely" schools would return to normal during the next school year. "We'll have to maintain the social distancing approaches for some considerable time to come," he said.

He suggested on Monday the target would be to get 50% of teaching in school from 11 August. Edinburgh council has said it planned for only a third of children to be in class once its term starts on 12 August. Swinney said that was not good enough.

Sturgeon said the Scottish government would update parents every three weeks on progress in ensuring schools would provide full timetables next term. Government officials would try to help councils struggling to find the right resources, she said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.56pm BST

block-time published-time 2.40pm BST

But there have been no further coronavirus deaths in Northern Ireland, the Department of Health in Northern Ireland has said.

block-time published-time 2.38pm BST

Public Health Wales  has recorded a further a further four coronavirus deaths, taking the total to 1,448.

block-time published-time 2.37pm BST

A zoo in Devon, Living Coasts, has announced that it will not re-open because of the forced closure due to coronavirus.

In a statement the attraction's operator, Wild Planet Trust, expressed regret and said its next stage was to find new homes for animals, which include seals and penguins. It said:

Falling visitor numbers and the forced closure of all its zoos due to Covid-19 has meant that it has had to look at its cost base and make efficiencies. After nearly 20 years of operation the site also needed substantial maintenance that the trust is no longer in a position to afford.

It added that 44 staff were at risk of redundancy.

block-time published-time 2.32pm BST

Priti Patel, the home secretary, will make a Commons statement on disorder this afternoon. It should start after 4pm, after the urgent question on the 2-metre rule.

enltrThere will also be a statement today from Home Secretary, @pritipatel on public order.

- UK House of Commons (@HouseofCommons) June 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.33pm BST

block-time published-time 2.27pm BST

England records 28 more hospital deaths

NHS England has recorded a further 28 coronavirus hospital deaths, bringing the total number of hospital deaths in England to 27,982. The full details are here.

The 28 who died were between 59 and 100 years old and all had underlying health conditions, NHS England says.

To provide a comparison, here are the equivalent NHS England figures for the last two weeks.

Monday 1 June - 108

Tuesday 2 June - 143

Wednesday 3 June - 179

Thursday 4 June - 115

Friday 5 June - 123

Saturday 6 June - 75

Sunday 7 June - 72

Monday 8 June - 59

Tuesday 9 June - 129

Wednesday 10 June - 88

Thursday 11 June - 83

Friday 12 June - 70

Saturday 13 June - 67

Sunday 14 June - 27

block-time published-time 2.07pm BST

Around 15% of prosecutions for alleged breaches of emergency coronavirus laws last month were incorrect or for offences that did not exist, the Crown Prosecution Service has admitted. In its latest review of how the repeatedly updated, health regulations are being enforced, the CPS said the legislation was correctly applied in almost 85% of cases. Out of 93 prosecutions finalised under either the Coronavirus Act or health protection regulations in May, 76 were charged correctly. All but one of the 17 erroneous prosecutions were stopped at the first court appearance, according to the CPS. Of 84 prosecutions brought under the health protection regulations, 76 were found to be correct. Prosecutors withdrew the remaining eight charges in court - four because they related to homeless people, two because Welsh regulations had been used in England and two on evidential grounds. All nine prosecutions brought under the Coronavirus Act were discontinued because there was no evidence they applied to potentially infectious people, which is what the act specifically covers.

Gregor McGill, the CPS director of legal services, said:

Continued hard work by the police and Crown Prosecution Service has improved the application and enforcement of the rules under the coronavirus legislation. Errors have significantly reduced, with all but one of the incorrect charges immediately identified and withdrawn by prosecutors in court.

The CPS will continue to review all finalised prosecutions where no fixed penalty notice was offered, as well as every case where someone disputes they have breached the Regulations, for as long as these laws remain in place.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.10pm BST

block-time published-time 1.55pm BST

The Guardian's Sarah Butler has been out in Birmingham talking to those making the most of newly re-opened shops.

Related:  'A bit of normality': Birmingham shoppers return to high street stores

Birmingham shoppers returned to the high street with many in the rest of England on Monday, as queues formed at "non-essential" retail names such as Zara, H&M, Sports Direct and Primark.

"It's good to get out and have a bit of normality. I've been coming into town fairly often and it was like a ghost town. It is a bit weird to see people again," said Simone Radway, 37, queuing to buy some cycling gear in Sports Direct in central Birmingham after a trip to the nearby Primark.

But any retailer hoping for a Christmas-style frenzy would have been disappointed. New Street station was quiet and shoppers said they had no trouble finding a parking spot. Nonetheless, Birmingham was busier than it had been for months and shoppers were prepared to queue up outside stores, all of which have to limit the number of customers under new government rules.

Shoppers queueing to get in Zara and other stores around the Bullring shopping centre in Birmingham. Photograph: Christopher Thomond/The Guardian

block-time published-time 1.43pm BST

Scottish ministers have finally been able to disclose how many people tested positive at UK government drive-through centres in Scotland, more than two months after the first centres opened.

Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said 2,343 people who used the network of drive through centres had tested positive since the first one opened at Glasgow airport on 5 April. More than 75,000 people had used the five drive through centres in Scotland at Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Inverness airports, and a college in Perth.

It has taken until now to match every test result with individual patient records because the UK and Scottish governments failed to require people using these test centres to supply their NHS numbers or postcodes until they changed the booking system in mid-May. Even then, many records still needed to be matched by hand by NHS officials.

The Guardian disclosed in May that the Welsh and Northern Irish governments had insisted that the Department of Health and Social Care changes its procedures at the start of the programme in early April, and            avoided long delays in matching up test results with people's home addresses.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.30pm BST

block-time published-time 1.37pm BST

Boris Johnson's 1.30pm video meeting with EU leaders Ursula von der Leyen, Charles Michel and David Sassoli - presidents of the commission, EU council and parliament respectively - is expected to last just one hour.

Michael Gove, Brexit negotiator David Frost and Sir Tim Barrow, the ambassador to the EU, will also attend.

Sources in London say they do not expect any "huge drama" at the meeting, a point underlined by its brevity.

The purpose of the meeting, from the UK's point of view, is to reiterate demands for a "high quality free trade agreement" such as those the EU has with other countries including Canada and Japan, said a spokesman for the prime minister.

The next five rounds of talks, which will be face to face, will take place in July and August:

•29 June (Brussels)•6 July (London)•13 July (Brussels)•20 July (London)•17 August (Brussels)

29 June (Brussels)

6 July (London)

13 July (Brussels)

20 July (London)

17 August (Brussels)

There is also an agreement for further talks in September, "unless otherwise agreed between the parties".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08pm BST

block-time published-time 1.28pm BST

No 10 rejects Labour claims previous racism inquiry recommendations being ignored

The Downing Street lobby briefing is over. Here are the main points.

•The prime minister's spokesman rejected Labour's claims that the government was ignoring the recommendations made by previous inquiries looking at racism. Asked about David Lammy's claim to this effect (see 10.02am), the spokesman said the government was implementing the recommendations of previous reports. He said:

The prime minister's spokesman rejected Labour's claims that the government was ignoring the recommendations made by previous inquiries looking at racism. Asked about David Lammy's claim to this effect (see 10.02am), the spokesman said the government was implementing the recommendations of previous reports. He said:

The Ministry of Justice recently published an update on the Lammy review which set out a comprehensive programme of work to address inequalities which were identified in the criminal justice system. It includes supporting those from under-represented groups to become judges. We have introduced a deferred prosecution pilot called Chance to Change. That is now up and running, with the intention of addressing racial inequalities that stem from a lack of trust in the justice system among ethnic minority defendants. We are bringing together and publishing more data than ever before on race. And last year Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service met its target of recruiting 14% BAME prison staff.

•The spokesman said that the commission on race and ethnic disparities announced by Boris Johnson today would look at issues like the under-performance of white working class boys in schools.•The prime minister's spokesman said that the government's review of the two-metre rule would be completed "in the coming weeks" - but he would not commit to it being ready before 4 July, when the government has said pubs and restaurants might be allowed to start opening up in England. There has been speculation that they might be allowed to serve customers outdoors from that point. When it was put to him that businesses needed advance notice of what would be allowed, the spokesman said the government was aware of the hospitality industry's need for certainty. But he also said the government had to act in a way that was safe.•The spokesman said that Simon Case, the new permanent secretary at No 10, would oversee the review of the two-metre rule. And he said the review would report to the Covid strategy committee chaired by the PM. Explaining its remit, he said:

The spokesman said that the commission on race and ethnic disparities announced by Boris Johnson today would look at issues like the under-performance of white working class boys in schools.

The prime minister's spokesman said that the government's review of the two-metre rule would be completed "in the coming weeks" - but he would not commit to it being ready before 4 July, when the government has said pubs and restaurants might be allowed to start opening up in England. There has been speculation that they might be allowed to serve customers outdoors from that point. When it was put to him that businesses needed advance notice of what would be allowed, the spokesman said the government was aware of the hospitality industry's need for certainty. But he also said the government had to act in a way that was safe.

The spokesman said that Simon Case, the new permanent secretary at No 10, would oversee the review of the two-metre rule. And he said the review would report to the Covid strategy committee chaired by the PM. Explaining its remit, he said:

It will look at evidence around the transmission of the virus in different environments, incident rates, international comparisons, and it will draw on advice from scientific and medical experts, as well as economists and papers from Sage. It will take advice from a range of experts, including the chief medical officer and the chief scientific adviser.

•The spokesman said that the health minister Edward Argar would respond to this afternoon's Commons urgent question about the two-metre rule. (See 9.44am.)•The spokesman said that Boris Johnson would be responding to the open letter sent to MPs by the England footballer Marcus Rashford saying the food voucher scheme for poor children should continue over the summer holidays. (See 8.11am.) The spokesman also praised Rashford for using his profile "in a positive way". And he said the government had already announced an extra £63m for councils to help disadvantaged families over the summer. He said:

The spokesman said that the health minister Edward Argar would respond to this afternoon's Commons urgent question about the two-metre rule. (See 9.44am.)

The spokesman said that Boris Johnson would be responding to the open letter sent to MPs by the England footballer Marcus Rashford saying the food voucher scheme for poor children should continue over the summer holidays. (See 8.11am.) The spokesman also praised Rashford for using his profile "in a positive way". And he said the government had already announced an extra £63m for councils to help disadvantaged families over the summer. He said:

The prime minister understands the issues facing families across the UK which is why last week the government announced an additional £63m for local authorities to benefit families who are struggling to afford food and other basic essentials.

The PM also set out that as schools open more widely and their kitchens reopen, we expect them to make food parcels available for collection or delivery for any children that are eligible for free school meals who are not yet able to return to schools. Where that is not possible, schools can continue to offer vouchers to eligible pupils.

•Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, will take the afternoon press conference at 5pm, the spokesman said. He said he thought Raab would be appearing on his own, without a government scientist. But the spokesman rejected suggestions that this was because scientists were no longer welcome. He said:

Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, will take the afternoon press conference at 5pm, the spokesman said. He said he thought Raab would be appearing on his own, without a government scientist. But the spokesman rejected suggestions that this was because scientists were no longer welcome. He said:

Last week you saw, from memory, the chief medical officer, the chief scientific adviser, you saw NHS England's medical director, you saw Baroness Harding who is in charge of test and trace, you also saw the Health and Safety Executive and a couple of others as well... There won't be an expert there every day but you will still see them.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.30pm BST

block-time published-time 1.24pm BST

Welsh FM hasn't spoken to PM for almost three weeks

The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has revealed that he has not spoken to Boris Johnson for almost three weeks.

Asked during his government's daily press conference if Wales was in the loop or going it alone, he said:

I last spoke to the prime minister two weeks ago last Thursday, so that's nearly three weeks ago. I've had no discussion with any UK minister offered in the weeks that have followed. As of today there is no invitation to speak to any UK minister during the rest of this week.

He clarified that he had spoken with the Welsh secretary, Simon Hart. Drakeford added:

Does that mean we don't get any intelligence from the UK government? No. There is still a great deal of discussion that goes on between officials. Vaughan Gething the [Welsh health minister] has a weekly call with the UK health ministers and ministers from the other devolved administrations.

But he said his calls for a "regular, reliable rhythm of meetings with UK ministers" had not been heeded. "I'm afraid we've been in a stop/start of that cycle for more than two weeks," he said.

The Wales first minister, Mark Drakeford Photograph: Ben Evans/Huw Evans/Rex/Shutterstock

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.34pm BST

block-time published-time 1.04pm BST

Boris Johnson has announced a "cross-governmental commission" into racial disparities in education, health and criminal justice. It is the latest of a series of reports into ethnic injustices over recent years. Guardian political correspondent Peter Walker looks at whether previous inquiries have changed anything:

Related:  Boris Johnson's racism inquiry: have previous ones changed anything?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.09pm BST

block-time published-time 12.57pm BST

No new coronavirus deaths in Scotland

Scotland's first minister,  Nicola Sturgeon, has announced that no new coronavirus deaths have been reported in Scotland in the last 24 hours, the third time the figure has remained the same since lockdown began.

As of Monday, a total of 2,448 patients have died in Scotland after testing positive for coronavirus, no change on Sunday's figure.

The reported death tolls previously remained the same on June 7 and June 8, a Sunday and a Monday. But the first minister stressed that death reports are lower at weekends.

Speaking at the Scottish government's coronavirus briefing, Sturgeon said a further 29 people have tested positive for the virus. There are 870 people in hospital with confirmed or suspected Covid-19, a decrease of 94. Of these patients, 18 were in intensive care, an increase of three.

Nicola Sturgeon. Photograph: Fraser Bremner/Scottish Daily Mail/Pool/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.35pm BST

block-time published-time 12.43pm BST

Google has apologised for an error that resulted in an image of Winston Churchill being removed from its search results, after accusations that the company had deliberately taken it down in support of the Black Lives Matter protests.

Conservative activists first noted the omission late on Saturday night, highlighting the fact that Churchill's image was absent from the gallery results for "UK prime ministers".

enltrGoogle "UK Prime Ministers" and Winston Churchill's photo isn't there. Very very mysterious - to put it politely.

- Charlotte Gill (@CharlotteCGill) June 13, 2020

enltrI just tried it, it's true. See for yourself. Here's a screen grab I got from a few minutes ago. pic.twitter.com/MF88sDw4O1

- Rhubba (@RhubbaComedy) June 13, 2020

Missing too was the PM's first historic term in office: the company's results recorded only his 1951 to 1955 leadership.

In a statement on Sunday, Google said the removal of Churchill's image was not accidental. Instead, the company said, it had intervened to correct a separate issue flagged by its users: that the image automatically selected for Churchill showed him at a much younger age than the "more famous and iconic" pictures of him during the war.

enltrAt the end of April, we received feedback that the image of Churchill automatically selected by our systems wasn't representative of him. The systems had selected a picture of a younger Winston Churchill (shown below), while he's more famously & iconically pictured when older... pic.twitter.com/eqEirPhlTV

- Google SearchLiaison (@searchliaison) June 14, 2020

Because Google avoids directly dictating search results, the company had blocked the younger image, but not specifically selected a replacement. "In this case, a bug in our systems prevented a new representative image from updating," the company said. "As a result, Churchill's entry lacked an image from late April until this weekend, when the issue was brought to our attention."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.46pm BST

block-time published-time 12.37pm BST

A man who suffered a broken wrist and damage to his arm and shoulder after he was detained outside his home in what he believes was a wrongful racist arrest is suing the Metropolitan police over his injuries.

Tariq Stanley, an insurance underwriter, said he was wrongfully detained outside his home in the Woolwich area of the city during the pandemic lockdown.

The 27-year-old black man recorded mobile phone footage of the arrest on 17 April. Stanley said it confirmed he was trying to cooperate with the police, even offering them the keys to his apartment so they could search it.

You can read the full report from Guardian reporter Henry McDonald here -

enltrMan sues Met police over injuries suffered in alleged racist arrest https://t.co/mb3ESm04sn

- Fran Lawther (@franlawtheruk) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 12.31pm BST

This, from Guardian writer David Conn -

enltrWhen I asked the Government about Cheltenham, Liverpool v Atletico etc going ahead as Covid-19 was spreading, they referred to a Matt Hancock statement 16 March: "The risks of transmission at 'mass gatherings' are relatively low." Now: 'Coronavirus thrives on mass gatherings.' https://t.co/jB1kyg4rOl

- David Conn (@david_conn) June 15, 2020

A series of high-profile sporting events went ahead as scheduled in mid-March even as Covid-19 was being declared a pandemic. This podcast from earlier this month, in which David Conn investigates the scientific reasoning behind the decision, is well worth a listen.

Related:  From Anfield to Cheltenham: did major events cost lives? - podcast

block-time published-time 12.30pm BST

This is from  David Sassoli, president of the European parliament, referring to the the video conference that Boris Johnson is holding later with the EU about the post-Brexit trade talks.

enltrWith President @vonderleyen and            @eucopresident this morning, preparing for the videoconference with PM            @BorisJohnson at 14.30. The EU and the            @Europarl_EN will work to intensify the negotiations with the UK.            pic.twitter.com/4hYKZefvId

- David Sassoli (@EP_President) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 12.16pm BST

Travis Perkins, the builders' merchant, is cutting 2,500 jobs in the UK, almost a tenth of its workforce, and closing 165 stores. The business says it expects weaker demand for materials in the next two years in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. You can read the full story at the link below and follow more live updates on the Guardian's business live blog here.

enltrTravis Perkins to cut 2,500 jobs and shut 165 stores in UK https://t.co/vGzjwXeCjh

- The Guardian (@guardian) June 15, 2020

block-time published-time 12.08pm BST

Passengers wearing masks on the London Underground this morning. From today face coverings are compulsory on public transport in England. Photograph: Tolga Akmen/AFP/Getty Images

block-time published-time 12.05pm BST

Man jailed for urinating at memorial to PC Keith Palmer

A 28-year-old football fan has been jailed after admitting urinating next to the memorial dedicated to PC Keith Palmer, who was stabbed to death in the 2017 Westminster terror attack.

Andrew Banks, of Manor Road in Stansted, Essex, was handed a 14-day immediate jail term after pleading guilty to outraging public decency during a far-right protest in central London on Saturday.

The PA Media news agency reports that Banks said he had been on an all-night drinking session in the capital and decided to join fellow football supporters travelling to London to "protect the statues", but admitted he did not know which statues.

He also said he had no idea about the memorial to PC Palmer, and handed himself into police when he was confronted by his father, who saw images of the incident online.

Jailing Banks at Westminster magistrates court on Monday morning, Chief magistrate Emma Arbuthnot said:

I accept you were drunk and did not know where you were urinating. Your explanation is you had 16 pints to drink, you hadn't been to bed, and a group of football supporters were coming up to protect the monuments.

The irony is rather than protecting the monuments, you almost urinated on one. That was more by luck than judgment. You showed no respect at the time for a man killed while protecting the Houses of Parliament.

Andrew Banks at Westminster magistrates court. Photograph: Elizabeth Cook/PA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.23pm BST

block-time published-time 12.05pm BST

Music venue Colston Hall has removed lettering from the outside of its building ahead of a planned name change, PA Media reports. It was named after Edward Colston, the 17th century slave trader, and built almost 150 years after his death. Bristol Music Trust, which runs the venue, announced in 2017 that the name would be changed this year following a £49m refurbishment. The organisation said this morning that removing the lettering is "just one step on our road" to revealing the new name this autumn. The move comes after a statue of Colston was toppled and thrown into Bristol harbour during a Black Lives Matter march last weekend.

Bristol Music Trust said:

We have taken this action as a symbolic moment and a public demonstration of the commitment we made three years ago to change our name.

Contractors on an aerial platform outside Bristol music venue Colston Hall removing the name of 17th century merchant Edward Colston from its signage. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA      Letters removed from the Colston Hall signage. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.23pm BST

block-time published-time 11.52am BST

Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that levels of anxiety among Britons appear to be reducing compared with the start of lockdown.

At the beginning of lockdown, the body noted a "marked" increase in anxiety. Between 20-30 March, almost half (49.6%) of people reported high anxiety. This reduced to 37% between 30 April and 10 May. But average anxiety scores are still higher compared with last year, and it has been estimated that 19 million adults in Britain are suffering high levels of anxiety.

The ONS report on anxiety and coronavirus ( which you can read here ) states:

The effect seen on average anxiety ratings throughout the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic shows a similar pattern to the theory of 'hedonic adaptation'.

When a shock event occurs, such as the impact of the coronavirus, wellbeing is temporarily impacted but people then quickly adapt so that wellbeing partially bounces back; though not necessarily to the same level as it was before the shock.

During lockdown, new measures have been put into place, which may have also helped to alleviate high levels of anxiety.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.59am BST

block-time published-time 11.51am BST

EHRC tells PM 'urgent action' on racial inequality needed now because 'countless reports' already exist

David Isaac, chairman of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, has said Boris Johnson should be taking action to address racial inequality instead of just announcing another inquiry. Echoing the point made by Labour (see 10.02am), Isaac said:

We know the scale of the problems we face to tackle the entrenched racial inequality in our country. It is not new. There have been countless reports and the data exists exposing all the issues.

Now is the time for urgent action. We need to see a clear and comprehensive race strategy with clear targets and timescales from government.

We hope this new commission will help deliver that and we stand ready to work with it.

block-time published-time 11.37am BST

A report by an influential group of MPs has said the Treasury should act to help more than a million people who have fallen through the cracks in the government's Covid-19 income support schemes.

The Guardian's Larry Elliott and Kalyeena Makortoff report that the all-party Treasury select committee said large numbers of people were enduring financial hardship as they were unable to benefit from the chancellor's schemes for salaried employees and the self-employed.

The committee said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, needed to make good on his promise to "do whatever it takes" to protect individuals and businesses from the impact of the pandemic. The MPs called on Sunak to address the gaps in his coronavirus           job           retention           scheme (CJRS) and self-employment income support scheme (SEISS).

Employers across Britain face a deadline this week to make job cuts, as the furlough scheme is gradually wound down from August.

Related:  Coronavirus: more than a million left out of income support, say MPs

block-time published-time 11.33am BST

The Scottish National party has announced that Amy Callaghan, the 28-year-old MP for East Dunbartonshire, is recovering in hospital following emergency surgery after collapsing at home with a brain haemorrhage last week.

The party said it was linked to a manageable but unspecified medical condition, and the event could have longer-term consequences. Callaghan took the seat from Jo Swinson, the then Liberal Democrat leader, in a closely-fought contest in last December's snap election.

Callaghan's family said:

Amy is in good spirits and able to communicate well with family. She has been overwhelmed with the messages of support and kindness which are a huge source of encouragement. She has made great progress thus far but is under no illusion of the seriousness of her condition and the rehabilitation that will follow.

block-time published-time 11.26am BST

Queues form as non-essential shops open in England

In England non-essential shops are opening again today. Retailers were not sure in advance how many shoppers would turn up, but in some areas interest seems high. Here are some places where people have been queuing.

The queue outside Primark at Wood Green, London. Photograph: Barcroft Media/Getty Images      Shoppers outside Fenwick in Newcastle. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA      People waiting outside Primark at the Rushden Lakes shopping complex in Rushden Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images      A crowd outside Niketown, Oxford Circus, in London. Photograph: Barcroft Media/Getty Images      The queue to enter Niketown in London. Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP      Shoppers outside the MK1 Shopping & Leisure Park in Milton Keynes. Photograph: Andrew Boyers/Reuters      People waiting outside Primark in Birmingham Photograph: Jacob King/PA      The queue outside Sports Direct in Southampton. Photograph: James Marsh/Rex/Shutterstock

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.33am BST

block-time published-time 11.16am BST

Thousands more pupils are going back to school today, but the picture across the UK is patchy.

At least parts of years 10 and 12 are returning to school to get some time with teachers ahead of their GCSEs and A-levels next year.

The government has faced criticism that it has not done more to get schools reopened, with some children facing the prospect of having been out of the classroom for almost six months by the time they return in September.

A No 10  source said Mr Johnson was "acutely aware" of the impact the extended closure was having on pupils and was working with the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, on a major "catch-up" plan.

Here's some pics of what some of those classrooms look like:

enltrWelcome back to school Year 10! pic.twitter.com/nSiHI987Eb

- Dr Ruth Norris (@DGS_Head) June 15, 2020

enltrGreat to have Year 10 back in for a couple of hours of social distanced learning. Finished off with a bit of McBeth blockbusters. pic.twitter.com/UFQd5JnV4w

- Teaching & Learning on Toast (@TeachingOnToast) June 15, 2020

enltrWelcome back Year 10 @Bedford_Academy           https://t.co/kyvN70ZhDv

- HEART Academies Trust (@heartacadtrust) June 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am BST

block-time published-time 11.07am BST

Johnson's Telegraph article on race and statues - Summary and analysis

In his Daily Telegraph article, which he has now posted on his Facebook page (perhaps to counter claims he was announcing government policy behind the Telegraph paywall), Boris Johnson  says that the Black Lives Matter focus on statues is "a total distraction from the matter in hand". That is a bit rich, given that his own article says much more about statues than it does about racial inequalities (a point that prompted David Lammy to accuse him of trying to provoke a culture war - see            10.22am). But the article also amounts to Johnson's most extensive comment on an issue that has attracted huge interest in the last week, and so it is worth highlighting what he says.

Here are the main points.

•Johnson claims that those calling for statues to be removed are trying to distort history. He says:

Johnson claims that those calling for statues to be removed are trying to distort history. He says:

I am also extremely dubious about the growing campaign to edit or photoshop the entire cultural landscape. If we start purging the record and removing the images of all but those whose attitudes conform to our own, we are engaged in a great lie, a distortion of our history - like some public figure furtively trying to make themselves look better by editing their own Wikipedia entry.

This seems to fundamentally misunderstand the motives of those, for instance, who celebrated the removal of the Edward Colston statue in Bristol. They would argue that what amounted to "distortion" was a monument celebrating someone as a benefactor with no acknowledgement of the monstrous origins of his wealth.

•He says he will resist "with every breath in my body" attempts to remove Winston Churchill's statue from Parliament Square.

He says he will resist "with every breath in my body" attempts to remove Winston Churchill's statue from Parliament Square.

[Churchill] was a hero, and I expect I am not alone in saying that I will resist with every breath in my body any attempt to remove that statue from Parliament Square, and the sooner his protective shielding comes off the better.

But, as David Lammy pointed out on Today, there is no serious campaign to remove the Churchill statute from Parliament Square in the first place and no one is calling for this beyond a small minority of activists (like Imarn Ayton, who was on the Today programme at the weekend). Johnson's argument seems designed to curry favour with the Mail on Sunday, which yesterday launched            a campaign to save the Churchill statue. As the Financial Times' Robert Wright pointed out, that is about the safest newspaper campaign ever.

enltrThe secret of a newspaper campaign is to go for one you're sure you'll win. But campaigning for a bang-to-Rights, nailed-on certainty seems unsporting. https://t.co/kDtx505hKG

- Robert Wright (@RKWinvisibleman) June 13, 2020•Johnson claims that removing statues of historic figures will result in a "never-ending debate about which well-known historical figure is sufficiently pure or politically correct to remain in public view". He goes on:

Johnson claims that removing statues of historic figures will result in a "never-ending debate about which well-known historical figure is sufficiently pure or politically correct to remain in public view". He goes on:

Where will it end? Are we supposed to haul down Cromwell who killed so many thousands of people in Ireland? What about Nelson and all the other innumerable reminders of this country's imperial past?

Take the case of Ayuba Suleiman Diallo, whose portrait hangs in Room 15 of the National Portrait Gallery. He was a native of Gambia who was known and admired in 18th-century London as a translator of Arab texts. He was also, originally, a slaver himself. Does that mean he should be purged from the gallery?

•He says that, instead of seeing statues taken down, he would rather see a more representative statues erected. He says:

He says that, instead of seeing statues taken down, he would rather see a more representative statues erected. He says:

Rather than tear down the past, why not add some of the men and women - most often BAME - who helped to make our modern Commonwealth and our modern world? Isn't that a more cheerful approach?

That "cheerful" is very telling. One criticism of Johnson is that he has a fundamental aversion into facing up to anything negative.

•He restates this view that there is "much more" that the government has to do to tackle racism.•He proposes a "cross-government commission to look at all aspects of inequality". The only reference to what is the news announcement in the article takes up about two sentences. Johnson says:

He restates this view that there is "much more" that the government has to do to tackle racism.

He proposes a "cross-government commission to look at all aspects of inequality". The only reference to what is the news announcement in the article takes up about two sentences. Johnson says:

It is time for a cross-governmental commission to look at all aspects of inequality - in employment, in health outcomes, in academic and all other walks of life.

We need to tackle the substance of the problem, not the symbols.

Explained like this, it is hard to see how this might be different from the race disparity audit published by Theresa May in 2017.

block-time published-time 10.53am BST

Up to half of those shielding have left home against official advice, ONS survey says

Up to half of people who are shielding from Covid-19 have left their home against advice, while a third say their mental health has worsened, according to new data. PA Media reports:

Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), based on a survey of 4,149 people who are shielding, found that 49% have been out since shielding began, while 51% have stayed at home. People who are shielding were initially told not to leave their home or garden, including for exercise, shopping or to go to work.

But on 1 June, the rules in England were relaxed to say people could leave their homes once a day for exercise.

The new poll across England, covering May 28 to June 3, found:

•Two-thirds (66%) have not stayed 2 metres away from those they live with despite being advised to do so, while 11% have always kept their distance and 23% have done so sometimes.•Almost half (49%, an estimated 1.1 million people) said they have left the house since receiving advice to shield and 40% have left home at least once in the previous seven days.•Some 53% said they had left home during the shielding period for exercise, 26% attended a GP or hospital appointment and 24% shopped for essentials. Some 12% collected a prescription, 11% had a blood test and 3% went to work.•In the previous seven days, 19% had left their house or garden every day, 34% had on some days, 29% had done so once and 18% had not at all.

Two-thirds (66%) have not stayed 2 metres away from those they live with despite being advised to do so, while 11% have always kept their distance and 23% have done so sometimes.

Almost half (49%, an estimated 1.1 million people) said they have left the house since receiving advice to shield and 40% have left home at least once in the previous seven days.

Some 53% said they had left home during the shielding period for exercise, 26% attended a GP or hospital appointment and 24% shopped for essentials. Some 12% collected a prescription, 11% had a blood test and 3% went to work.

In the previous seven days, 19% had left their house or garden every day, 34% had on some days, 29% had done so once and 18% had not at all.

The poll also found that while 61% of those shielding had experienced no difference in their mental health and wellbeing due to shielding, 35% said their mental health had got worse (29% slightly worse and 6% much worse).

The data also showed that around 627,000 of those shielding (28% of the total) had previously worked before being advised to shield. Of those who normally worked before shielding, 36% are now working from home and 5% are continuing to work outside the home (an estimated 32,000).

Just over a third (36 %) of those who normally work have been furloughed, and 17% have stopped working. Of those offered support from the government to help them receive supplies while shielding, 54% had registered for support and 46% had not.

Some 2.2 million clinically extremely vulnerable people have been advised to shield due to Covid-19.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12am BST

block-time published-time 10.25am BST

Long queues of people formed outside ZSL London Zoo in Regent's Park, west London. Parents and children were asked to respect 2-metre social distancing and many wore face coverings.

enltrIf you're visiting today, please ensure you have bought tickets online - we have sold out of tickets for today and every visitor will need to have pre-booked. If you've missed out, don't worry - we've got plenty of other dates left: https://t.co/x0SfbRsLOv           pic.twitter.com/UREw3sN22n

- ZSL London Zoo (@zsllondonzoo) June 15, 2020

Jamie Turner, site manager for ZSL London Zoo, said just under 2,000 tickets had been sold for Monday and that the return of so many customers was "beautiful to see".

Visitors are being asked to keep "a tiger's length" apart.

People queuing to enter London Zoo this morning. Photograph: Chris Jackson/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.10am BST

block-time published-time 10.22am BST

Lammy accuses Tories of seeking 'culture war' over fate of Churchill's statue

In his Today interview (see 9.19am and            10.02am) David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, also accused Boris Johnson of making his Telegraph article mostly about Winston Churchill statue because the Tories want a "culture war" as a distraction from their policy failings on race. Lammy said:

[Johnson] insists on talking about statues. The Labour party isn't talking about statues. The Lib Dems [aren't] calling for Winston Churchill's statue to be removed. Neither are the Greens. The only person that wants to focus on Winston Churchill's statue is the Conservative party and frankly it's bizarre. They want a culture war because they want to distract from the central issue; implement the reviews.

Do something. Change it. You're in power. You've been in power for a decade.

block-time published-time 10.04am BST

The governing bodies of 80 of the nation's leading sports - including British Athletics, British Cycling and England Netball - have published an unprecedented statement saying they have not done enough to confront racism at all levels from grassroots participation through to the boardroom, our colleague Sean Ingle  reports.

Related:  'An ugly truth': British sports bodies admit failure to confront racism

block-time published-time 10.02am BST

Lammy says Johnson should implement existing racism inquiry recommendations ahead of ordering new one

In his Today programme interview this morning (see 9.19am) David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, said that if Boris Johnson were serious about wanting to address racial inequalities, he should implement the recommendations of the many reviews already sitting on shelves in Westminster instead of ordering a new inquiry.

Helpfully, he itemised some of them, starting with a reference to the review he himself led into the way BAME people are treated by the criminal justice system. David Cameron appointed Lammy to head the review when he was PM, and it reported to Theresa May's government inn 2017.

Lammy said:

I made 35 specific recommendations in the Lammy review (pdf). Implement them. There are 110 recommendations in            the Angiolini review (pdf) into deaths into police custody. Implement them. There are 30 recommendations in            the Home Office review (pdf) into the Windrush scandal. Implement them. Twenty six into            Baroness McGregor's review (pdf) into workplace discrimination. Implement them. That's what Boris has to do. And the Black Lives protests can stop and we can get on with dealing with the coronavirus.

block-time published-time 9.44am BST

There will be an an urgent question in the Commons on the 2-metre rule. Having repeatedly said that this is being regularly kept under review, ministers have now said a specific review of it is under way.

Greg Clark, the Conservative chair of the Commons science committee, has tabled the UQ. He is asking Boris Johnson to respond, although it is very unlikely that he will. No 10 is much more likely to send another minister to the Commons to respond (which is allowed).

enltrOne UQ from 330pm: @GregClarkMP to ask            @BorisJohnson to make a statement on publishing the review of the 2 metre social distancing rule [as he committed to the Liaison Committee to do before 15th June] One statement: Public order update -            @pritipatel

- Labour Whips (@labourwhips) June 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.56am BST

block-time published-time 9.35am BST

Agenda for the day

Good morning. I'm Andrew Sparrow, joining the blog for the day.

Here is the agenda with what's coming up.

12pm: Downing Street lobby briefing.

12.30pm: The Scottish and Welsh governments are due to hold their daily coronavirus briefings.

1.30pm: Boris Johnson holds a video meeting with Ursula von der Leyen, the European commission president, to discuss the Brexit talks.

2.30pm: The permanent secretaries at housing, business, the Treasury and the Cabinet Office give evidence to the Commons public accounts committee about the government's response to coronavirus.

2.30pm: Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, takes questions in the Commons.

3pm: Prof Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, is among the academics and medical professionals giving evidence to the Lords science and technology committee on the immunology and pathophysiology of coronavirus.

3pm: The Rev Jesse Jackson addresses a Black Lives Matter webinar organised by the National Education Union.

4pm: Local government and Joint Biosecurity Centre officials give evidence to the Commons communities committee on track and trace.

5pm: UK government press conference.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am BST

block-time published-time 9.31am BST

Queues outside shops as non-essential retail reopens

Long queues have been seen outside Primark stores across England.

enltrDown at Primark this morning as it opens for the first time since lockdown and the queue is ENORMOUS pic.twitter.com/fWldI5aCX5

- Elle May Rice (@ellemayrice) June 15, 2020

(This pic taken by Elle May Rice in Liverpool for the Liverpool Echo)

There were lines of dozens of people at branches of the budget clothes store in Birmingham, Derby, Liverpool and Nottingham.

Research from American Express has found that seven in ten (72%) independent retailers that closed their doors in March are planning to open.

The majority of small retailers (89%) felt confident they could make the necessary adjustments to keep customers safe.

Just over one-third (34%) of retailers thought they would be trading at pre-lockdown levels by December 2020, rising to 56% who felt they would be back to normal by the end of 2021.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.36pm BST

block-time published-time 9.19am BST

Labour tells PM to 'do something' now on race rather than just announce 'back of fag packet' commission

The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy,  eviscerated Boris Johnson's decision to set up a commission on race and ethnic disparities on BBC Radio 4's Today programme this morning.

He accused the government of writing its commission on race and ethnic disparities "on the back of a fag packet" to "assuage the Black Lives Matter protest".

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme:

You can understand why it feels like, yet again in the UK, we want figures, data - but we don't want action.

Black people aren't playing victim, as Boris indicates, they are protesting precisely because the time for review is over and the time for action is now.

Lammy slammed Johnson's decision to announce the commission in the Daily Telegraph, which is behind a paywall.

I don't know why he's announced a commission behind a paywall, in the Telegraph, buried in the middle of yet another article about Churchill.

If he was serious, why are there no details about how it will be staffed, its remit, its terms of reference, its timetable? That's the question.

It's because this was written on the back of a fag packet yesterday to assuage the Black Lives Matter protest. Get on with the action, legislate, move - you're in government, do something.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.26am BST

block-time published-time 9.08am BST

BP may not develop some of its potential oilfields

Coronavirus good news klaxon!

BP has told shareholders that it could write down the value of its assets by up to $17.5bn (£14bn) as it reduced its long-term forecast for oil prices and warned that the Covid-19 pandemic would have a lasting impact on the global economy.

The energy giant slashed its forecast for Brent crude oil prices to $55 a barrel from $75 a barrel and said the coronavirus crisis would speed up the shift to a lower-carbon economy.

The company estimates that this will result in write-offs of $13bn to $17.5bn, which will drag down its financial results in the second quarter.  It is also reviewing whether to develop some of its potential oilfields.

Read the full story here:

Related:  BP expects Covid-19 to have 'enduring impact on global economy'

block-time published-time 8.46am BST

The District Councils' Network has put out guidance, urging the public to take extra care when visiting high streets and town centres to avoid a second spike in coronavirus infection.

The government recently announced £20m for district councils to lead the local effort to safeguarding high streets following the pandemic, and councils are urging the public to follow safety guidance.

They say they are trying to make things safer by:

Helping marshal movements with floor markings and signage.

Carrying out more frequent street cleaning, providing hand-sanitiser posts, adapting public seating and conveniences.

Creating more pedestrianised spaces and streets.

Adapting indoor and outdoor market spaces to allow traders to trade safely.

Deploying council staff or volunteers to provide help and advice.

They say councils are planning how to save the high street, looking at measures including reshaping a mixed offer of retail, culture, entertainment and housing.

Cllr Mark Crane, DCN lead member for stronger economies, said:

We will be delighted to see visitors return to our high streets, which we're working hard to reshape so that shops and businesses get the boost they desperately need, but without compromising public health.

But we need members of the public to respect these efforts, and take extra care when visiting their local high streets and town centres during this challenging period.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.54am BST

block-time published-time 8.30am BST

Small business minister Paul Scully has encouraged people to go to the shops as many reopen for the first time since the start of lockdown.

Speaking to BBC Breakfast on Monday, he said:

The high street is going to be a different place to what it was before, with the one-way systems, with the hand sanitisers, and with people not trying clothes on in the same way.

But, nonetheless, it is safe to shop. I would encourage people to be sensible, work with the people in the shop but do go out and shop, and start opening our economy gradually and carefully."

He added the government would keep the two-metre rule "under review".

Scully was asked how the government would respond to footballer Marcus Rashford's plea to extend the current food voucher scheme for children normally reliant on school meals throughout the summer holidays. Scully described Manchester United player Rashford, 22, who has raised £20m for vulnerable children in the UK with the charity FareShare since the start of lockdown, as an "inspirational figure".

What we've done is put £9m into summer activities, which clearly if people with children are at these activities they will get fed within that as well.

We're also bringing in £63m worth of support to local authorities, for hardship funds, to make sure that people who do struggle can actually get access to a decent meal.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.19am BST

block-time published-time 8.23am BST

The Chartered Institute of Marketing has warned that the UK is entering into an extremely challenging time for business and calls for customers to give brands "the benefit of the doubt".

Chris Daly, CEO, Chartered Institute of Marketing said:

Every business is having to think extremely carefully about how it uses its marketing budget in the coming weeks and months; balancing efforts to promote sales and footfall, with keeping customers safe and well informed.

Importantly, communicating to customers over the coming weeks is going to require businesses to strike a very fine balance; and not everyone is going to get it right. Some businesses have been vilified in recent weeks, especially at the start of the Covid-19 crisis, and we hope that government and consumers will be more understanding as businesses face up to this difficult situation.

We will not defend irresponsible or unprofessional marketing, but it is important that as well as celebrating the success stories, we give businesses the benefit of the doubt as they seek to bring back their customers and restart the British economy.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.36am BST

block-time published-time 8.11am BST

This letter from Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford is incredibly powerful.

Related:  'Protect the vulnerable': Marcus Rashford's open letter to MPs

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.36am BST

block-time published-time 7.35am BST

Today is the first day that it will be mandatory for people travelling on public transport in England to wear a face covering  over their nose and mouth for the entirety of any journeys made.

enltrThree stories: ?? Shops welcome back customers but businesses fear for survival https://t.co/g8uVCtLitv?? New face mask rules should not encourage more public transport use            https://t.co/dJKZhlhlB?? PM vows to tackle racism but warns it 'won't be easy'            https://t.co/0YLb5ZTtDJ           pic.twitter.com/Z61htJjJv4

- SkyNews (@SkyNews) June 15, 2020

The mayor of London is asking all Londoners to wear a face covering where they can't keep a safe distance (2 metres) from others.

In Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, wearing a face mask is recommended but not compulsory.

You can read the full government guidance here.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.24am BST

block-time published-time 7.21am BST

Non-essential shops reopen in England for first time in three months

Here are the top stories in the UK today.

•Shops in England selling non-essential goods can reopen on Monday for the first time in almost three months. Retailers have introduced strict safety measures and social distancing. With fears growing about the health of the UK economy, reopening the service sector has been seen as vital. Retailers are appealing to customers to support their local shops to help them survive the coronavirus pandemic, which has devastated high street trade. Boris Johnson has urged people to "shop with confidence".•The British economy will shrink by 8% this year and is unlikely to recover from the damage wrought by the coronavirus crisis until 2023, according to a leading economic forecaster. After official figures showed Britain's economy shrank by a record 20.4% in April - putting the country on course for the worst recession in more than three centuries - the EY Item Club was moved to produce its first interim report between two quarterly updates to reflect the deteriorating outlook.•Foreign NHS workers and carers are still being charged for using the health service, despite the prime minister's pledge to scrap these fees "as soon as possible". On 21 May, in a remarkable U-turn Boris Johnson said that the £400 annual fee paid by non-EU migrants to use the NHS - on top of other mounting visa costs - should be removed for health and care workers. But a poll conducted by Doctors Association UK exclusively shared with the Guardian showed 158 NHS workers reported having to continue to pay for immigration health surcharge, while just eight reporting said they did not.•England's coronavirus lockdown should not be further lifted until the government's contact-tracing system has proven to be "robust and effective", the World Health Organization has said after widespread criticism of the first results of the new tracking operation. As shops across England prepared to reopen, and people were encouraged by the government to come out of their homes and on to the high street, Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO's director for Europe, cautioned that the UK remained in a "very active phase of the pandemic".•Racism and discrimination suffered by Britain's black, Asian and minority ethnic people has contributed to the high death rates from Covid-19 in those communities, an official inquiry has found. The conclusion is contained in a section of a government-commissioned report that ministers have refused to publish, apparently for fear of stoking tensions around race and racism after protests in response to George Floyd's killing by a white police officer in Minneapolis.

Shops in England selling non-essential goods can reopen on Monday for the first time in almost three months. Retailers have introduced strict safety measures and social distancing. With fears growing about the health of the UK economy, reopening the service sector has been seen as vital. Retailers are appealing to customers to support their local shops to help them survive the coronavirus pandemic, which has devastated high street trade. Boris Johnson has urged people to "shop with confidence".

The British economy will shrink by 8% this year and is unlikely to recover from the damage wrought by the coronavirus crisis until 2023, according to a leading economic forecaster. After official figures showed Britain's economy shrank by a record 20.4% in April - putting the country on course for the worst recession in more than three centuries - the EY Item Club was moved to produce its first interim report between two quarterly updates to reflect the deteriorating outlook.

Foreign NHS workers and carers are still being charged for using the health service, despite the prime minister's pledge to scrap these fees "as soon as possible". On 21 May, in a remarkable U-turn Boris Johnson said that the £400 annual fee paid by non-EU migrants to use the NHS - on top of other mounting visa costs - should be removed for health and care workers. But a poll conducted by Doctors Association UK exclusively shared with the Guardian showed 158 NHS workers reported having to continue to pay for immigration health surcharge, while just eight reporting said they did not.

England's coronavirus lockdown should not be further lifted until the government's contact-tracing system has proven to be "robust and effective", the World Health Organization has said after widespread criticism of the first results of the new tracking operation. As shops across England prepared to reopen, and people were encouraged by the government to come out of their homes and on to the high street, Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO's director for Europe, cautioned that the UK remained in a "very active phase of the pandemic".

Racism and discrimination suffered by Britain's black, Asian and minority ethnic people has contributed to the high death rates from Covid-19 in those communities, an official inquiry has found. The conclusion is contained in a section of a government-commissioned report that ministers have refused to publish, apparently for fear of stoking tensions around race and racism after protests in response to George Floyd's killing by a white police officer in Minneapolis.

I'll be with you for the next few hours today, so please do get in touch if you have a tip or a story. My email is alexandra.topping@theguardian.com and I'm @lexytopping on Twitter. My DMs are open.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.36am BST

11598 2020-06-15T18:15:00Z true 2020-06-15T06:31:55Z false false 2020-06-15T19:08:55Z false UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/e4cnp false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/b87735ee1b372877b6d3abf2e8894d86b1b90809/0_699_5481_3289/500.jpg

false en true There have been a further 38 deaths from coronavirus in the UK, according to the latest figures from the Department of Health and Social Care, taking the total to 41,736. Senior Tory MPs have publicly urged Boris Johnson to cut the 2 metre distancing rule in England with immediate effect, in interventions underling the scale of discontent about the issue in his party. Pubs, restaurants and hairdressers across the country have been slated to reopen on 4 July, but they do not yet know whether they will have to abide by the 2 metre rule at all times - something many say would mean they will not be viable businesses. Foreign secretary Dominic Raab told the daily Downing Street press conference that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule, in comments likely to be seen as hint that the regulation could be relaxed soon. The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, has condemned Boris Johnson's plan for a government commission to examine racial inequalities as "written on the back of a fag packet" and intended as a distraction from the government's lack of action over the issue. Lammy accused the prime minister of primarily seeking a culture war by announcing the plan in a comment piece for the Daily Telegraph, which was devoted mainly to reiterating his opposition to removing statues of historical figures. Boris Johnson has received a boost to plans to secure a trade deal with the European Union by the end of the summer after EU leaders agreed to strive to find early common ground on trade and security to avoid unnecessary economic chaos next year. But there were immediate signs of tensions on the horizon with the president of the EU council, Charles Michel, warning in tweets that the EU would not accept a "pig in the poke" and it would "never accept an agreement that goes against interests of the union". Long queues of shoppers formed outside some stores around England on the first day that non-essential shops were allowed to reopen for business since the coronavirus lockdown was imposed. Figures showed that between 8am and midday footfall on England's high streets was up by 51.7% on last Monday, while across all retail destinations there were 41.7% more shoppers as shopping centres saw a smaller rise. That's it from us for today. Thanks for reading. England will experience a "summer of rave" not seen since 1989 because the government has failed to give "socially starved" young people any clarity on when they can start partying again legally, clubbing experts have warned. The Guardian's Helen Pidd reports that police forces across England have been struggling to keep up with an explosion of illicit parties in motorway underpasses, parks and industrial estates since Boris Johnson relaxed lockdown restrictions last month. Advertised on Snapchat and Instagram, their locations are revealed at the 11th hour by WhatsApp messages, with word quickly spreading as people livestream the event on social media, dropping virtual "pins" on Google Maps for their friends to join them. Most proceed peacefully, if in contravention of social distancing guidelines. But thousands of people attended two raves in Greater Manchester at the weekend, leaving one man dead of a suspected drugs overdose, one woman reporting a rape, and three separate reported stabbings. The number of confirmed cases of Covid-19 within the prison estate in England and Wales continues to rise, Ministry of Justice figures show. As at 5pm on Sunday, 500 prisoners had tested positive for the coronavirus across 80 prisons, an increase of 1.6%, while there were 965 infected prison staff across 105 prisons, an rise of just 0.4%. There are around 79,700 prisoners across 117 prisons in England and Wales, and around 33,000 staff working in public sector prisons. Figures published in the Guardian on Monday revealed more than 1,000 prisoners were released into homelessness at the height of the coronavirus pandemic in England and Wales. Here are the main points from Dominic Raab's press conference. Raab, the foreign secretary, said that there was nothing "magic" about the two-metre rule. In comments that will be seen as a strong hint that the review launched by No 10 will lead to the rule being relaxed at some point fairly soon, he said: There's no magic to one or other particular measure, there will be different levels of risk whether it's at two metres, one-and-a-half metres or one metre. As we bring the incidence and the transmission rate down, depending on the setting, it's something that can be looked at. We are still going to make sure that all of the policy judgments that we rightly as politicians take and are accountable for are underpinned by the science. And later he said: The science isn't set in stone. It is constantly evolving. So it is fluid. That's why we need to constantly monitor it. When Edward Argar, the health minister, answered a Commons urgent question on this earlier, many Tory MPs called for the two-metre rule to be relaxed, with some saying that decision should be taken immediately. Raab defended the government's decision to set up a new review looking at racism, saying that the commission being launched would set a "positive agenda for change" and lead to specific policy recommendations. He defended the government's decision to withhold parts of a Public Health England report looking at why BAME people are disproportionately at risk of dying from coronavirus. Asked why the government was not publishing this if it was serious about addressing inequalities, he said it was a sensitive issue and that ministers wanted to get it right. He said: We do want to get to the bottom of that, we've commissioned more research on it. I think you'd agree that needs to be handled very sensitively but we are making sure we get to the bottom of it and that we've got a clear view before we advise the public... We want to make sure we've got a clearer understanding so we can communicate it with practical advice for those involved, precisely because it is a very sensitive issue and we want to give clear and reassuring guidance and not to have different people saying different things. We will release as much evidence as we can as soon as we practically can. YouGov has published some fresh polling this afternoon. It suggests that Sir Keir Starmer has drawn level with Boris Johnson on who would make the best prime minister. But the Conservatives still have a significant lead over Labour in voting intention, the poll suggests. Secondary schools in England have been told they can invite pupils in for one face-to-face meeting ahead of the summer holidays to check on well-being and progress since lockdown. The new guidance from the Department for Education comes as pupils in years 10 and 12 who are preparing to sit GCSEs and A-levels next summer begin to return to school this week for limited contact. The DfE has also confirmed that primary schools can use flexibility to admit more children, in addition to the year groups already allowed back to school, if they have capacity to do so. The government is under pressure to get more children back into school before the summer holidays amid growing evidence of patchy provision of lessons at home and fears that the attainment gap will widen. Education secretary Gavin Williamson said: "I want to make sure as many pupils as possible can get back into the classroom and be reunited with their friends and teachers before summer, to support their wellbeing and education." Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, welcomed the idea of a "check-in" session but added: "These changes do not make up for the lack of a long-term, strategic plan for education for the coming months." Q: When the PM says you need to get infection rates down before the two-metre rule can be relaxed, what does he mean? Raab says two metres will applies for now. The PM has launched a review. The government will say more than, he says. Q: What assurances can you give to people in the hospital sector that they will be able to reopen? Raab says 4 July was always the earliest possible date for reopening. It has to be done in safest possible way, he says. And that's it. The press conference is over. Q: In April you said it would not be business as usual with China after coronavirus. How strongly do you take warnings about the danger China could do to the UK economy? Raab says he thinks his comment may have been over-interpreted. He says it is not necessarily business as usual with any country. He says they want a balanced approach to China. Q: When will we see the results of the Huawei review? Raab says that will be when the full data is back. Back in the Commons, Priti Patel has been paying tribute to Patrick Hutchinson, the Black Lives Matter demonstrator who was photographed carrying a counter-protester to safety during Saturday's protests in London. She said: I think... all members of the house will join me in saying he is the very best of Britain. Our country needs more people like him and his actions this weekend spoke volumes and I pay tribute to him and the way in which he conducted himself and the way in which he stepped in. Hutchinson spoke to Channel 4 news last night and his comments are worth a read. Q: Are you taking less notice of the science? Raab says the science is evolving. Science and medical experts will continue to attend the press conferences, he says. But he says other experts will be represented too. Q: Your colleague Nusrat Ghani said today that you don't need any more BME reviews. You just need to implement what has been recommended already. Raab says the commission is being set up to set a new direction. But he stressed that a lot of progress has already been made. He says this commission will come up with actual policies. Q: Aren't you just kicking the can down the road? Raab says the government is already following up on things like the Lammy review. (See 1.28pm.) And he says there is some encouraging Ipsos MORI polling out on this today. Q: Do you accept that changing the two-metre rule involves a trade-off between safety and business? Raab says there is nothing absolute about two metres. And he says the scientific evidence is constantly evolving Q: Do you agree that the way British Airways is treating its workers is a disgrace? Raab says firms are going through a very difficult time. He would urge them to save as many jobs as possible. Q: What help is the government offering? Raab says it has offered a lot of help already. He says his department, the Foreign Office, spent £75m on a charter flight regime that helped airlines. Q: But what are you doing for British Airways? Raab says the chancellor is looking at all vulnerable sectors. Q: [From the BBC's Mark Easton] Instead of announcing a new disparities review, why doesn't the government publish the material from the Public Health England review that was suppressed? Raab says he does not accept this is just another review. He says the government is making progress on the recommendations from past reviews. Q: But there are leaks from the report explaining why BAME people are dying more frequently from coronavirus? Raab says it is a sensitive topic. When the government can release further information, it will do so. Q: What will the government do to help key workers with childcare over the summer? The normal options - summer camps, grandparents and holidays abroad - aren't available? Raab says that is a good question. But he says the government will fund summer activities. Raab is now taking the first question, from Olly in Newcastle. Q: When will the alert level fall to one, or close to one? Raab says it is hard to say. They are trying to push it down. But the alert level is not up to politicians, he says. And here is the slide with the death figures. Raab is now presenting the slides. Here are the figures for tests and news cases. Raab says the government is monitoring the impact of its changes carefully. There is a risk of a second spike, he says. He says the government will not move to the next stage before 4 July. Nick Thomas-Symonds says that we need to see "deeds not words" and that, by launching an inquiry into racism and inequality and failing to act now, "the prime minister just isn't offering the leadership required". Priti Patel responds that the Black Lives Matter movement and the points they have been making are "important and essential". She says the aim of the commission is to set out a "positive agenda for change" and that all MPs should welcome that. Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary and first secretary of state, is taking the UK government press conference. He summarises the latest moves to ease the lockdown coming into force in England. These are modest and careful steps, he says. The Department of Health and Social Care has released the latest headline UK death figures. There have been a further 38 deaths, taking the total to 41,736. This is the figure for people who have tested positive for coronavirus and died. It is not the total for all coronavirus deaths because thousands of people have died from coronavirus without having had a test, ONS figures suggest. Labour's shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds says that this weekend we were "reminded once again" about the professionalism of our front line workers. He says he was appalled to see the images of a man urinating by the memorial to PC Keith Palmer. On the issue of damage to memorials, he says: The prime minister should be clear that we will not allow him to move the focus from the action to address the discrimination people face now. And let us be clear... there should be no attempt to draw comparisons between those intent on violence this weekend and the legitimate cause of the Black Lives Matter campaigners, who have brought attention to the impact that racism and inequality continue to have both here in the UK and across the world. Patel says she wants to see "these vicious individuals" brought to justice. She says that large gatherings of people remain unlawful and that she urges people not to attend any future protests to "protect themselves and their loved ones" from the coronavirus. In total, at least 100 officers have now been injured, says Patel. And at least 280 arrests have been made. "Many of the so-called protesters came with the deliberate intent of causing harm to those around them and to police officers". Patel says hooliganism is "utterly indefensible". She says that the image of the man desecrating the memorial to PC Keith Palmer, who made the "ultimate sacrifice" during a terror attack, was "the most abhorrent". Patel says that over 210,000 have attended demonstrations across the country following the death of George Floyd. She says that there were at least 160 separate protests this weekend, the vast majority of which passed peacefully. But counter demonstrations sparked ugly scenes. This Saturday, 2,000 people staged counter-protests in Westminster with eruptions of violence throughout the day. Racists and far-right hooligans clashed with the police and fights broke out. Smoke bombs, glass bottles were lobbed at the police in shameful scenes. 38 police officers were hurt across the country this weekend, as they were kicked, punched or pelted with missiles. The home secretary, Priti Patel, is giving a statement to the Commons on the violence in central London this weekend. She says she was "saddened and sickened by the far-right thugs" who came to London on "a so-called mission" to protect our heritage. They failed to understand that "our heritage is founded on a set of shared values - tolerance, respect for people and property, and adherence to the rule of law", she says. There is no place for their sickening conduct and hate in our society. They were violent. They were aggressive and abusive towards police officers. they were patently racist. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at the University of Oxford, has told the House of Lords science and technology committee he would be surprised if the UK avoided a second coronavirus wave. The PA Media news agency has his comments: I think it is possible that we might not have a second wave. But I think given the fact that the lockdown has now been largely released, we're now back in action, and we have still - pretty rapidly declining - but a pretty reasonable level of infections in the community, I would be very surprised if we avoided the second wave. I think the real question is, are we going to have a number of single outbursts around the country and then a second wave, or are we going to just get a second wave and when will that be? This is from David Henig, the British trade specialist and former civil servant who heads the UK trade policy project at the European Centre for International Political Economy, on Boris Johnson suggesting July could be a deadline in the talks process. (See 4.32pm.) And here is the quote from the clip Boris Johnson recorded for broadcasters after his talks with the EU where he said he would like to set the end of July as a deadline for getting a breakthrough in the post-Brexit trade talks. (See 3.53pm.) He said: What we already said today is the faster we can do this the better, we see no reason why you shouldn't get that done in July. The issue is very clear, we fought an election based on these ideas, the manifesto was very clear. I certainly don't want to see it going on to the autumn/winter as I think perhaps in Brussels they would like. Earlier this year Downing Street effectively set June as its deadline for a breakthrough, saying that if the broad outline of a deal was not clear by then, it could walk away and prepare to trade with the EU on WTO terms (ie, opt for a "no-deal" Brexit) from the end of the transition in December. The coronavirus crisis made that deadline unrealistic. Johnson now seems to be reviving it for the end of July, although from his words it is not clear how firm an ultimatum this actually is. Care homes have been ordered to destroy a batch of faulty Covid-19 test kits after the Department of Health and Social Care discovered the swabs could break off while being used to gather samples from residents' tonsils and noses. Care home managers were told on Sunday not to use the tests because they had "brittle stems at risk of snapping". The kits were manufactured by Citotest, a company based in China, and were distributed by the government's Covid-19 care home testing programme. It is tasked with providing tests for all staff and residents in care settings, not just people displaying symptoms. The affected batch should be destroyed or kept in a safe area clearly marked that they should not be used, officials said, adding the problem emerged on Saturday and they were working as quickly as possible to resolve it. You can read the full story from the Guardian's social affairs correspondent Robert Booth here - In the Commons Labour's Richard Burgon says the push from Tory MPs to replace the 2-metre rule with a 1-metre one is an example of the party putting profits ahead of public safety. Edward Argar, the health minister, says the government is holding a review so it can decide what policy is best. Boris Johnson has said that "a bit of oomph" is needed to conclude the UK-EU talks on a post-Brexit trade talks. Speaking from Downing Street, he said: It's very clear what the UK needs... We can't have the involvement of the European court of justice in this country; we can't have a system whereby we continue to have to obey EU law even when we're out of the EU and we've got to get a great deal for our fish... It's very clear what we need to achieve, I don't think we're actually that far apart, but what we need now is to see a bit of oomph in the negotiations. And in the Commons Tobias Ellwood, a Conservative, says 1 metre is the right distance, and now is the right time to announce it. Argar says Ellwood is making a powerful case. But he says Ellwood must await the outcome of the review. More than 1,000 prisoners were released into homelessness at the height of the coronavirus pandemic in England and Wales, figures show, prompting the government to increase funding for accommodation for prison leavers. Figures released to the Labour MP Lyn Brown - the shadow minister for prisons and probation - show 840 men, 89 women and 85 young adults aged 18 to 24 were released into rough sleeping or other forms of homelessness between 23 March, when the lockdown was imposed, and 30 April. A further 1,209 men, women and young adults were released with unknown circumstances for accommodation in the same period. You can read the full story from the Guardian's home affairs correspondent Jamie Grierson here - In the Commons John Redwood, a Conservative, says the government should announce the reduction of the 2-metre rule to a 1-metre rule today. That would help business, he says. Argar says he hears what Redwood is saying, but that it is important to carry out a proper review. In the Commons the Conservative MP Bob Stewart asks, if the reproduction number is falling, why any social distancing is needed at all. Argar says R is still close to 1. He says as it falls, the government will be able to relax lockdown measures. From ITV's Paul Brand In the Commons Iain Duncan Smith, the former Conservative leader, says it could be six weeks (from the liaison committee) before we get the results of this review on the 2-metre rule, even though the facts have not changed. He says the advisers are divided. Government must take a decision, he says. He says livelihoods depend on this. (Duncan Smith favours a relaxation of the rule.) This is intriguing. Boris Johnson is planning to make a Commons statement on "global Britain" tomorrow. Greg Clark, the Conservative MP who chairs the science committee, says Boris Johnson told the liaison committee three weeks ago that the government would review the 2-metre rule before today's opening of non-essential shops. And he puts a string of questions to Argar. Argar says the review will consider the wider impact of the rule. Economists will contribute, he says. He says work has been under way on this for some time. Businesses need guidance as early as possible, he admits. Argar says it is important that this is done "as quickly as possible". As for why different countries have different rules, Argar says there is no fixed rule. In the UK Sage says a 1-metre rule could lead to a tenfold increase in risk. He says scientists advise. But ultimately ministers will decide, he says. In the Commons Edward Argar, the health minister, is responding to the urgent question on the 2-metre rule. He says the government is reviewing the rule. He summarises how that review will work, using almost the same language as that used by Downing Street at its lobby briefing. (See 1.28pm.) He says he understands why there is so much interest in this. But unless and until the review concludes otherwise, the 2-metre rule stays, he says. And this is from Charles Michel, the president of the European council, on the UK-EU talks about the post-Brexit trade negotiations. He says the EU will not be willing to "buy a pig in a poke". He means Brussels won't sign up to a deal at all costs. (Or "no deal is better than a bad deal", as someone else once said.) The EU has just issued the joint UK-EU statement about its meeting with Boris Johnson, my colleague Jennifer Rankin reports. Both sides agreed that "new momentum" was needed in the post-Brexit trade talks, the statement says. However, the statement does not say much about what might provide this "new momentum". Both sides have already agreed a timetable for talks over the summer. (See 1.37pm.) The statement says both sides want "an early understanding" on the principles behind any potential agreement, but it does not mention a deadline. It has been reported that the UK would like the end of August as a deadline, while the EU is holding out for the end of October. The EU statement also shows Brussels is confirming that the transition period will end on 31 December. Nicola Sturgeon has denied suggestions that school children in Scotland could still be learning at home in a year's time, and insisted the Scottish government wanted schools to resume full-time teaching as soon as possible. The first minister told her daily coronavirus briefing she expected Scotland's 32 councils to use "innovation and creativity" to ensure pupils had as much face-to-face learning as possible once schools reopened from 11 August onwards. She said: It is absolutely not the case that we're planning for blended learning to last a year or anything like it. On the contrary, we don't want blended learning to last a single moment longer than is strictly necessary. [We] want young people to be back having face-to-face teaching for 100% of the school week as soon as it is feasible. Educationalists have warned that the wholesale closure of schools has damaged the education and prospects for a generation of children; some councils warn they do not have the money or space to provide socially distanced learning John Swinney, the Scottish education secretary, told BBC Scotland on Sunday it was "unlikely" schools would return to normal during the next school year. "We'll have to maintain the social distancing approaches for some considerable time to come," he said. He suggested on Monday the target would be to get 50% of teaching in school from 11 August. Edinburgh council has said it planned for only a third of children to be in class once its term starts on 12 August. Swinney said that was not good enough. Sturgeon said the Scottish government would update parents every three weeks on progress in ensuring schools would provide full timetables next term. Government officials would try to help councils struggling to find the right resources, she said. But there have been no further coronavirus deaths in Northern Ireland, the Department of Health in Northern Ireland has said. Public Health Wales has recorded a further a further four coronavirus deaths, taking the total to 1,448. A zoo in Devon, Living Coasts, has announced that it will not re-open because of the forced closure due to coronavirus. In a statement the attraction's operator, Wild Planet Trust, expressed regret and said its next stage was to find new homes for animals, which include seals and penguins. It said: Falling visitor numbers and the forced closure of all its zoos due to Covid-19 has meant that it has had to look at its cost base and make efficiencies. After nearly 20 years of operation the site also needed substantial maintenance that the trust is no longer in a position to afford. It added that 44 staff were at risk of redundancy. Priti Patel, the home secretary, will make a Commons statement on disorder this afternoon. It should start after 4pm, after the urgent question on the 2-metre rule. NHS England has recorded a further 28 coronavirus hospital deaths, bringing the total number of hospital deaths in England to 27,982. The full details are here. The 28 who died were between 59 and 100 years old and all had underlying health conditions, NHS England says. To provide a comparison, here are the equivalent NHS England figures for the last two weeks. Monday 1 June - 108 Tuesday 2 June - 143 Wednesday 3 June - 179 Thursday 4 June - 115 Friday 5 June - 123 Saturday 6 June - 75 Sunday 7 June - 72 Monday 8 June - 59 Tuesday 9 June - 129 Wednesday 10 June - 88 Thursday 11 June - 83 Friday 12 June - 70 Saturday 13 June - 67 Sunday 14 June - 27 Around 15% of prosecutions for alleged breaches of emergency coronavirus laws last month were incorrect or for offences that did not exist, the Crown Prosecution Service has admitted. In its latest review of how the repeatedly updated, health regulations are being enforced, the CPS said the legislation was correctly applied in almost 85% of cases. Out of 93 prosecutions finalised under either the Coronavirus Act or health protection regulations in May, 76 were charged correctly. All but one of the 17 erroneous prosecutions were stopped at the first court appearance, according to the CPS. Of 84 prosecutions brought under the health protection regulations, 76 were found to be correct. Prosecutors withdrew the remaining eight charges in court - four because they related to homeless people, two because Welsh regulations had been used in England and two on evidential grounds. All nine prosecutions brought under the Coronavirus Act were discontinued because there was no evidence they applied to potentially infectious people, which is what the act specifically covers. Gregor McGill, the CPS director of legal services, said: Continued hard work by the police and Crown Prosecution Service has improved the application and enforcement of the rules under the coronavirus legislation. Errors have significantly reduced, with all but one of the incorrect charges immediately identified and withdrawn by prosecutors in court. The CPS will continue to review all finalised prosecutions where no fixed penalty notice was offered, as well as every case where someone disputes they have breached the Regulations, for as long as these laws remain in place. The Guardian's Sarah Butler has been out in Birmingham talking to those making the most of newly re-opened shops. Birmingham shoppers returned to the high street with many in the rest of England on Monday, as queues formed at "non-essential" retail names such as Zara, H&M, Sports Direct and Primark. "It's good to get out and have a bit of normality. I've been coming into town fairly often and it was like a ghost town. It is a bit weird to see people again," said Simone Radway, 37, queuing to buy some cycling gear in Sports Direct in central Birmingham after a trip to the nearby Primark. But any retailer hoping for a Christmas-style frenzy would have been disappointed. New Street station was quiet and shoppers said they had no trouble finding a parking spot. Nonetheless, Birmingham was busier than it had been for months and shoppers were prepared to queue up outside stores, all of which have to limit the number of customers under new government rules. Scottish ministers have finally been able to disclose how many people tested positive at UK government drive-through centres in Scotland, more than two months after the first centres opened. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said 2,343 people who used the network of drive through centres had tested positive since the first one opened at Glasgow airport on 5 April. More than 75,000 people had used the five drive through centres in Scotland at Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Inverness airports, and a college in Perth. It has taken until now to match every test result with individual patient records because the UK and Scottish governments failed to require people using these test centres to supply their NHS numbers or postcodes until they changed the booking system in mid-May. Even then, many records still needed to be matched by hand by NHS officials. The Guardian disclosed in May that the Welsh and Northern Irish governments had insisted that the Department of Health and Social Care changes its procedures at the start of the programme in early April, and avoided long delays in matching up test results with people's home addresses. Boris Johnson's 1.30pm video meeting with EU leaders Ursula von der Leyen, Charles Michel and David Sassoli - presidents of the commission, EU council and parliament respectively - is expected to last just one hour. Michael Gove, Brexit negotiator David Frost and Sir Tim Barrow, the ambassador to the EU, will also attend. Sources in London say they do not expect any "huge drama" at the meeting, a point underlined by its brevity. The purpose of the meeting, from the UK's point of view, is to reiterate demands for a "high quality free trade agreement" such as those the EU has with other countries including Canada and Japan, said a spokesman for the prime minister. The next five rounds of talks, which will be face to face, will take place in July and August: 29 June (Brussels) 6 July (London) 13 July (Brussels) 20 July (London) 17 August (Brussels) There is also an agreement for further talks in September, "unless otherwise agreed between the parties". The Downing Street lobby briefing is over. Here are the main points. The prime minister's spokesman rejected Labour's claims that the government was ignoring the recommendations made by previous inquiries looking at racism. Asked about David Lammy's claim to this effect (see 10.02am), the spokesman said the government was implementing the recommendations of previous reports. He said: The Ministry of Justice recently published an update on the Lammy review which set out a comprehensive programme of work to address inequalities which were identified in the criminal justice system. It includes supporting those from under-represented groups to become judges. We have introduced a deferred prosecution pilot called Chance to Change. That is now up and running, with the intention of addressing racial inequalities that stem from a lack of trust in the justice system among ethnic minority defendants. We are bringing together and publishing more data than ever before on race. And last year Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service met its target of recruiting 14% BAME prison staff. The spokesman said that the commission on race and ethnic disparities announced by Boris Johnson today would look at issues like the under-performance of white working class boys in schools. The prime minister's spokesman said that the government's review of the two-metre rule would be completed "in the coming weeks" - but he would not commit to it being ready before 4 July, when the government has said pubs and restaurants might be allowed to start opening up in England. There has been speculation that they might be allowed to serve customers outdoors from that point. When it was put to him that businesses needed advance notice of what would be allowed, the spokesman said the government was aware of the hospitality industry's need for certainty. But he also said the government had to act in a way that was safe. The spokesman said that Simon Case, the new permanent secretary at No 10, would oversee the review of the two-metre rule. And he said the review would report to the Covid strategy committee chaired by the PM. Explaining its remit, he said: It will look at evidence around the transmission of the virus in different environments, incident rates, international comparisons, and it will draw on advice from scientific and medical experts, as well as economists and papers from Sage. It will take advice from a range of experts, including the chief medical officer and the chief scientific adviser. The spokesman said that the health minister Edward Argar would respond to this afternoon's Commons urgent question about the two-metre rule. (See 9.44am.) The spokesman said that Boris Johnson would be responding to the open letter sent to MPs by the England footballer Marcus Rashford saying the food voucher scheme for poor children should continue over the summer holidays. (See 8.11am.) The spokesman also praised Rashford for using his profile "in a positive way". And he said the government had already announced an extra £63m for councils to help disadvantaged families over the summer. He said: The prime minister understands the issues facing families across the UK which is why last week the government announced an additional £63m for local authorities to benefit families who are struggling to afford food and other basic essentials. The PM also set out that as schools open more widely and their kitchens reopen, we expect them to make food parcels available for collection or delivery for any children that are eligible for free school meals who are not yet able to return to schools. Where that is not possible, schools can continue to offer vouchers to eligible pupils. Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, will take the afternoon press conference at 5pm, the spokesman said. He said he thought Raab would be appearing on his own, without a government scientist. But the spokesman rejected suggestions that this was because scientists were no longer welcome. He said: Last week you saw, from memory, the chief medical officer, the chief scientific adviser, you saw NHS England's medical director, you saw Baroness Harding who is in charge of test and trace, you also saw the Health and Safety Executive and a couple of others as well... There won't be an expert there every day but you will still see them. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has revealed that he has not spoken to Boris Johnson for almost three weeks. Asked during his government's daily press conference if Wales was in the loop or going it alone, he said: I last spoke to the prime minister two weeks ago last Thursday, so that's nearly three weeks ago. I've had no discussion with any UK minister offered in the weeks that have followed. As of today there is no invitation to speak to any UK minister during the rest of this week. He clarified that he had spoken with the Welsh secretary, Simon Hart. Drakeford added: Does that mean we don't get any intelligence from the UK government? No. There is still a great deal of discussion that goes on between officials. Vaughan Gething the [Welsh health minister] has a weekly call with the UK health ministers and ministers from the other devolved administrations. But he said his calls for a "regular, reliable rhythm of meetings with UK ministers" had not been heeded. "I'm afraid we've been in a stop/start of that cycle for more than two weeks," he said. Boris Johnson has announced a "cross-governmental commission" into racial disparities in education, health and criminal justice. It is the latest of a series of reports into ethnic injustices over recent years. Guardian political correspondent Peter Walker looks at whether previous inquiries have changed anything: Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has announced that no new coronavirus deaths have been reported in Scotland in the last 24 hours, the third time the figure has remained the same since lockdown began. As of Monday, a total of 2,448 patients have died in Scotland after testing positive for coronavirus, no change on Sunday's figure. The reported death tolls previously remained the same on June 7 and June 8, a Sunday and a Monday. But the first minister stressed that death reports are lower at weekends. Speaking at the Scottish government's coronavirus briefing, Sturgeon said a further 29 people have tested positive for the virus. There are 870 people in hospital with confirmed or suspected Covid-19, a decrease of 94. Of these patients, 18 were in intensive care, an increase of three. Google has apologised for an error that resulted in an image of Winston Churchill being removed from its search results, after accusations that the company had deliberately taken it down in support of the Black Lives Matter protests. Conservative activists first noted the omission late on Saturday night, highlighting the fact that Churchill's image was absent from the gallery results for "UK prime ministers". Missing too was the PM's first historic term in office: the company's results recorded only his 1951 to 1955 leadership. In a statement on Sunday, Google said the removal of Churchill's image was not accidental. Instead, the company said, it had intervened to correct a separate issue flagged by its users: that the image automatically selected for Churchill showed him at a much younger age than the "more famous and iconic" pictures of him during the war. Because Google avoids directly dictating search results, the company had blocked the younger image, but not specifically selected a replacement. "In this case, a bug in our systems prevented a new representative image from updating," the company said. "As a result, Churchill's entry lacked an image from late April until this weekend, when the issue was brought to our attention." A man who suffered a broken wrist and damage to his arm and shoulder after he was detained outside his home in what he believes was a wrongful racist arrest is suing the Metropolitan police over his injuries. Tariq Stanley, an insurance underwriter, said he was wrongfully detained outside his home in the Woolwich area of the city during the pandemic lockdown. The 27-year-old black man recorded mobile phone footage of the arrest on 17 April. Stanley said it confirmed he was trying to cooperate with the police, even offering them the keys to his apartment so they could search it. You can read the full report from Guardian reporter Henry McDonald here - This, from Guardian writer David Conn - A series of high-profile sporting events went ahead as scheduled in mid-March even as Covid-19 was being declared a pandemic. This podcast from earlier this month, in which David Conn investigates the scientific reasoning behind the decision, is well worth a listen. This is from David Sassoli, president of the European parliament, referring to the the video conference that Boris Johnson is holding later with the EU about the post-Brexit trade talks. Travis Perkins, the builders' merchant, is cutting 2,500 jobs in the UK, almost a tenth of its workforce, and closing 165 stores. The business says it expects weaker demand for materials in the next two years in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. You can read the full story at the link below and follow more live updates on the Guardian's business live blog here. A 28-year-old football fan has been jailed after admitting urinating next to the memorial dedicated to PC Keith Palmer, who was stabbed to death in the 2017 Westminster terror attack. Andrew Banks, of Manor Road in Stansted, Essex, was handed a 14-day immediate jail term after pleading guilty to outraging public decency during a far-right protest in central London on Saturday. The PA Media news agency reports that Banks said he had been on an all-night drinking session in the capital and decided to join fellow football supporters travelling to London to "protect the statues", but admitted he did not know which statues. He also said he had no idea about the memorial to PC Palmer, and handed himself into police when he was confronted by his father, who saw images of the incident online. Jailing Banks at Westminster magistrates court on Monday morning, Chief magistrate Emma Arbuthnot said: I accept you were drunk and did not know where you were urinating. Your explanation is you had 16 pints to drink, you hadn't been to bed, and a group of football supporters were coming up to protect the monuments. The irony is rather than protecting the monuments, you almost urinated on one. That was more by luck than judgment. You showed no respect at the time for a man killed while protecting the Houses of Parliament. Music venue Colston Hall has removed lettering from the outside of its building ahead of a planned name change, PA Media reports. It was named after Edward Colston, the 17th century slave trader, and built almost 150 years after his death. Bristol Music Trust, which runs the venue, announced in 2017 that the name would be changed this year following a £49m refurbishment. The organisation said this morning that removing the lettering is "just one step on our road" to revealing the new name this autumn. The move comes after a statue of Colston was toppled and thrown into Bristol harbour during a Black Lives Matter march last weekend. Bristol Music Trust said: We have taken this action as a symbolic moment and a public demonstration of the commitment we made three years ago to change our name. Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that levels of anxiety among Britons appear to be reducing compared with the start of lockdown. At the beginning of lockdown, the body noted a "marked" increase in anxiety. Between 20-30 March, almost half (49.6%) of people reported high anxiety. This reduced to 37% between 30 April and 10 May. But average anxiety scores are still higher compared with last year, and it has been estimated that 19 million adults in Britain are suffering high levels of anxiety. The ONS report on anxiety and coronavirus (which you can read here) states: The effect seen on average anxiety ratings throughout the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic shows a similar pattern to the theory of 'hedonic adaptation'. When a shock event occurs, such as the impact of the coronavirus, wellbeing is temporarily impacted but people then quickly adapt so that wellbeing partially bounces back; though not necessarily to the same level as it was before the shock. During lockdown, new measures have been put into place, which may have also helped to alleviate high levels of anxiety. David Isaac, chairman of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, has said Boris Johnson should be taking action to address racial inequality instead of just announcing another inquiry. Echoing the point made by Labour (see 10.02am), Isaac said: We know the scale of the problems we face to tackle the entrenched racial inequality in our country. It is not new. There have been countless reports and the data exists exposing all the issues. Now is the time for urgent action. We need to see a clear and comprehensive race strategy with clear targets and timescales from government. We hope this new commission will help deliver that and we stand ready to work with it. A report by an influential group of MPs has said the Treasury should act to help more than a million people who have fallen through the cracks in the government's Covid-19 income support schemes. The Guardian's Larry Elliott and Kalyeena Makortoff report that the all-party Treasury select committee said large numbers of people were enduring financial hardship as they were unable to benefit from the chancellor's schemes for salaried employees and the self-employed. The committee said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, needed to make good on his promise to "do whatever it takes" to protect individuals and businesses from the impact of the pandemic. The MPs called on Sunak to address the gaps in his coronavirus job retention scheme (CJRS) and self-employment income support scheme (SEISS). Employers across Britain face a deadline this week to make job cuts, as the furlough scheme is gradually wound down from August. The Scottish National party has announced that Amy Callaghan, the 28-year-old MP for East Dunbartonshire, is recovering in hospital following emergency surgery after collapsing at home with a brain haemorrhage last week. The party said it was linked to a manageable but unspecified medical condition, and the event could have longer-term consequences. Callaghan took the seat from Jo Swinson, the then Liberal Democrat leader, in a closely-fought contest in last December's snap election. Callaghan's family said: Amy is in good spirits and able to communicate well with family. She has been overwhelmed with the messages of support and kindness which are a huge source of encouragement. She has made great progress thus far but is under no illusion of the seriousness of her condition and the rehabilitation that will follow. In England non-essential shops are opening again today. Retailers were not sure in advance how many shoppers would turn up, but in some areas interest seems high. Here are some places where people have been queuing. Thousands more pupils are going back to school today, but the picture across the UK is patchy. At least parts of years 10 and 12 are returning to school to get some time with teachers ahead of their GCSEs and A-levels next year. The government has faced criticism that it has not done more to get schools reopened, with some children facing the prospect of having been out of the classroom for almost six months by the time they return in September. A No 10 source said Mr Johnson was "acutely aware" of the impact the extended closure was having on pupils and was working with the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, on a major "catch-up" plan. Here's some pics of what some of those classrooms look like: In his Daily Telegraph article, which he has now posted on his Facebook page (perhaps to counter claims he was announcing government policy behind the Telegraph paywall), Boris Johnson says that the Black Lives Matter focus on statues is "a total distraction from the matter in hand". That is a bit rich, given that his own article says much more about statues than it does about racial inequalities (a point that prompted David Lammy to accuse him of trying to provoke a culture war - see 10.22am). But the article also amounts to Johnson's most extensive comment on an issue that has attracted huge interest in the last week, and so it is worth highlighting what he says. Here are the main points. Johnson claims that those calling for statues to be removed are trying to distort history. He says: I am also extremely dubious about the growing campaign to edit or photoshop the entire cultural landscape. If we start purging the record and removing the images of all but those whose attitudes conform to our own, we are engaged in a great lie, a distortion of our history - like some public figure furtively trying to make themselves look better by editing their own Wikipedia entry. This seems to fundamentally misunderstand the motives of those, for instance, who celebrated the removal of the Edward Colston statue in Bristol. They would argue that what amounted to "distortion" was a monument celebrating someone as a benefactor with no acknowledgement of the monstrous origins of his wealth. He says he will resist "with every breath in my body" attempts to remove Winston Churchill's statue from Parliament Square. [Churchill] was a hero, and I expect I am not alone in saying that I will resist with every breath in my body any attempt to remove that statue from Parliament Square, and the sooner his protective shielding comes off the better. But, as David Lammy pointed out on Today, there is no serious campaign to remove the Churchill statute from Parliament Square in the first place and no one is calling for this beyond a small minority of activists (like Imarn Ayton, who was on the Today programme at the weekend). Johnson's argument seems designed to curry favour with the Mail on Sunday, which yesterday launched a campaign to save the Churchill statue. As the Financial Times' Robert Wright pointed out, that is about the safest newspaper campaign ever. Johnson claims that removing statues of historic figures will result in a "never-ending debate about which well-known historical figure is sufficiently pure or politically correct to remain in public view". He goes on: Where will it end? Are we supposed to haul down Cromwell who killed so many thousands of people in Ireland? What about Nelson and all the other innumerable reminders of this country's imperial past? Take the case of Ayuba Suleiman Diallo, whose portrait hangs in Room 15 of the National Portrait Gallery. He was a native of Gambia who was known and admired in 18th-century London as a translator of Arab texts. He was also, originally, a slaver himself. Does that mean he should be purged from the gallery? He says that, instead of seeing statues taken down, he would rather see a more representative statues erected. He says: Rather than tear down the past, why not add some of the men and women - most often BAME - who helped to make our modern Commonwealth and our modern world? Isn't that a more cheerful approach? That "cheerful" is very telling. One criticism of Johnson is that he has a fundamental aversion into facing up to anything negative. He restates this view that there is "much more" that the government has to do to tackle racism. He proposes a "cross-government commission to look at all aspects of inequality". The only reference to what is the news announcement in the article takes up about two sentences. Johnson says: It is time for a cross-governmental commission to look at all aspects of inequality - in employment, in health outcomes, in academic and all other walks of life. We need to tackle the substance of the problem, not the symbols. Explained like this, it is hard to see how this might be different from the race disparity audit published by Theresa May in 2017. Up to half of people who are shielding from Covid-19 have left their home against advice, while a third say their mental health has worsened, according to new data. PA Media reports: Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), based on a survey of 4,149 people who are shielding, found that 49% have been out since shielding began, while 51% have stayed at home. People who are shielding were initially told not to leave their home or garden, including for exercise, shopping or to go to work. But on 1 June, the rules in England were relaxed to say people could leave their homes once a day for exercise. The new poll across England, covering May 28 to June 3, found: Two-thirds (66%) have not stayed 2 metres away from those they live with despite being advised to do so, while 11% have always kept their distance and 23% have done so sometimes. Almost half (49%, an estimated 1.1 million people) said they have left the house since receiving advice to shield and 40% have left home at least once in the previous seven days. Some 53% said they had left home during the shielding period for exercise, 26% attended a GP or hospital appointment and 24% shopped for essentials. Some 12% collected a prescription, 11% had a blood test and 3% went to work. In the previous seven days, 19% had left their house or garden every day, 34% had on some days, 29% had done so once and 18% had not at all. The poll also found that while 61% of those shielding had experienced no difference in their mental health and wellbeing due to shielding, 35% said their mental health had got worse (29% slightly worse and 6% much worse). The data also showed that around 627,000 of those shielding (28% of the total) had previously worked before being advised to shield. Of those who normally worked before shielding, 36% are now working from home and 5% are continuing to work outside the home (an estimated 32,000). Just over a third (36 %) of those who normally work have been furloughed, and 17% have stopped working. Of those offered support from the government to help them receive supplies while shielding, 54% had registered for support and 46% had not. Some 2.2 million clinically extremely vulnerable people have been advised to shield due to Covid-19. Long queues of people formed outside ZSL London Zoo in Regent's Park, west London. Parents and children were asked to respect 2-metre social distancing and many wore face coverings. Jamie Turner, site manager for ZSL London Zoo, said just under 2,000 tickets had been sold for Monday and that the return of so many customers was "beautiful to see". Visitors are being asked to keep "a tiger's length" apart. In his Today interview (see 9.19am and 10.02am) David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, also accused Boris Johnson of making his Telegraph article mostly about Winston Churchill statue because the Tories want a "culture war" as a distraction from their policy failings on race. Lammy said: [Johnson] insists on talking about statues. The Labour party isn't talking about statues. The Lib Dems [aren't] calling for Winston Churchill's statue to be removed. Neither are the Greens. The only person that wants to focus on Winston Churchill's statue is the Conservative party and frankly it's bizarre. They want a culture war because they want to distract from the central issue; implement the reviews. Do something. Change it. You're in power. You've been in power for a decade. The governing bodies of 80 of the nation's leading sports - including British Athletics, British Cycling and England Netball - have published an unprecedented statement saying they have not done enough to confront racism at all levels from grassroots participation through to the boardroom, our colleague Sean Ingle reports. In his Today programme interview this morning (see 9.19am) David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, said that if Boris Johnson were serious about wanting to address racial inequalities, he should implement the recommendations of the many reviews already sitting on shelves in Westminster instead of ordering a new inquiry. Helpfully, he itemised some of them, starting with a reference to the review he himself led into the way BAME people are treated by the criminal justice system. David Cameron appointed Lammy to head the review when he was PM, and it reported to Theresa May's government inn 2017. Lammy said: I made 35 specific recommendations in the Lammy review (pdf). Implement them. There are 110 recommendations in the Angiolini review (pdf) into deaths into police custody. Implement them. There are 30 recommendations in the Home Office review (pdf) into the Windrush scandal. Implement them. Twenty six into Baroness McGregor's review (pdf) into workplace discrimination. Implement them. That's what Boris has to do. And the Black Lives protests can stop and we can get on with dealing with the coronavirus. There will be an an urgent question in the Commons on the 2-metre rule. Having repeatedly said that this is being regularly kept under review, ministers have now said a specific review of it is under way. Greg Clark, the Conservative chair of the Commons science committee, has tabled the UQ. He is asking Boris Johnson to respond, although it is very unlikely that he will. No 10 is much more likely to send another minister to the Commons to respond (which is allowed). Good morning. I'm Andrew Sparrow, joining the blog for the day. Here is the agenda with what's coming up. 12pm: Downing Street lobby briefing. 12.30pm: The Scottish and Welsh governments are due to hold their daily coronavirus briefings. 1.30pm: Boris Johnson holds a video meeting with Ursula von der Leyen, the European commission president, to discuss the Brexit talks. 2.30pm: The permanent secretaries at housing, business, the Treasury and the Cabinet Office give evidence to the Commons public accounts committee about the government's response to coronavirus. 2.30pm: Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 3pm: Prof Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, is among the academics and medical professionals giving evidence to the Lords science and technology committee on the immunology and pathophysiology of coronavirus. 3pm: The Rev Jesse Jackson addresses a Black Lives Matter webinar organised by the National Education Union. 4pm: Local government and Joint Biosecurity Centre officials give evidence to the Commons communities committee on track and trace. 5pm: UK government press conference. Long queues have been seen outside Primark stores across England. (This pic taken by Elle May Rice in Liverpool for the Liverpool Echo) There were lines of dozens of people at branches of the budget clothes store in Birmingham, Derby, Liverpool and Nottingham. Research from American Express has found that seven in ten (72%) independent retailers that closed their doors in March are planning to open. The majority of small retailers (89%) felt confident they could make the necessary adjustments to keep customers safe. Just over one-third (34%) of retailers thought they would be trading at pre-lockdown levels by December 2020, rising to 56% who felt they would be back to normal by the end of 2021. The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, eviscerated Boris Johnson's decision to set up a commission on race and ethnic disparities on BBC Radio 4's Today programme this morning. He accused the government of writing its commission on race and ethnic disparities "on the back of a fag packet" to "assuage the Black Lives Matter protest". He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: You can understand why it feels like, yet again in the UK, we want figures, data - but we don't want action. Black people aren't playing victim, as Boris indicates, they are protesting precisely because the time for review is over and the time for action is now. Lammy slammed Johnson's decision to announce the commission in the Daily Telegraph, which is behind a paywall. I don't know why he's announced a commission behind a paywall, in the Telegraph, buried in the middle of yet another article about Churchill. If he was serious, why are there no details about how it will be staffed, its remit, its terms of reference, its timetable? That's the question. It's because this was written on the back of a fag packet yesterday to assuage the Black Lives Matter protest. Get on with the action, legislate, move - you're in government, do something. Coronavirus good news klaxon! BP has told shareholders that it could write down the value of its assets by up to $17.5bn (£14bn) as it reduced its long-term forecast for oil prices and warned that the Covid-19 pandemic would have a lasting impact on the global economy. The energy giant slashed its forecast for Brent crude oil prices to $55 a barrel from $75 a barrel and said the coronavirus crisis would speed up the shift to a lower-carbon economy. The company estimates that this will result in write-offs of $13bn to $17.5bn, which will drag down its financial results in the second quarter. It is also reviewing whether to develop some of its potential oilfields. Read the full story here: The District Councils' Network has put out guidance, urging the public to take extra care when visiting high streets and town centres to avoid a second spike in coronavirus infection. The government recently announced £20m for district councils to lead the local effort to safeguarding high streets following the pandemic, and councils are urging the public to follow safety guidance. They say they are trying to make things safer by:  Helping marshal movements with floor markings and signage.  Carrying out more frequent street cleaning, providing hand-sanitiser posts, adapting public seating and conveniences.  Creating more pedestrianised spaces and streets.  Adapting indoor and outdoor market spaces to allow traders to trade safely.  Deploying council staff or volunteers to provide help and advice. They say councils are planning how to save the high street, looking at measures including reshaping a mixed offer of retail, culture, entertainment and housing. Cllr Mark Crane, DCN lead member for stronger economies, said: We will be delighted to see visitors return to our high streets, which we're working hard to reshape so that shops and businesses get the boost they desperately need, but without compromising public health. But we need members of the public to respect these efforts, and take extra care when visiting their local high streets and town centres during this challenging period. Small business minister Paul Scully has encouraged people to go to the shops as many reopen for the first time since the start of lockdown. Speaking to BBC Breakfast on Monday, he said: The high street is going to be a different place to what it was before, with the one-way systems, with the hand sanitisers, and with people not trying clothes on in the same way. But, nonetheless, it is safe to shop. I would encourage people to be sensible, work with the people in the shop but do go out and shop, and start opening our economy gradually and carefully." He added the government would keep the two-metre rule "under review". Scully was asked how the government would respond to footballer Marcus Rashford's plea to extend the current food voucher scheme for children normally reliant on school meals throughout the summer holidays. Scully described Manchester United player Rashford, 22, who has raised £20m for vulnerable children in the UK with the charity FareShare since the start of lockdown, as an "inspirational figure". What we've done is put £9m into summer activities, which clearly if people with children are at these activities they will get fed within that as well. We're also bringing in £63m worth of support to local authorities, for hardship funds, to make sure that people who do struggle can actually get access to a decent meal. The Chartered Institute of Marketing has warned that the UK is entering into an extremely challenging time for business and calls for customers to give brands "the benefit of the doubt". Chris Daly, CEO, Chartered Institute of Marketing said: Every business is having to think extremely carefully about how it uses its marketing budget in the coming weeks and months; balancing efforts to promote sales and footfall, with keeping customers safe and well informed. Importantly, communicating to customers over the coming weeks is going to require businesses to strike a very fine balance; and not everyone is going to get it right. Some businesses have been vilified in recent weeks, especially at the start of the Covid-19 crisis, and we hope that government and consumers will be more understanding as businesses face up to this difficult situation. We will not defend irresponsible or unprofessional marketing, but it is important that as well as celebrating the success stories, we give businesses the benefit of the doubt as they seek to bring back their customers and restart the British economy. This letter from Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford is incredibly powerful. Today is the first day that it will be mandatory for people travelling on public transport in England to wear a face covering over their nose and mouth for the entirety of any journeys made. The mayor of London is asking all Londoners to wear a face covering where they can't keep a safe distance (2 metres) from others. In Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, wearing a face mask is recommended but not compulsory. You can read the full government guidance here. Here are the top stories in the UK today. Shops in England selling non-essential goods can reopen on Monday for the first time in almost three months. Retailers have introduced strict safety measures and social distancing. With fears growing about the health of the UK economy, reopening the service sector has been seen as vital. Retailers are appealing to customers to support their local shops to help them survive the coronavirus pandemic, which has devastated high street trade. Boris Johnson has urged people to "shop with confidence". The British economy will shrink by 8% this year and is unlikely to recover from the damage wrought by the coronavirus crisis until 2023, according to a leading economic forecaster. After official figures showed Britain's economy shrank by a record 20.4% in April - putting the country on course for the worst recession in more than three centuries - the EY Item Club was moved to produce its first interim report between two quarterly updates to reflect the deteriorating outlook. Foreign NHS workers and carers are still being charged for using the health service, despite the prime minister's pledge to scrap these fees "as soon as possible". On 21 May, in a remarkable U-turn Boris Johnson said that the £400 annual fee paid by non-EU migrants to use the NHS - on top of other mounting visa costs - should be removed for health and care workers. But a poll conducted by Doctors Association UK exclusively shared with the Guardian showed 158 NHS workers reported having to continue to pay for immigration health surcharge, while just eight reporting said they did not. England's coronavirus lockdown should not be further lifted until the government's contact-tracing system has proven to be "robust and effective", the World Health Organization has said after widespread criticism of the first results of the new tracking operation. As shops across England prepared to reopen, and people were encouraged by the government to come out of their homes and on to the high street, Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO's director for Europe, cautioned that the UK remained in a "very active phase of the pandemic". Racism and discrimination suffered by Britain's black, Asian and minority ethnic people has contributed to the high death rates from Covid-19 in those communities, an official inquiry has found. The conclusion is contained in a section of a government-commissioned report that ministers have refused to publish, apparently for fear of stoking tensions around race and racism after protests in response to George Floyd's killing by a white police officer in Minneapolis. I'll be with you for the next few hours today, so please do get in touch if you have a tip or a story. My email is alexandra.topping@theguardian.com and I'm @lexytopping on Twitter. My DMs are open. 68802 false false  Andrew Sparrow, Frances Perraudin and Alexandra Topping      Shoppers in Westfield shopping centre in London as many non-essential stores reopened in England.        Mess left behind following a rave at Daisy Nook Park in Manchester on Saturday night.        Dominic Raab at the press conference.        Death rates        Testing and new case figures        Hospital figures        Nick Thomas-Symonds        Priti Patel.        A sign at the giraffe enclosure in London Zoo, which reopened today.        A visitor look at the penguins at Chester Zoo after it reopened today.        Shoppers queueing to get in Zara and other stores around the Bullring shopping centre in Birmingham.        The Wales first minister, Mark Drakeford        Nicola Sturgeon.        Passengers wearing masks on the London Underground this morning. From today face coverings are compulsory on public transport in England.        Andrew Banks at Westminster magistrates court.        Contractors on an aerial platform outside Bristol music venue Colston Hall removing the name of 17th century merchant Edward Colston from its signage.        Letters removed from the Colston Hall signage.        The queue outside Primark at Wood Green, London.        Shoppers outside Fenwick in Newcastle.        People waiting outside Primark at the Rushden Lakes shopping complex in Rushden        A crowd outside Niketown, Oxford Circus, in London.        The queue to enter Niketown in London.        Shoppers outside the MK1 Shopping & Leisure Park in Milton Keynes.        People waiting outside Primark in Birmingham        The queue outside Sports Direct in Southampton.        People queuing to enter London Zoo this morning.