block-time published-time 10.19am GMT

Highest number of deaths during second wave in France

France reported 551 new Covid-19 deaths on Monday evening, the highest number of the second wave, according to French public health director Jérôme Salomon. And the head of Santé Publique France warned that the worst of the spike was to come.

Salomon said France had the 4th highest number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the world - an extra 20,155 were reported on Monday - but attributed this to what he called "particularly high" testing in the country. France is now carrying out around 2.3m tests a week.

A patient suspected of contracting coronavirus at the emergency service of the Robert Boulin hospital in Libourne, southwestern France. Photograph: Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images

Officials reported that 4,690 intensive care beds were now being occupied by Covid-19 patients. Before the first wave in March-April this year, France had around 5,000 intensive care beds; this figure has now been increased with an eventual target of around 7,500.

With news of a possible vaccine on the horizon, an Ipsos poll found that only 59% of French people quizzed said they would get vaccinated against the coronavirus. 20% of those asked said they were vehemently opposed to having the vaccine.

A number of schools were closed across France on Tuesday after several teaching unions called for members to hold a "health strike" in protest at what they see as insufficient Covid-19 precautions in some schools and lycées. It was not immediately clear how many teachers had responded to the strike call.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.20am GMT

block-time published-time 10.17am GMT

Malaysia's health ministry reported 869 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, raising the total to 42,050 infections.

The Southeast Asian country also recorded six new deaths, taking total fatalities from the pandemic to 300.

block-time published-time 10.04am GMT

As Pfizer reports a 90% efficacy rate in clinical trials for its mRNA vaccine, here's the latest edition of the Guardian's vaccine tracker.

Related:  Covid vaccine tracker: when will a coronavirus vaccine be ready?

block-time published-time 9.48am GMT

Weekly death toll in England and Wales jumps 41%

In England and Wales, a total of 1,379 deaths registered in the week ending October 30 mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS).

It is first time the weekly figure has been above 1,000 since the week ending 12 June.

It is also the highest number of deaths involving Covid-19 since the week ending 5 June. The total is up from 978 deaths in the week to 23 October - a jump of 41%.

For more on these figures, head to Andrew Sparrow's UK live blog:

Related: UK coronavirus live: More than 10% of deaths in England and Wales now involve Covid, ONS says

Updated at 10.09am GMT

9.35am GMT

German health minister Jens Spahn expects the EU to sign a final purchase agreement with BioNTech and its partner Pfizer "in the coming days" for its potential vaccine against Covid-19.

"We will now bring this to a speedy conclusion," Spahn told a news conference in Berlin.

Spahn said he expects Germany will get up to 100m doses of the BioNTech-Pfizer vaccine. But earlier this morning, German economy minister Peter Altmaier said: "Nobody knows when and for how many people this (vaccine) will be available."

Updated at 10.09am GMT

9.22am GMT

Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat dies after contracting Covid-19Saeb Erekat (centre0 with Bill Clinton and Yassar Arafat during the 1994 Camp David summit.Photograph: Reuters

The Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat has died at 65 after contracting Covid-19, news agencies have reported. He was reported to be in a medically induced coma and in critical condition in mid-October.

Erekat, who had a lung transplant in 2017, had led the Palestinian negotiating team in peace talks with Israel since 1994. He was also secretary general of the PLO's executive committee.

He continued to lead the Palestinian delegation in talks during the Trump administration, and in September said in response to the diplomatic breakthrough between Israel and Gulf monarchies: "We definitely feel betrayed ... [the deals are] tremendous encouragement for the Israeli government to continue their occupation."

"I am the most disadvantaged negotiator in the history of man," he told a reporter in 2007, the year that the Islamic militant group Hamas seized control of Gaza from Abbas' forces. "I have no army, no navy, no economy, my society is fragmented."

AP writes:

The American-educated Erekat was involved in nearly every round of peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians going back to the landmark Madrid conference in 1991, when he famously showed up draped in a black-and-white checkered keffiyeh, a symbol of Palestinian nationalism.

Over the next few decades Erekat was a constant presence in Western media, where he tirelessly advocated for a negotiated two-state solution to the decades-old conflict, defended the Palestinian leadership and blamed Israel for the failure to reach an agreement.

Updated at 9.38am GMT

8.50am GMT

Indonesia reported 3,779 new coronavirus infections on Tuesday, bringing the total number to 444,348, data from the country's Covid-19 taskforce showed.

The data added 72 new Covid-19 deaths, taking the total number to 14,761. Indonesia has confirmed the highest tally of coronavirus cases and deaths.

Updated at 9.29am GMT

8.36am GMT

In Hungary, the government has reported 103 deaths from coronavirus in the last 24 hours, Reuters reports. That figure is close to the national peak set on Saturday of 107.

The number of new cases rose by 4,140, the government said in a statement. It said the number of people hospitalised with Covid-19 rose to 6,153, with a record number of 461 patients on ventilators.

Updated at 9.09am GMT

8.28am GMT

Matt Hancock has been speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme. He reiterates some of the points he made earlier, noting that the vaccine can only be taken out of -70C temperatures four times between the manufacturer's facility and a GP's surgery.

He says that he wrote to GPs last night to set out the agreement about "the incredibly important role they'll play" and says £150m extra will be allocated to GPs this winter to help with the process. "It is a mammoth logistical operation," he adds.

He also notes that while the most vulnerable will be vaccinated first, the rest of the programme may begin before every person over 80 has received their doses:

We'll vaccinate category 1 first, and then category 1 and 2, and then category 1 and 2 and 3... it's a bit like boarding an aeroplane... when you're called to board, they call the passengers they want on first, after that they call the passengers they want on next, but they don't say the first group can't any longer get on. So you keep rolling it out."

He reiterates that suppression tactics must continue because "we will not know how effective the vaccine is at stopping the transmission [for some time]." "The protection of an individual only comes after both doses and then one to two weeks after that, so that itself is a four to five week process." He says the government is "cautious to be really clear that we've got to stick with the programme we've got at the moment."

Updated at 8.30am GMT

8.15am GMT

Russia reported 20,977 new coronavirus infections on Tuesday, including 5,902 in the capital Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,817,109, Reuters reports. There were 21,798 cases the previous day.

Authorities also reported 368 coronavirus-related deaths in the last 24 hours, against 256 the day before, taking the official death toll to 31,161.

8.13am GMT

The UK 's unemployment rate has jumped to 4.8 percent as the coronavirus pandemic destroys a record number of UK jobs, official data showed Tuesday.

The reading for the third quarter compared with an unemployment rate of 4.5 percent for June-August, the Office for National Statistics said.

"The employment rate has been decreasing since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, while the unemployment rate is now rising sharply," the ONS said.

"Redundancies have reached a record high," it added.

You can read more about this at the UK business live blog:

Related: UK unemployment rate jumps to 4.8% as redundancies hit record high - business live

Updated at 8.13am GMT

8.10am GMT

Spain 's health minister Salvador Illa has said the first doses of the promising Pfizer vaccine could reach the country in early 2021.

The government expects to get 20m doses initially, enough to vaccinate 10m people, he says.

8.07am GMT

In India, Amrit Dhillon has reported on the children forced into work by the coronavirus pandemic. Her excellent piece begins with Subhan Shaikh, who was at school in Mumbai until the pandemic hit but now has to work because the lockdown brought his mother's work as a school bus attendant to an end:

Today, life for Subhan revolves around tea, which has become a lifeline for his family. After seeing his mother struggle, Subhan decided to do something and became a tea seller on the streets of Mumbai.

From 2pm Subhan is allowed to borrow the stove in the corner of a food stall in Bhendi Bazaar to make a big pan of milky tea. He strains the tea into a large thermos flask, hangs it precariously on his bicycle handlebars and sets off to sell it in tiny paper cups for five rupees each.

There is no shortage of customers as Indians drink tea endlessly throughout the day. "I go around all day until about 10pm. I make about 250 rupees (£2.50) every day which I give to mum to buy vegetables," says Subhan, speaking on the phone from Mumbai.

Subhan's experience is typical for millions of India's urban poor, Dhillon writes, "who have been pushed further into poverty by the impact of Covid-19 on jobs and incomes. All dreams of educating children to give them a better life have been put aside for now."

You can read the piece here:

Related: From schoolboy to tea seller: Covid poverty forces India's children into work

Updated at 8.07am GMT

7.44am GMT

When people aren't feeling optimistic about a vaccine by spring, they're probably worrying about celebrations at Christmas. And in France, a Paris hospital director has argued that the traditional festivities should be cancelled this year over fears of sparking another resurgence in infections.

According to Reuters, Julien Lenglet told RMC Radio that there was a risk that Christmas and New Year's Eve parties - known in France as "Saint-Sylvestre" - could end up as a "giant, intergenerational cluster that could be at the origins of a potential new third wave" of Covid-19.

"I would say, without any hesitation, that we ought to cancel Christmas and Saint-Sylvestre," said Lenglet, who works at the Antony hospital in the Paris region.

France entered a second, national lockdown to curb the spread of the Covid-19 virus at the end of October, but some politicians and health experts are hoping that by doing so, the Covid-19 numbers might start to come down, allowing allow the country to reopen in time for the Christmas season.

Updated at 8.04am GMT

7.36am GMT

Ukraine registered 10,179 Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours, its health ministry said on Tuesday, not the record figure of 10,842 that it had earlier reported.

The minister Maksym Stepanov said a total of 479,197 cases had been registered in Ukraine as of 10 November, with 8,756 deaths.

Updated at 7.42am GMT

7.31am GMT

UK's health service asked to be ready to deploy vaccine in December

Meanwhile, the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, has also been speaking about the vaccine.

Hancock says he has asked the NHS to be ready to start deploying the vaccine from the start of December. But he notes that there are "many hurdles that still need to be gone over" and that the full safety data needs to be analysed first.

Matt Hancock.Photograph: Sky News

Hancock says that priority for vaccination when available is a "clinical process" and that it will start with the most vulnerable people in care homes and those that look after them, then be rolled out to NHS and social care staff, and then "coming down through the age ranges". He adds: "That prioritisation is set by the clinical body and we will take their advice on the best way to roll this out to keep people safe."

He declines to explicitly back the suggestion from Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, that life could be back to normal by spring 2021. "Yes, this is promising news, but there is a long way further to go," he says. A little later in the interview he says: "We've always been clear that our central expectation for the roll-out of a vaccine ... is in the first part of 2021 ... that remains my central expectation."

Updated at 7.35am GMT

7.18am GMT

Everyone wants as many expert views on the vaccine news as possible, so here's another voice: in the UK, BBC Radio 4's Today programme is interviewing Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics and vaccine specialist at the university of Bristol. He's pretty optimistic.

"This is extremely good news," he says. "It gives us the first step but a very important step forward in defeating the pandemic."

He says that a 90% efficacy rate "is up there with the very best vaccines that we've got ... it really really works ... it is extraordinarily good."

He does note that the study was probably mostly on "relatively mild cases." And, he adds, "in order to extrapolate from being able to prevent relatively mild Covid to stop elderly people from getting seriously ill or dying is to some extent at this point a leap of faith - but we have to take that leap of faith, that's the evidence we've got at this point, and 90% is pretty good, so it's pretty likely that even if it's less effective in elderly people than younger people it'll still work to some extent."

He concludes: "We're going to see it being used, almost certainly, within a few weeks from now."

Updated at 7.30am GMT

7.10am GMT

Hi, this is Archie Bland taking over from Helen Sullivan, and beginning today with the Czech Republic's latest case count: health ministry figures published today show a drop of more than 3,000 positive tests against a week earlier, with the number of new cases in the last 24 hours now 6,048.

In total, the country of 10.7 million has recorded 420,875 cases after showing one of Europe's highest infection rates for several weeks.

The ministry also reported 216 new deaths, including 95 on Monday as well as revisions to previous days. Overall, 5,074 people have died in relation to Covid-19.

Updated at 7.35am GMT

6.55am GMT

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan, for today - except that you may wish to know, in non-Covid development, Fox News (!) cut away from a briefing held by the White House press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany on Monday.

"Whoa, whoa, whoa - I just think we have to be very clear. She's charging the other side as welcoming fraud and welcoming illegal voting. Unless she has more details to back that up, I can't in good countenance continue to show you this," said host Neil Cavuto from the studio:

'Whoa' - Fox News cuts off Kayleigh McEnany for 'illegal votes' spiel https://t.co/nY2IZzpEGF

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) November 10, 2020

6.53am GMT

Global renewable electricity installation will hit a record level in 2020, according to the International Energy Agency, in sharp contrast with the declines caused by the coronavirus pandemic in the fossil fuel sectors.

The IEA report published on Tuesday says almost 90% of new electricity generation in 2020 will be renewable, with just 10% powered by gas and coal. The trend puts green electricity on track to become the largest power source in 2025, displacing coal, which has dominated for the past 50 years.

Growing acceptance of the need to tackle the climate crisis by cutting carbon emissions has made renewable energy increasingly attractive to investors. The IEA reports that shares in renewable equipment makers and project developers have outperformed most major stock market indices and that the value of shares in solar companies has more than doubled since December 2019:

Related: Renewable energy defies Covid-19 to hit record growth in 2020

6.30am GMT

Summary

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•China inflation dips to 11-year low as pork stocks rise. Falling food prices dragged China's consumer inflation to an 11-year low last month, spurred by improving supplies of pork, official data showed Tuesday.•Blocking Taiwan at WHO will increase hostility to China, premier says. China's efforts to block Taiwan's participation at the World Health Organization during the coronavirus pandemic will only increase the world's hostility towards the country, the island's premier said on Tuesday.•Australia records third day with no local cases. Australia has gone three days without any locally acquired cases of Covid-19. All cases have been detected in quarantined locals who have recently returned from overseas.Now the country is considering opening its borders to Asian countries, including parts of China, prime minister Scott Morrison said on Tuesday, as Canberra seeks to revive an economy ravaged by Covid-19.•Monday saw record Covid patients in US hospitals. There were almost 59,000 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across the US on Monday, the country's highest number ever of in-patients being treated for the disease. The number of people with the virus being hospitalised has increasedabout 73% over the past 30 days to at least 58,982 - a record level that surpasses the previous high of 58,370 on July 22.•US FDA authorises emergency use of Eli Lilly's experimental treatment for Covid. The US Food and Drug Administration on Monday authorised emergency use of Eli Lilly and Co's experimental Covid-19 antibody treatment for non-hospitalised patients older than 65 or who have certain chronic medical conditions. The FDA said its emergency use authorisation (EUA) was based on clinical trials showing that the treatment, bamlanivimab, reduced the need for hospitalisation or emergency room visits in Covid-19 patients at high risk of disease progression.•Brazil halts trials of Chinese Covid-19 vaccine. Brazil's health regulator said on Monday it had suspended clinical trials of a Chinese-developed Covid-19 vaccine after an "adverse incident" involving a volunteer recipient, a blow for one of the most advanced vaccine candidates, AFP reports.The setback for CoronaVac, developed by Chinese pharmaceutical firm Sinovac Biotech, came on the same day US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer said its own vaccine candidate had shown 90% effectiveness, sending global markets soaring and raising hopes of an end to the pandemic.•World may be tired, but virus 'not tired of us': WHO chief. The World Health Organization's chief called on Monday for everyone to keep fighting Covid-19, warning that while we may be sick of battling the pandemic, the virus is "not tired of us", AFP reports. Speaking to WHO's main annual assembly, which resumed on Monday after being cut short in May, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also hailed the election of Joe Biden as the next US president, voicing hope it could signal tighter global cooperation to end the pandemic.•Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly.•The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter."•Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce.•A senior World Health Organization official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive".

China inflation dips to 11-year low as pork stocks rise. Falling food prices dragged China's consumer inflation to an 11-year low last month, spurred by improving supplies of pork, official data showed Tuesday.

Blocking Taiwan at WHO will increase hostility to China, premier says. China's efforts to block Taiwan's participation at the World Health Organization during the coronavirus pandemic will only increase the world's hostility towards the country, the island's premier said on Tuesday.

Australia records third day with no local cases. Australia has gone three days without any locally acquired cases of Covid-19. All cases have been detected in quarantined locals who have recently returned from overseas.Now the country is considering opening its borders to Asian countries, including parts of China, prime minister Scott Morrison said on Tuesday, as Canberra seeks to revive an economy ravaged by Covid-19.

Monday saw record Covid patients in US hospitals. There were almost 59,000 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across the US on Monday, the country's highest number ever of in-patients being treated for the disease. The number of people with the virus being hospitalised has increasedabout 73% over the past 30 days to at least 58,982 - a record level that surpasses the previous high of 58,370 on July 22.

US FDA authorises emergency use of Eli Lilly's experimental treatment for Covid. The US Food and Drug Administration on Monday authorised emergency use of Eli Lilly and Co's experimental Covid-19 antibody treatment for non-hospitalised patients older than 65 or who have certain chronic medical conditions. The FDA said its emergency use authorisation (EUA) was based on clinical trials showing that the treatment, bamlanivimab, reduced the need for hospitalisation or emergency room visits in Covid-19 patients at high risk of disease progression.

Brazil halts trials of Chinese Covid-19 vaccine. Brazil's health regulator said on Monday it had suspended clinical trials of a Chinese-developed Covid-19 vaccine after an "adverse incident" involving a volunteer recipient, a blow for one of the most advanced vaccine candidates, AFP reports.The setback for CoronaVac, developed by Chinese pharmaceutical firm Sinovac Biotech, came on the same day US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer said its own vaccine candidate had shown 90% effectiveness, sending global markets soaring and raising hopes of an end to the pandemic.

World may be tired, but virus 'not tired of us': WHO chief. The World Health Organization's chief called on Monday for everyone to keep fighting Covid-19, warning that while we may be sick of battling the pandemic, the virus is "not tired of us", AFP reports. Speaking to WHO's main annual assembly, which resumed on Monday after being cut short in May, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also hailed the election of Joe Biden as the next US president, voicing hope it could signal tighter global cooperation to end the pandemic.

Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly.

The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter."

Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce.

A senior World Health Organization official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive".

Updated at 7.33am GMT

6.20am GMT

A study from researchers at the University of Oxford and NIHR Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre found that nearly one in five people who have had Covid-19 were diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder - such as anxiety, depression or insomnia - within three months of testing positive for the virus. In the story below, we speak to survivors about their experiences:

Related: 'I began to lose hope': the people living with post-Covid psychiatric disorders

6.04am GMT

People are planning to drive and fly more in future than they did before the coronavirus pandemic, a survey suggests, even though the overwhelming majority accept human responsibility for the climate crisis.

The apparent disconnect between beliefs and actions raises fears that without strong political intervention, these actions could undermine efforts to meet the targets set in the Paris agreement and hopes of a green recovery from the coronavirus crisis.

Approximately 26,000 people in 25 countries were polled in July and August by the YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project, in a survey designed with the Guardian.

By a ratio of more than three to one, the respondents agreed humankind was mainly or partly to blame for the climate emergency:

Related: People plan to fly and drive more post-Covid, climate poll shows

5.47am GMT

The Philippine economy shrank for the third straight quarter in July-September, official data showed Tuesday, but there were signs activity was slowly picking up as coronavirus restrictions eased and more businesses reopened.

AFP: President Rodrigo Duterte's government has been gradually loosening measures introduced in March to contain the virus after they sent the country plunging into its first recession in three decades and pushed many families deeper into poverty.

Gross domestic product fell 11.5 percent on-year in the latest quarter, the Philippine Statistics Authority said.

That was worse than the 9.6 percent contraction forecast by economists in a Bloomberg survey. But it was smaller than the downwardly revised 16.9 percent fall in the April-June and 0.7 drop in the first three months of the year.

A worker wearing a face mask fixes a decoration shaped like the Eiffel tower next to others displayed for sale on a road in San Fernando, Pampanga province in the Philippines, 6 October 2020.Photograph: Ted Aljibe/AFP/Getty Images

Consumer spending fell 9.3 percent as many people fearful of catching the virus that has infected around 400,000 in the country avoided shopping malls and restaurants. But it was better than the 15.5 percent plunge seen in the second quarter as the government extended operating hours and allowed more types of businesses to reopen.

Acting Socioeconomic Planning Secretary Karl Kendrick Chua said the recovery in Metro Manila, which accounts for a third of the country's output, was constricted by limited public transport. Trains, buses and the popular jeepneys have been operating at reduced capacity because of social distancing rules.

The country's economic woes have been exacerbated by a drop in the amount of money sent home by the legion of Filipinos working abroad that sustains many families.

Remittances fell 2.6 percent in the first eight months as thousands of workers lost their jobs and came home.

5.36am GMT

China inflation dips to 11-year low as pork stocks rise

Falling food prices dragged China's consumer inflation to an 11-year low last month, spurred by improving supplies of pork, official data showed Tuesday.

AFP reports that the cost of pork - a staple meat in the world's second-largest economy - has been edging down after rocketing last year when an African swine fever outbreak ravaged pig stocks. Authorities have been struggling to recover supplies since.

The country's consumer price index (CPI), a key gauge of retail inflation, rose 0.5 percent from a year ago, a slower pace than expected, according to National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) data.

This marked the third straight month of slower growth, and the lowest headline inflation since October 2009.

Prices of pork fell for the first time after 19 consecutive months of increases, dropping 2.8 percent, Dong Lijuan, a senior statistician at the NBS, said Tuesday.

China saw a historic contraction in economic growth in the first quarter this year, following harsh measures to curb the coronavirus outbreak, and has since grappled with uncertainty in global demand while trying to spur domestic spending.

5.26am GMT

Blocking Taiwan at WHO will increase hostility to China, premier says

China's efforts to block Taiwan's participation at the World Health Organisation during the coronavirus pandemic will only increase the world's hostility towards the country, the island's premier said on Tuesday.

AP: Chinese-claimed but democratically run Taiwan says its inability to fully access the WHO, because of China's objections, has created a gap in global pandemic prevention. China and the WHO say that is untrue. On Monday, WHO member countries rejected a US-backed appeal on for Taiwan to be permitted at a meeting of its decision-making body, the World Health Assembly. China had labelled the proposal illegal and invalid.

Speaking to reporters, Taiwan Premier Su Tseng-chang said many countries supported the island's participation in the WHA.

"But China, because of political factors, has obstructed Taiwan, which has prevented the pandemic the best," Su said. "This is not only suppressing Taiwan, it is in fact also damaging to the whole world, creating a rupture in pandemic prevention," Su added. "What China has done will only cause more and more countries and people to stand up and condemn them." The WHO says it cooperates with Taiwan on health matters, including on aspects of the pandemic, and that the island has been provided with the help it needs, but that it is up to member states to decide whether to invite it to the meeting.

5.13am GMT

Covid-19 Podcast: what's up with the coronavirus cough?

Linda Geddes speaks to Prof Jacky Smith about one of Covid-19's most consistent symptoms: the persistent dry cough. As winter arrives in the northern hemisphere, how do we tell the difference between the possible onset of the virus and the kind of routine coughs normally experienced at this time of year?

Related: Covid-19: what's up with the coronavirus cough? - podcast

5.03am GMT

Microsoft Corp on Tuesday launched two models of its Xbox gaming console, seven years after the debut of the previous version, to capture a pandemic-driven boom in consumer spending on games. The Xbox Series X - which the company has described as the "world's most powerful console" - will retail for $499.99 and a lower-priced Xbox Series S will sell for $299.99. The strategy offers consumers greater choice but the compact Series S faces criticism for being less powerful than the Series X, with less storage capacity and lacking advanced "ray tracing" graphics for titles like Capcom's "Devil May Cry 5." Xbox will compete with Sony Corp's PlayStation 5, scheduled to launch on Thursday. PS5 is widely viewed as leading the console race due to its bigger fan base and a broader range of exclusive gaming titles available at launch. This was the first time Microsoft launched its gaming console globally on the same day and the company said it has seen the highest preorders for Xbox consoles across various markets.

4.55am GMT

Australia records third day with no local cases

Australia has gone three days without any locally acquired cases of Covid-19. All cases have been detected in quarantined locals who have recently returned from overseas.

Now the country is considering opening its borders to Asian countries, including parts of China, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Tuesday, as Canberra seeks to revive an economy ravaged by Covid-19. Australia in March shut its borders to all non-citizens and permanent residents, though in October Canberra allowed New Zealand residents to enter. Internal travel is limited, although those restrictions are scheduled to be removed by the end of the year. Morrison ruled out entry from the United States or Europe, but said Australia may allow people from low-risk countries such as Taiwan, Japan, Singapore and even provinces in China.

A woman wears a mask as a precaution against coronavirus in Melbourne, Australia.Photograph: Dave Hewison/Speed Media/REX/Shutterstock

"We... are looking at what alternative arrangements could be hard to channel visitors through appropriate quarantine arrangements for low-risk countries," Morrison told reporters in Canberra. China was one of the first countries from which Australia restricted entry.

Reviving tourism would be a much-needed boost to Australia's economy, which shrank 7% in the three months that ended in June, the most since records began in 1959. Tourism in 2019 accounted for 3.1% of the country's gross domestic product, contributing almost A$61 billion ($44.4 billion) to the economy, government data shows. Although many Australians are taking holidays locally, many tourism operators are struggling and have been forced to shed staff. Unemployment ticked up to 6.9% in September, official data showed. Morrison said Australia would extend higher unemployment benefits until the end of March, though at a reduced rate. Currently those unemployed receive A$815 every two weeks, but this will fall to A$715 at the end of December.

Updated at 6.09am GMT

4.51am GMT

The US has reported more than a million new cases in the past 10 days, according to a Reuters tally, the speediest surge in infections since the country reported its first Covid-19 cases, in Washington state, 294 days ago. More than 770,000 new cases were diagnosed in the week ended 10 November, up 34% over the previous seven days, according to the tally. The country has reported a total of around 10.13 million cases. Deaths over the week to Nov. 10 increased 15%, or more than 6,600 people, over the previous week. That was the highest one-week total since mid-August, taking the overall death toll for the pandemic to more than 238,000. Worryingly for officials, health experts say the death toll tends to spike four to six weeks after a surge in infections. In Texas, which became the first US state to surpass one million cumulative coronavirus cases on Saturday, authorities in the El Paso county on Monday said they were bringing in 10 temporary refrigerated morgue trailers in anticipation of further fatalities.

4.35am GMT

Asian share markets mostly shot higher on Tuesday, Reuters reports, as global investors applauded progress in the development of a coronavirus vaccine, which lifted confidence in a world economic recovery. But China's factory-gate prices fell at a sharper-than-expected pace in October, weighed by soft demand for fuel even as the country's trade and manufacturing sectors staged impressive recoveries from their Covid-19 slump.

4.21am GMT

Monday saw record Covid patients in US hospitals

There were almost 59,000 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across the United States on Monday, the country's highest number ever of in-patients being treated for the disease, Reuters reports. The number of people with the virus being hospitalized has surged around 73% over the past 30 days to at least 58,982 - a record level that surpasses the previous high of 58,370 on July 22. The United States also recorded more than 100,000 cases for the sixth consecutive day on Monday, cementing its position as the nation worst affected by the coronavirus pandemic.

4.15am GMT

US biotech firm Arcturus Therapeutics said it expects to start distributing its Covid-19 vaccine candidate in the first quarter of next year after early stage trials showed promising results, Reuters reports. The firm said in a statement late on Monday it had already struck multi-million dollar supply deals with Israel and Southeast Asian city-state Singapore, where it is working on the vaccine with a local university and has been conducting trials. Arcturus said its ARCT-021 vaccine candidate has been generally well tolerated in trials so far, with the majority of adverse events being mild. It added it was urgently working to start later stage studies and expects to begin shipments early next year. The news came as Pfizer Inc said its Covid-19 vaccine is more than 90% effective based on initial trial results, a major victory in the war against a virus that has killed over a million people and battered the world's economy.

3.53am GMT

Brazil halts trials of Chinese Covid-19 vaccine

Brazil's health regulator said Monday it had suspended clinical trials of a Chinese-developed Covid-19 vaccine after an "adverse incident" involving a volunteer recipient, a blow for one of the most advanced vaccine candidates, AFP reports.

The setback for CoronaVac, developed by Chinese pharmaceutical firm Sinovac Biotech, came on the same day US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer said its own vaccine candidate had shown 90 percent effectiveness, sending global markets soaring and raising hopes of an end to the pandemic.

The Brazilian regulator, Anvisa, said in a statement it had "ruled to interrupt the clinical study of the CoronaVac vaccine after a serious adverse incident" on 29 October.

It said it could not give details on what happened because of privacy regulations, but that such incidents included death, potentially fatal side effects, serious disability, hospitalisation, birth defects and other "clinically significant events."

The Governor of the state of Sao Paulo, Joao Doria (L), and the director of the Butantan Institute, Dimas Covas (R), present a version of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine during a press conference in Sao Paulo, Brazil, 9 November 2020.Photograph: Sebastião Moreira/EPA

However, the public health centre coordinating the trials of the vaccine in Brazil, the Butantan Institute, said it was "surprised" by the decision.

The institute "is investigating in detail what happened," and "is at the Brazilian regulatory agency's disposal to provide any clarification necessary on any adverse incident the clinical trials may have presented," it said.

It said it would hold a press conference on Tuesday at 11:00 am (1400 GMT).

CoronaVac has been caught up in a messy political battle in Brazil, where its most visible backer has been Sao Paulo Governor Joao Doria, a top opponent of far-right President Jair Bolsonaro.

The Sao Paulo state government said in a statement it "regrets that it learned of the decision from the press, instead of directly from Anvisa," and was waiting along with the Butantan Institute for more information on "the real reasons for the suspension."

3.28am GMT

The Solomon Islands prime minister has excoriated some of his returning citizens who have lied about their exposure to Covid-19 and imported the virus in the country.

"It is sad that most of the positive cases resulted from dishonesty by our own citizens: they lied in their pre-departure assessment forms," Manasseh Sogavare said in an address to the nation.

The Solomons, like many Pacific countries, has had few Covid-19 cases, just 16 since the start of the pandemic. But the country had successfully remained Covid-free until October, when the virus was repatriated with citizens returning from overseas.

While the outbreak remains contained in quarantine, there are fears that if it does break out, the Solomons fragile public health system could be quickly overwhelmed.

"As a result of the behaviour of few of our citizens that opened our country to this unprecedented increase in numbers of Covid-19 cases, my government will hold these people responsible for endangering our people and our country," Sogavare said.

Sogavare said people who had been found to have lied on their entry forms would be prosecuted for endangering public health.

"By their dishonest actions, they knowingly endangered our citizens and our country. Their selfish actions had increased the cost of our fight against Covid-19 substantially."

Also in the Pacific, three sailors on board a container ship that travelled from Apia in Samoa to Pago Pago in neighbouring American Samoa have tested positive for Covid-19. No-one from the ship disembarked in Samoa (which remains Covid-free), nor in Pago Pago.

The vessel, the Fesco Askold, has been sent out to open waters while authorities consider off-loading options.

The Pacific is the least Covid-infected region on earth. The small and remote island nations and territories of Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau, Norfolk island and Pitcairn island are believed to be still free of the virus.

3.11am GMT

Unemployed Australians will receive AU$100 (US$73) less a fortnight after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced a three-month extension to the jobseeker coronavirus supplement but at a reduced rate.

Morrison told reporters in Canberra the supplement, which was due to expire in December, will be cut from $250 to $150 a fortnight and extended to March at a cost of $3.2bn.

He gave no commitment that "elevated and temporary" economic support would continue, arguing that jobs are returning to the Australian economy and the government can't allow the "lifeline [to] hold Australia back as we move into the next phases of recovery":

Related: Jobseeker Covid payment extended till March but will be cut to $150 a fortnight

2.39am GMT

California's coronavirus cases are at their highest levels in months, a disquieting reality Governor Gavin Newsom said Monday was "obviously sobering" and that led San Francisco Bay Area health officials to urge people who travel outside the region to quarantine for two weeks upon return, AP reports. Newsom said some of the increase could be tied to Halloween celebrations while Barbara Ferrer, the health director for Los Angeles County, urged people who gathered during the weekend to celebrate Joe Biden's victory in the presidential race to quarantine to avoid fuelling the spread. LA County is home to 10 million people, roughly one-quarter of California's population, and was seeing 750 cases per day in September. Last week, four days saw case counts above 2,000.

"Recovery just doesn't continue when you have thousands of new cases each day," Ferrer said. "And many of these cases stem from people taking risks that are frankly not appropriate. It isn't that hard to play by the rules, especially since these rules are what keep some people alive and allow our economy to improve." California hasn't seen the even more dramatic surges other states are experiencing but new figures are troubling. The number of confirmed cases, the infection rate, hospitalisations and intensive care patients all have reached their highest level in months, Newsom warned. The positivity rate the number of people who test positive climbed from 2.5% to 3.7% in about three weeks, hospitalisations are 29% over 14 days and "that trend-line continues up," he said. Meantime, California is nearing two grim milestones: 1 million cases and 18,000 deaths.

2.19am GMT

Lockdown, the noun that has come to define so many lives across the world in 2020, has been named word of the year by Collins Dictionary.

Lockdown is defined by Collins as "the imposition of stringent restrictions on travel, social interaction, and access to public spaces", and its usage has boomed over the last year. The 4.5bn-word Collins Corpus, which contains written material from websites, books and newspapers, as well as spoken material from radio, television and conversations, registered a 6,000% increase in its usage. In 2019, there were 4,000 recorded instances of lockdown being used. In 2020, this had soared to more than a quarter of a million:

Related: Lockdown named word of the year by Collins Dictionary

1.54am GMT

The FTSE 100 posted its biggest one-day gain since March on Monday after the drug companies Pfizer and BioNTech said their prospective coronavirus vaccine was 90% effective.

The news jolted global stock market indices to record levels but it also highlighted the stark divergences in fortunes across sectors during the pandemic. Those companies who gained from people spending their work and leisure time at home were among the biggest losers on Monday, while the vaccine news offered some welcome relief to previously hard-hit sectors such as travel and events:

Related: Global markets: winners and losers as Covid vaccine hopes send shares surging

1.24am GMT

Joe Biden vowed on Monday to spare no effort in tackling the coronavirus pandemic as soon as he enters the White House and warned the US is "facing a very dark winter".

Speaking in a televised address to the nation - little more than 48 hours after he was announced the winner of the presidential election - the Democrat said he was ready to get to work, laying out plans as the pandemic on Monday was approaching 10m cases.

The US has experienced record new infections in recent days, a figure expected to significantly worsen before the former vice-president's inauguration on 20 January. According to Johns Hopkins university, as of Sunday the coronavirus had killed 237,570 people in the US and had infected more than 9.9 million.

While he welcomed Pfizer's announcement earlier in the day that it has found a vaccine that it believes is 90% effective, he warned America could lose 200,000 more lives in the next few months before a vaccine becomes available:

Related: Joe Biden vows to 'spare no effort' in tackling Covid as US sees record cases

12.53am GMT

On that note - Slate writer Dan Kois points out that bamlanivimab is almost a palindrome.

12.51am GMT

US FDA authorises emergency use of Eli Lilly's experimental treatment for Covid

The US Food and Drug Administration on Monday authorised emergency use of Eli Lilly and Co's experimental Covid-19 antibody treatment for non-hospitalised patients older than 65 or who have certain chronic medical conditions. The FDA said its emergency use authorisation (EUA) was based on clinical trials showing that the treatment, bamlanivimab, reduced the need for hospitalisation or emergency room visits in Covid-19 patients at high risk of disease progression. It can now be used for treating mild-to-moderate Covid-19 in adults and pediatric patients over the age of 12, the FDA said.

The antibody is not authorised for patients who are hospitalised due to Covid-19 or require oxygen therapy due to Covid-19. The FDA said the drug, which U.S. President Donald Trump has praised, had not been shown to benefit such patients and could worsen their clinical status. A US government-sponsored study of the treatment in hospitalised Covid-19 patients was recently abandoned because the treatment was not shown to be helping.

Updated at 2.30am GMT

12.40am GMT

Was Donald Trump's White House watch party a super-spreader event?

It was supposed to be a scene of celebration.

Instead, the Trump campaign's election night watch party held in the White House East Room - with few masks and no social distancing - is being eyed as a potential coronavirus super-spreading event and yet another symbol of Donald Trump's cavalier attitude toward a virus that is infecting more than 100,000 Americans a day.

Ben Carson, the secretary for housing and urban development, is the latest attendee to test positive, a department spokesman confirmed. The event has been under scrutiny since another attendee, the president's chief of staff, Mark Meadows, contracted the virus, which has now killed more than 237,000 people in the US alone.

Carson's deputy chief of staff, Coalter Baker, said the secretary "is in good spirits" and "feels fortunate to have access to effective therapeutics which aid and markedly speed his recovery".

The latest White House cluster comes just a month after Trump's own diagnosis and hospitalization, and two weeks after several aides to the vice-president, Mike Pence, including his chief of staff, tested positive for the virus.

And it is not the first potential super-spreader event to take place at the White House - a crowded Rose Garden ceremony, at which Trump announced the supreme court nomination of Amy Coney Barrett, also came under scrutiny in October after at least seven attendees tested positive:

Related: Was Donald Trump's White House watch party a super-spreader event?

12.16am GMT

Noticeably absent from this week's resumed World Health Assembly (WHA) was Taiwan, which said Chinese "obstruction" had prevented it from attending and accused the WHO of prioritising politics over health, AFP reports.

The self-ruled island of 23 million has seen remarkable success in combating the pandemic - with only seven deaths and fewer than 600 confirmed cases.

But it is frozen out of the WHO by Beijing, which regards Taiwan as its own territory - not even allowed to participate as an observer as was the case between 2009 and 2016.

"As the world is still under serious threat of the Covid-19 pandemic... it is an irony to the 'health for all' goal under the WHO charter" to exclude Taiwan, Taipei's foreign ministry said Monday.

The WHA will also focus on the more than 60 other health emergencies the WHO has responded to this year, including measles, Ebola and yellow fever outbreaks.

It will be an occasion for countries to discuss reforming the WHO so it can respond to challenges like pandemics faster and more effectively.

Tedros called again for "a system in which countries agree to a regular and transparent process of peer review" of their health policies.

He said the Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council, where each country's rights situation is evaluated every few years, could serve as inspiration.

The idea was put forward last year by the Central African Republic and Benin, and France, Germany and Cameroon have already accepted to work on this project, he added.

The issue of transparency in health policies is at the heart of the Covid-19 pandemic, with China accused by some countries including the United States of having covered up at least the first cases of coronavirus.

11.58pm GMT

World may be tired, but virus 'not tired of us': WHO chief

The World Health Organization's chief called Monday on everyone to keep fighting Covid-19, warning that while we may be sick of battling the pandemic, the virus is "not tired of us", AFP reports.

Speaking to WHO's main annual assembly, which resumed Monday after being cut short in May, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also hailed the election of Joe Biden as the next US president, voicing hope it could signal tighter global cooperation to end the pandemic.

Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director General of the World Health Organization, speaks during a visit of the Presidents of the Swiss Federal Chambers, at the WHO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, 15 October 2020.Photograph: Martial Trezzini/EPA

It was vital, he said, for people to follow the science and resist the urge to turn a blind eye to the virus.

"We might be tired of Covid-19. But it is not tired of us," he said.

Tedros, speaking from quarantine after coming in contact with someone who tested positive for Covid-19, warned that the virus preys on weakness.

"It preys on those in weaker health, but it preys on other weaknesses too: inequality, division, denial, wishful thinking and wilful ignorance," he said.

"We cannot negotiate with it, nor close our eyes and hope it goes away."

"It pays no heed to political rhetoric or conspiracy theories," he said.

"Our only hope is science, solutions and solidarity."

11.46pm GMT

Top UK scientist says vaccine 'feels like watershed moment'

Scientists have reacted positively to the announcement by Pfizer/BioNTech that their vaccine has been 90% successful in the vital large-scale trials:

Peter Horby, a professor of emerging infectious diseases and global health in the Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, said:

This news made me smile from ear to ear. It is a relief to see such positive results on this vaccine and bodes well for Covid-19 vaccines in general. Of course we need to see more detail and await the final results, and there is a long long way to go before vaccines will start to make a real difference, but this feels to me like a watershed moment.

"At face value, this is exceptionally good news," said Eleanor Riley, a professor of immunology and infectious disease at the University of Edinburgh. However, she said there were important questions that had not been immediately answered by Pfizer or BioNTech, including: how long will the immunity likely last? How severe were the infections used in the trial? And what age were the trial participants?

Lawrence Young, a professor of molecular oncology at Warwick Medical School, described it as a "very timely and encouraging development". He pointed out that it would be a challenge to distribute this vaccine as it needs to be stored at -70 to -80C. He added:

It is difficult to fully evaluate the interim data without more information but it appears that the vaccine is able to protect against Covid-19 disease. The big question is whether the vaccine can block virus infection and subsequent transmission.

11.41pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live pandemic blog.

I'll be bringing you the latest from around the world for the next while.

You can get in touch here.

As the US passes 10m coronavirus cases, the highest in the world and a fifth of the global total of 50m, pharmaceutical firms Pfizer and BioNTech revealed interim results of large-scale trials which showed that its Covid-19 vaccine was 90% effective. World leaders and scientists reacted to the news with cautious optimism.

You can read Sarah Boseley's analysis of the vaccine announcement here and a Q&A by Nicola Davis here. There is also this piece by Philip Oltermann on the husband and wife dream team behind BioNTech and how the news was a shot in the arm for Germany's Turkish community.

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly.•The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter."•Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce.•A senior World Health Organisation official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive".•There was also positive news from Belgium, where health officials said a second wave of Covid-19 hospital admissions appeared to have peaked and would now begin to decline. About 400 people were hospitalised due to coronavirus complications on Sunday, compared with 879 on 3 November.•Iran was one of a number of countries reporting a record rise in the daily number of coronavirus cases. It said the figure had reached 10,463 over the previous 24 hours, the first time the numbers for new infections had reached five figures. Russia also reported its highest 24-hour tally of new infections.•Doctors in Italy have warned there will be an additional 10,000 Covid-19 deaths in a month in the country unless a national lockdown is imposed. As Italy edges towards a million coronavirus infections since the start of the pandemic, 32,616 new cases were registered on Sunday, a more than sevenfold increase since 8 October•The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has tested positive for coronavirus. Zelenskiy said he "feels good" and was self-isolating, adding on Twitter: "It's gonna be fine!"79262020-11-09T23:41:16Zfalsefalse2020-11-10T10:20:32ZtrueAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/fd57zfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/19f8ad0f17b2f4f8ef143a64ceec8724d0bf070b/0_0_6720_4032/500.jpgfalseentrueFrance reported 551 new Covid-19 deaths on Monday evening, the highest number of the second wave, according to French public health director Jérôme Salomon. And the head of Santé Publique France warned that the worst of the spike was to come. Salomon said France had the 4th highest number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the world - an extra 20,155 were reported on Monday - but attributed this to what he called "particularly high" testing in the country. France is now carrying out around 2.3m tests a week. Officials reported that 4,690 intensive care beds were now being occupied by Covid-19 patients. Before the first wave in March-April this year, France had around 5,000 intensive care beds; this figure has now been increased with an eventual target of around 7,500. With news of a possible vaccine on the horizon, an Ipsos poll found that only 59% of French people quizzed said they would get vaccinated against the coronavirus. 20% of those asked said they were vehemently opposed to having the vaccine. A number of schools were closed across France on Tuesday after several teaching unions called for members to hold a "health strike" in protest at what they see as insufficient Covid-19 precautions in some schools and lycées. It was not immediately clear how many teachers had responded to the strike call. Malaysia's health ministry reported 869 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, raising the total to 42,050 infections. The Southeast Asian country also recorded six new deaths, taking total fatalities from the pandemic to 300. As Pfizer reports a 90% efficacy rate in clinical trials for its mRNA vaccine, here's the latest edition of the Guardian's vaccine tracker. In England and Wales, a total of 1,379 deaths registered in the week ending October 30 mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). It is first time the weekly figure has been above 1,000 since the week ending 12 June. It is also the highest number of deaths involving Covid-19 since the week ending 5 June. The total is up from 978 deaths in the week to 23 October - a jump of 41%. For more on these figures, head to Andrew Sparrow's UK live blog: German health minister Jens Spahn expects the EU to sign a final purchase agreement with BioNTech and its partner Pfizer "in the coming days" for its potential vaccine against Covid-19. "We will now bring this to a speedy conclusion," Spahn told a news conference in Berlin. Spahn said he expects Germany will get up to 100m doses of the BioNTech-Pfizer vaccine. But earlier this morning, German economy minister Peter Altmaier said: "Nobody knows when and for how many people this (vaccine) will be available." The Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat has died at 65 after contracting Covid-19, news agencies have reported. He was reported to be in a medically induced coma and in critical condition in mid-October. Erekat, who had a lung transplant in 2017, had led the Palestinian negotiating team in peace talks with Israel since 1994. He was also secretary general of the PLO's executive committee. He continued to lead the Palestinian delegation in talks during the Trump administration, and in September said in response to the diplomatic breakthrough between Israel and Gulf monarchies: "We definitely feel betrayed ... [the deals are] tremendous encouragement for the Israeli government to continue their occupation." "I am the most disadvantaged negotiator in the history of man," he told a reporter in 2007, the year that the Islamic militant group Hamas seized control of Gaza from Abbas' forces. "I have no army, no navy, no economy, my society is fragmented." AP writes: The American-educated Erekat was involved in nearly every round of peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians going back to the landmark Madrid conference in 1991, when he famously showed up draped in a black-and-white checkered keffiyeh, a symbol of Palestinian nationalism. Over the next few decades Erekat was a constant presence in Western media, where he tirelessly advocated for a negotiated two-state solution to the decades-old conflict, defended the Palestinian leadership and blamed Israel for the failure to reach an agreement. Indonesia reported 3,779 new coronavirus infections on Tuesday, bringing the total number to 444,348, data from the country's Covid-19 taskforce showed. The data added 72 new Covid-19 deaths, taking the total number to 14,761. Indonesia has confirmed the highest tally of coronavirus cases and deaths. In Hungary, the government has reported 103 deaths from coronavirus in the last 24 hours, Reuters reports. That figure is close to the national peak set on Saturday of 107. The number of new cases rose by 4,140, the government said in a statement. It said the number of people hospitalised with Covid-19 rose to 6,153, with a record number of 461 patients on ventilators. Matt Hancock has been speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme. He reiterates some of the points he made earlier, noting that the vaccine can only be taken out of -70C temperatures four times between the manufacturer's facility and a GP's surgery. He says that he wrote to GPs last night to set out the agreement about "the incredibly important role they'll play" and says £150m extra will be allocated to GPs this winter to help with the process. "It is a mammoth logistical operation," he adds. He also notes that while the most vulnerable will be vaccinated first, the rest of the programme may begin before every person over 80 has received their doses: We'll vaccinate category 1 first, and then category 1 and 2, and then category 1 and 2 and 3... it's a bit like boarding an aeroplane... when you're called to board, they call the passengers they want on first, after that they call the passengers they want on next, but they don't say the first group can't any longer get on. So you keep rolling it out." He reiterates that suppression tactics must continue because "we will not know how effective the vaccine is at stopping the transmission [for some time]." "The protection of an individual only comes after both doses and then one to two weeks after that, so that itself is a four to five week process." He says the government is "cautious to be really clear that we've got to stick with the programme we've got at the moment." Russia reported 20,977 new coronavirus infections on Tuesday, including 5,902 in the capital Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,817,109, Reuters reports. There were 21,798 cases the previous day. Authorities also reported 368 coronavirus-related deaths in the last 24 hours, against 256 the day before, taking the official death toll to 31,161. The UK's unemployment rate has jumped to 4.8 percent as the coronavirus pandemic destroys a record number of UK jobs, official data showed Tuesday. The reading for the third quarter compared with an unemployment rate of 4.5 percent for June-August, the Office for National Statistics said. "The employment rate has been decreasing since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, while the unemployment rate is now rising sharply," the ONS said. "Redundancies have reached a record high," it added. You can read more about this at the UK business live blog: Spain's health minister Salvador Illa has said the first doses of the promising Pfizer vaccine could reach the country in early 2021. The government expects to get 20m doses initially, enough to vaccinate 10m people, he says. In India, Amrit Dhillon has reported on the children forced into work by the coronavirus pandemic. Her excellent piece begins with Subhan Shaikh, who was at school in Mumbai until the pandemic hit but now has to work because the lockdown brought his mother's work as a school bus attendant to an end: Today, life for Subhan revolves around tea, which has become a lifeline for his family. After seeing his mother struggle, Subhan decided to do something and became a tea seller on the streets of Mumbai. From 2pm Subhan is allowed to borrow the stove in the corner of a food stall in Bhendi Bazaar to make a big pan of milky tea. He strains the tea into a large thermos flask, hangs it precariously on his bicycle handlebars and sets off to sell it in tiny paper cups for five rupees each. There is no shortage of customers as Indians drink tea endlessly throughout the day. "I go around all day until about 10pm. I make about 250 rupees (£2.50) every day which I give to mum to buy vegetables," says Subhan, speaking on the phone from Mumbai. Subhan's experience is typical for millions of India's urban poor, Dhillon writes, "who have been pushed further into poverty by the impact of Covid-19 on jobs and incomes. All dreams of educating children to give them a better life have been put aside for now." You can read the piece here: When people aren't feeling optimistic about a vaccine by spring, they're probably worrying about celebrations at Christmas. And in France, a Paris hospital director has argued that the traditional festivities should be cancelled this year over fears of sparking another resurgence in infections. According to Reuters, Julien Lenglet told RMC Radio that there was a risk that Christmas and New Year's Eve parties - known in France as "Saint-Sylvestre" - could end up as a "giant, intergenerational cluster that could be at the origins of a potential new third wave" of Covid-19. "I would say, without any hesitation, that we ought to cancel Christmas and Saint-Sylvestre," said Lenglet, who works at the Antony hospital in the Paris region. France entered a second, national lockdown to curb the spread of the Covid-19 virus at the end of October, but some politicians and health experts are hoping that by doing so, the Covid-19 numbers might start to come down, allowing allow the country to reopen in time for the Christmas season. Ukraine registered 10,179 Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours, its health ministry said on Tuesday, not the record figure of 10,842 that it had earlier reported. The minister Maksym Stepanov said a total of 479,197 cases had been registered in Ukraine as of 10 November, with 8,756 deaths. Meanwhile, the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, has also been speaking about the vaccine. Hancock says he has asked the NHS to be ready to start deploying the vaccine from the start of December. But he notes that there are "many hurdles that still need to be gone over" and that the full safety data needs to be analysed first. Hancock says that priority for vaccination when available is a "clinical process" and that it will start with the most vulnerable people in care homes and those that look after them, then be rolled out to NHS and social care staff, and then "coming down through the age ranges". He adds: "That prioritisation is set by the clinical body and we will take their advice on the best way to roll this out to keep people safe." He declines to explicitly back the suggestion from Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, that life could be back to normal by spring 2021. "Yes, this is promising news, but there is a long way further to go," he says. A little later in the interview he says: "We've always been clear that our central expectation for the roll-out of a vaccine ... is in the first part of 2021 ... that remains my central expectation." Everyone wants as many expert views on the vaccine news as possible, so here's another voice: in the UK, BBC Radio 4's Today programme is interviewing Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics and vaccine specialist at the university of Bristol. He's pretty optimistic. "This is extremely good news," he says. "It gives us the first step but a very important step forward in defeating the pandemic." He says that a 90% efficacy rate "is up there with the very best vaccines that we've got ... it really really works ... it is extraordinarily good." He does note that the study was probably mostly on "relatively mild cases." And, he adds, "in order to extrapolate from being able to prevent relatively mild Covid to stop elderly people from getting seriously ill or dying is to some extent at this point a leap of faith - but we have to take that leap of faith, that's the evidence we've got at this point, and 90% is pretty good, so it's pretty likely that even if it's less effective in elderly people than younger people it'll still work to some extent." He concludes: "We're going to see it being used, almost certainly, within a few weeks from now." Hi, this is Archie Bland taking over from Helen Sullivan, and beginning today with the Czech Republic's latest case count: health ministry figures published today show a drop of more than 3,000 positive tests against a week earlier, with the number of new cases in the last 24 hours now 6,048. In total, the country of 10.7 million has recorded 420,875 cases after showing one of Europe's highest infection rates for several weeks. The ministry also reported 216 new deaths, including 95 on Monday as well as revisions to previous days. Overall, 5,074 people have died in relation to Covid-19. That's it from me, Helen Sullivan, for today - except that you may wish to know, in non-Covid development, Fox News (!) cut away from a briefing held by the White House press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany on Monday. "Whoa, whoa, whoa - I just think we have to be very clear. She's charging the other side as welcoming fraud and welcoming illegal voting. Unless she has more details to back that up, I can't in good countenance continue to show you this," said host Neil Cavuto from the studio: Global renewable electricity installation will hit a record level in 2020, according to the International Energy Agency, in sharp contrast with the declines caused by the coronavirus pandemic in the fossil fuel sectors. The IEA report published on Tuesday says almost 90% of new electricity generation in 2020 will be renewable, with just 10% powered by gas and coal. The trend puts green electricity on track to become the largest power source in 2025, displacing coal, which has dominated for the past 50 years. Growing acceptance of the need to tackle the climate crisis by cutting carbon emissions has made renewable energy increasingly attractive to investors. The IEA reports that shares in renewable equipment makers and project developers have outperformed most major stock market indices and that the value of shares in solar companies has more than doubled since December 2019: Here are the key developments from the last few hours: China inflation dips to 11-year low as pork stocks rise. Falling food prices dragged China's consumer inflation to an 11-year low last month, spurred by improving supplies of pork, official data showed Tuesday. Blocking Taiwan at WHO will increase hostility to China, premier says. China's efforts to block Taiwan's participation at the World Health Organization during the coronavirus pandemic will only increase the world's hostility towards the country, the island's premier said on Tuesday. Australia records third day with no local cases. Australia has gone three days without any locally acquired cases of Covid-19. All cases have been detected in quarantined locals who have recently returned from overseas.Now the country is considering opening its borders to Asian countries, including parts of China, prime minister Scott Morrison said on Tuesday, as Canberra seeks to revive an economy ravaged by Covid-19. Monday saw record Covid patients in US hospitals. There were almost 59,000 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across the US on Monday, the country's highest number ever of in-patients being treated for the disease. The number of people with the virus being hospitalised has increasedabout 73% over the past 30 days to at least 58,982 - a record level that surpasses the previous high of 58,370 on July 22. US FDA authorises emergency use of Eli Lilly's experimental treatment for Covid. The US Food and Drug Administration on Monday authorised emergency use of Eli Lilly and Co's experimental Covid-19 antibody treatment for non-hospitalised patients older than 65 or who have certain chronic medical conditions. The FDA said its emergency use authorisation (EUA) was based on clinical trials showing that the treatment, bamlanivimab, reduced the need for hospitalisation or emergency room visits in Covid-19 patients at high risk of disease progression. Brazil halts trials of Chinese Covid-19 vaccine. Brazil's health regulator said on Monday it had suspended clinical trials of a Chinese-developed Covid-19 vaccine after an "adverse incident" involving a volunteer recipient, a blow for one of the most advanced vaccine candidates, AFP reports.The setback for CoronaVac, developed by Chinese pharmaceutical firm Sinovac Biotech, came on the same day US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer said its own vaccine candidate had shown 90% effectiveness, sending global markets soaring and raising hopes of an end to the pandemic. World may be tired, but virus 'not tired of us': WHO chief. The World Health Organization's chief called on Monday for everyone to keep fighting Covid-19, warning that while we may be sick of battling the pandemic, the virus is "not tired of us", AFP reports. Speaking to WHO's main annual assembly, which resumed on Monday after being cut short in May, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also hailed the election of Joe Biden as the next US president, voicing hope it could signal tighter global cooperation to end the pandemic. Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly. The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter." Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce. A senior World Health Organization official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive". A study from researchers at the University of Oxford and NIHR Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre found that nearly one in five people who have had Covid-19 were diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder - such as anxiety, depression or insomnia - within three months of testing positive for the virus. In the story below, we speak to survivors about their experiences: People are planning to drive and fly more in future than they did before the coronavirus pandemic, a survey suggests, even though the overwhelming majority accept human responsibility for the climate crisis. The apparent disconnect between beliefs and actions raises fears that without strong political intervention, these actions could undermine efforts to meet the targets set in the Paris agreement and hopes of a green recovery from the coronavirus crisis. Approximately 26,000 people in 25 countries were polled in July and August by the YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project, in a survey designed with the Guardian. By a ratio of more than three to one, the respondents agreed humankind was mainly or partly to blame for the climate emergency: The Philippine economy shrank for the third straight quarter in July-September, official data showed Tuesday, but there were signs activity was slowly picking up as coronavirus restrictions eased and more businesses reopened. AFP: President Rodrigo Duterte's government has been gradually loosening measures introduced in March to contain the virus after they sent the country plunging into its first recession in three decades and pushed many families deeper into poverty. Gross domestic product fell 11.5 percent on-year in the latest quarter, the Philippine Statistics Authority said. That was worse than the 9.6 percent contraction forecast by economists in a Bloomberg survey. But it was smaller than the downwardly revised 16.9 percent fall in the April-June and 0.7 drop in the first three months of the year. Consumer spending fell 9.3 percent as many people fearful of catching the virus that has infected around 400,000 in the country avoided shopping malls and restaurants. But it was better than the 15.5 percent plunge seen in the second quarter as the government extended operating hours and allowed more types of businesses to reopen. Acting Socioeconomic Planning Secretary Karl Kendrick Chua said the recovery in Metro Manila, which accounts for a third of the country's output, was constricted by limited public transport. Trains, buses and the popular jeepneys have been operating at reduced capacity because of social distancing rules. The country's economic woes have been exacerbated by a drop in the amount of money sent home by the legion of Filipinos working abroad that sustains many families. Remittances fell 2.6 percent in the first eight months as thousands of workers lost their jobs and came home. Falling food prices dragged China's consumer inflation to an 11-year low last month, spurred by improving supplies of pork, official data showed Tuesday. AFP reports that the cost of pork - a staple meat in the world's second-largest economy - has been edging down after rocketing last year when an African swine fever outbreak ravaged pig stocks. Authorities have been struggling to recover supplies since. The country's consumer price index (CPI), a key gauge of retail inflation, rose 0.5 percent from a year ago, a slower pace than expected, according to National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) data. This marked the third straight month of slower growth, and the lowest headline inflation since October 2009. Prices of pork fell for the first time after 19 consecutive months of increases, dropping 2.8 percent, Dong Lijuan, a senior statistician at the NBS, said Tuesday. China saw a historic contraction in economic growth in the first quarter this year, following harsh measures to curb the coronavirus outbreak, and has since grappled with uncertainty in global demand while trying to spur domestic spending. China's efforts to block Taiwan's participation at the World Health Organisation during the coronavirus pandemic will only increase the world's hostility towards the country, the island's premier said on Tuesday. AP: Chinese-claimed but democratically run Taiwan says its inability to fully access the WHO, because of China's objections, has created a gap in global pandemic prevention. China and the WHO say that is untrue. On Monday, WHO member countries rejected a US-backed appeal on for Taiwan to be permitted at a meeting of its decision-making body, the World Health Assembly. China had labelled the proposal illegal and invalid. Speaking to reporters, Taiwan Premier Su Tseng-chang said many countries supported the island's participation in the WHA. "But China, because of political factors, has obstructed Taiwan, which has prevented the pandemic the best," Su said. "This is not only suppressing Taiwan, it is in fact also damaging to the whole world, creating a rupture in pandemic prevention," Su added. "What China has done will only cause more and more countries and people to stand up and condemn them." The WHO says it cooperates with Taiwan on health matters, including on aspects of the pandemic, and that the island has been provided with the help it needs, but that it is up to member states to decide whether to invite it to the meeting. Covid-19 Podcast: what's up with the coronavirus cough? Linda Geddes speaks to Prof Jacky Smith about one of Covid-19's most consistent symptoms: the persistent dry cough. As winter arrives in the northern hemisphere, how do we tell the difference between the possible onset of the virus and the kind of routine coughs normally experienced at this time of year? Microsoft Corp on Tuesday launched two models of its Xbox gaming console, seven years after the debut of the previous version, to capture a pandemic-driven boom in consumer spending on games. The Xbox Series X - which the company has described as the "world's most powerful console" - will retail for $499.99 and a lower-priced Xbox Series S will sell for $299.99. The strategy offers consumers greater choice but the compact Series S faces criticism for being less powerful than the Series X, with less storage capacity and lacking advanced "ray tracing" graphics for titles like Capcom's "Devil May Cry 5." Xbox will compete with Sony Corp's PlayStation 5, scheduled to launch on Thursday. PS5 is widely viewed as leading the console race due to its bigger fan base and a broader range of exclusive gaming titles available at launch. This was the first time Microsoft launched its gaming console globally on the same day and the company said it has seen the highest preorders for Xbox consoles across various markets. Australia has gone three days without any locally acquired cases of Covid-19. All cases have been detected in quarantined locals who have recently returned from overseas. Now the country is considering opening its borders to Asian countries, including parts of China, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Tuesday, as Canberra seeks to revive an economy ravaged by Covid-19. Australia in March shut its borders to all non-citizens and permanent residents, though in October Canberra allowed New Zealand residents to enter. Internal travel is limited, although those restrictions are scheduled to be removed by the end of the year. Morrison ruled out entry from the United States or Europe, but said Australia may allow people from low-risk countries such as Taiwan, Japan, Singapore and even provinces in China. "We... are looking at what alternative arrangements could be hard to channel visitors through appropriate quarantine arrangements for low-risk countries," Morrison told reporters in Canberra. China was one of the first countries from which Australia restricted entry. Reviving tourism would be a much-needed boost to Australia's economy, which shrank 7% in the three months that ended in June, the most since records began in 1959. Tourism in 2019 accounted for 3.1% of the country's gross domestic product, contributing almost A$61 billion ($44.4 billion) to the economy, government data shows. Although many Australians are taking holidays locally, many tourism operators are struggling and have been forced to shed staff. Unemployment ticked up to 6.9% in September, official data showed. Morrison said Australia would extend higher unemployment benefits until the end of March, though at a reduced rate. Currently those unemployed receive A$815 every two weeks, but this will fall to A$715 at the end of December. The US has reported more than a million new cases in the past 10 days, according to a Reuters tally, the speediest surge in infections since the country reported its first Covid-19 cases, in Washington state, 294 days ago. More than 770,000 new cases were diagnosed in the week ended 10 November, up 34% over the previous seven days, according to the tally. The country has reported a total of around 10.13 million cases. Deaths over the week to Nov. 10 increased 15%, or more than 6,600 people, over the previous week. That was the highest one-week total since mid-August, taking the overall death toll for the pandemic to more than 238,000. Worryingly for officials, health experts say the death toll tends to spike four to six weeks after a surge in infections. In Texas, which became the first US state to surpass one million cumulative coronavirus cases on Saturday, authorities in the El Paso county on Monday said they were bringing in 10 temporary refrigerated morgue trailers in anticipation of further fatalities. Asian share markets mostly shot higher on Tuesday, Reuters reports, as global investors applauded progress in the development of a coronavirus vaccine, which lifted confidence in a world economic recovery. But China's factory-gate prices fell at a sharper-than-expected pace in October, weighed by soft demand for fuel even as the country's trade and manufacturing sectors staged impressive recoveries from their Covid-19 slump. There were almost 59,000 Covid-19 patients in hospitals across the United States on Monday, the country's highest number ever of in-patients being treated for the disease, Reuters reports. The number of people with the virus being hospitalized has surged around 73% over the past 30 days to at least 58,982 - a record level that surpasses the previous high of 58,370 on July 22. The United States also recorded more than 100,000 cases for the sixth consecutive day on Monday, cementing its position as the nation worst affected by the coronavirus pandemic. US biotech firm Arcturus Therapeutics said it expects to start distributing its Covid-19 vaccine candidate in the first quarter of next year after early stage trials showed promising results, Reuters reports. The firm said in a statement late on Monday it had already struck multi-million dollar supply deals with Israel and Southeast Asian city-state Singapore, where it is working on the vaccine with a local university and has been conducting trials. Arcturus said its ARCT-021 vaccine candidate has been generally well tolerated in trials so far, with the majority of adverse events being mild. It added it was urgently working to start later stage studies and expects to begin shipments early next year. The news came as Pfizer Inc said its Covid-19 vaccine is more than 90% effective based on initial trial results, a major victory in the war against a virus that has killed over a million people and battered the world's economy. Brazil's health regulator said Monday it had suspended clinical trials of a Chinese-developed Covid-19 vaccine after an "adverse incident" involving a volunteer recipient, a blow for one of the most advanced vaccine candidates, AFP reports. The setback for CoronaVac, developed by Chinese pharmaceutical firm Sinovac Biotech, came on the same day US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer said its own vaccine candidate had shown 90 percent effectiveness, sending global markets soaring and raising hopes of an end to the pandemic. The Brazilian regulator, Anvisa, said in a statement it had "ruled to interrupt the clinical study of the CoronaVac vaccine after a serious adverse incident" on 29 October. It said it could not give details on what happened because of privacy regulations, but that such incidents included death, potentially fatal side effects, serious disability, hospitalisation, birth defects and other "clinically significant events." However, the public health centre coordinating the trials of the vaccine in Brazil, the Butantan Institute, said it was "surprised" by the decision. The institute "is investigating in detail what happened," and "is at the Brazilian regulatory agency's disposal to provide any clarification necessary on any adverse incident the clinical trials may have presented," it said. It said it would hold a press conference on Tuesday at 11:00 am (1400 GMT). CoronaVac has been caught up in a messy political battle in Brazil, where its most visible backer has been Sao Paulo Governor Joao Doria, a top opponent of far-right President Jair Bolsonaro. The Sao Paulo state government said in a statement it "regrets that it learned of the decision from the press, instead of directly from Anvisa," and was waiting along with the Butantan Institute for more information on "the real reasons for the suspension." The Solomon Islands prime minister has excoriated some of his returning citizens who have lied about their exposure to Covid-19 and imported the virus in the country. "It is sad that most of the positive cases resulted from dishonesty by our own citizens: they lied in their pre-departure assessment forms," Manasseh Sogavare said in an address to the nation. The Solomons, like many Pacific countries, has had few Covid-19 cases, just 16 since the start of the pandemic. But the country had successfully remained Covid-free until October, when the virus was repatriated with citizens returning from overseas. While the outbreak remains contained in quarantine, there are fears that if it does break out, the Solomons fragile public health system could be quickly overwhelmed. "As a result of the behaviour of few of our citizens that opened our country to this unprecedented increase in numbers of Covid-19 cases, my government will hold these people responsible for endangering our people and our country," Sogavare said. Sogavare said people who had been found to have lied on their entry forms would be prosecuted for endangering public health. "By their dishonest actions, they knowingly endangered our citizens and our country. Their selfish actions had increased the cost of our fight against Covid-19 substantially." Also in the Pacific, three sailors on board a container ship that travelled from Apia in Samoa to Pago Pago in neighbouring American Samoa have tested positive for Covid-19. No-one from the ship disembarked in Samoa (which remains Covid-free), nor in Pago Pago. The vessel, the Fesco Askold, has been sent out to open waters while authorities consider off-loading options. The Pacific is the least Covid-infected region on earth. The small and remote island nations and territories of Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau, Norfolk island and Pitcairn island are believed to be still free of the virus. Unemployed Australians will receive AU$100 (US$73) less a fortnight after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced a three-month extension to the jobseeker coronavirus supplement but at a reduced rate. Morrison told reporters in Canberra the supplement, which was due to expire in December, will be cut from $250 to $150 a fortnight and extended to March at a cost of $3.2bn. He gave no commitment that "elevated and temporary" economic support would continue, arguing that jobs are returning to the Australian economy and the government can't allow the "lifeline [to] hold Australia back as we move into the next phases of recovery": California's coronavirus cases are at their highest levels in months, a disquieting reality Governor Gavin Newsom said Monday was "obviously sobering" and that led San Francisco Bay Area health officials to urge people who travel outside the region to quarantine for two weeks upon return, AP reports. Newsom said some of the increase could be tied to Halloween celebrations while Barbara Ferrer, the health director for Los Angeles County, urged people who gathered during the weekend to celebrate Joe Biden's victory in the presidential race to quarantine to avoid fuelling the spread. LA County is home to 10 million people, roughly one-quarter of California's population, and was seeing 750 cases per day in September. Last week, four days saw case counts above 2,000. "Recovery just doesn't continue when you have thousands of new cases each day," Ferrer said. "And many of these cases stem from people taking risks that are frankly not appropriate. It isn't that hard to play by the rules, especially since these rules are what keep some people alive and allow our economy to improve." California hasn't seen the even more dramatic surges other states are experiencing but new figures are troubling. The number of confirmed cases, the infection rate, hospitalisations and intensive care patients all have reached their highest level in months, Newsom warned. The positivity rate the number of people who test positive climbed from 2.5% to 3.7% in about three weeks, hospitalisations are 29% over 14 days and "that trend-line continues up," he said. Meantime, California is nearing two grim milestones: 1 million cases and 18,000 deaths. Lockdown, the noun that has come to define so many lives across the world in 2020, has been named word of the year by Collins Dictionary. Lockdown is defined by Collins as "the imposition of stringent restrictions on travel, social interaction, and access to public spaces", and its usage has boomed over the last year. The 4.5bn-word Collins Corpus, which contains written material from websites, books and newspapers, as well as spoken material from radio, television and conversations, registered a 6,000% increase in its usage. In 2019, there were 4,000 recorded instances of lockdown being used. In 2020, this had soared to more than a quarter of a million: The FTSE 100 posted its biggest one-day gain since March on Monday after the drug companies Pfizer and BioNTech said their prospective coronavirus vaccine was 90% effective. The news jolted global stock market indices to record levels but it also highlighted the stark divergences in fortunes across sectors during the pandemic. Those companies who gained from people spending their work and leisure time at home were among the biggest losers on Monday, while the vaccine news offered some welcome relief to previously hard-hit sectors such as travel and events: Joe Biden vowed on Monday to spare no effort in tackling the coronavirus pandemic as soon as he enters the White House and warned the US is "facing a very dark winter". Speaking in a televised address to the nation - little more than 48 hours after he was announced the winner of the presidential election - the Democrat said he was ready to get to work, laying out plans as the pandemic on Monday was approaching 10m cases. The US has experienced record new infections in recent days, a figure expected to significantly worsen before the former vice-president's inauguration on 20 January. According to Johns Hopkins university, as of Sunday the coronavirus had killed 237,570 people in the US and had infected more than 9.9 million. While he welcomed Pfizer's announcement earlier in the day that it has found a vaccine that it believes is 90% effective, he warned America could lose 200,000 more lives in the next few months before a vaccine becomes available: On that note - Slate writer Dan Kois points out that bamlanivimab is almost a palindrome. The US Food and Drug Administration on Monday authorised emergency use of Eli Lilly and Co's experimental Covid-19 antibody treatment for non-hospitalised patients older than 65 or who have certain chronic medical conditions. The FDA said its emergency use authorisation (EUA) was based on clinical trials showing that the treatment, bamlanivimab, reduced the need for hospitalisation or emergency room visits in Covid-19 patients at high risk of disease progression. It can now be used for treating mild-to-moderate Covid-19 in adults and pediatric patients over the age of 12, the FDA said. The antibody is not authorised for patients who are hospitalised due to Covid-19 or require oxygen therapy due to Covid-19. The FDA said the drug, which U.S. President Donald Trump has praised, had not been shown to benefit such patients and could worsen their clinical status. A US government-sponsored study of the treatment in hospitalised Covid-19 patients was recently abandoned because the treatment was not shown to be helping. It was supposed to be a scene of celebration. Instead, the Trump campaign's election night watch party held in the White House East Room - with few masks and no social distancing - is being eyed as a potential coronavirus super-spreading event and yet another symbol of Donald Trump's cavalier attitude toward a virus that is infecting more than 100,000 Americans a day. Ben Carson, the secretary for housing and urban development, is the latest attendee to test positive, a department spokesman confirmed. The event has been under scrutiny since another attendee, the president's chief of staff, Mark Meadows, contracted the virus, which has now killed more than 237,000 people in the US alone. Carson's deputy chief of staff, Coalter Baker, said the secretary "is in good spirits" and "feels fortunate to have access to effective therapeutics which aid and markedly speed his recovery". The latest White House cluster comes just a month after Trump's own diagnosis and hospitalization, and two weeks after several aides to the vice-president, Mike Pence, including his chief of staff, tested positive for the virus. And it is not the first potential super-spreader event to take place at the White House - a crowded Rose Garden ceremony, at which Trump announced the supreme court nomination of Amy Coney Barrett, also came under scrutiny in October after at least seven attendees tested positive: Noticeably absent from this week's resumed World Health Assembly (WHA) was Taiwan, which said Chinese "obstruction" had prevented it from attending and accused the WHO of prioritising politics over health, AFP reports. The self-ruled island of 23 million has seen remarkable success in combating the pandemic - with only seven deaths and fewer than 600 confirmed cases. But it is frozen out of the WHO by Beijing, which regards Taiwan as its own territory - not even allowed to participate as an observer as was the case between 2009 and 2016. "As the world is still under serious threat of the Covid-19 pandemic... it is an irony to the 'health for all' goal under the WHO charter" to exclude Taiwan, Taipei's foreign ministry said Monday. The WHA will also focus on the more than 60 other health emergencies the WHO has responded to this year, including measles, Ebola and yellow fever outbreaks. It will be an occasion for countries to discuss reforming the WHO so it can respond to challenges like pandemics faster and more effectively. Tedros called again for "a system in which countries agree to a regular and transparent process of peer review" of their health policies. He said the Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council, where each country's rights situation is evaluated every few years, could serve as inspiration. The idea was put forward last year by the Central African Republic and Benin, and France, Germany and Cameroon have already accepted to work on this project, he added. The issue of transparency in health policies is at the heart of the Covid-19 pandemic, with China accused by some countries including the United States of having covered up at least the first cases of coronavirus. The World Health Organization's chief called Monday on everyone to keep fighting Covid-19, warning that while we may be sick of battling the pandemic, the virus is "not tired of us", AFP reports. Speaking to WHO's main annual assembly, which resumed Monday after being cut short in May, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also hailed the election of Joe Biden as the next US president, voicing hope it could signal tighter global cooperation to end the pandemic. It was vital, he said, for people to follow the science and resist the urge to turn a blind eye to the virus. "We might be tired of Covid-19. But it is not tired of us," he said. Tedros, speaking from quarantine after coming in contact with someone who tested positive for Covid-19, warned that the virus preys on weakness. "It preys on those in weaker health, but it preys on other weaknesses too: inequality, division, denial, wishful thinking and wilful ignorance," he said. "We cannot negotiate with it, nor close our eyes and hope it goes away." "It pays no heed to political rhetoric or conspiracy theories," he said. "Our only hope is science, solutions and solidarity." Scientists have reacted positively to the announcement by Pfizer/BioNTech that their vaccine has been 90% successful in the vital large-scale trials: Peter Horby, a professor of emerging infectious diseases and global health in the Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, said: This news made me smile from ear to ear. It is a relief to see such positive results on this vaccine and bodes well for Covid-19 vaccines in general. Of course we need to see more detail and await the final results, and there is a long long way to go before vaccines will start to make a real difference, but this feels to me like a watershed moment. "At face value, this is exceptionally good news," said Eleanor Riley, a professor of immunology and infectious disease at the University of Edinburgh. However, she said there were important questions that had not been immediately answered by Pfizer or BioNTech, including: how long will the immunity likely last? How severe were the infections used in the trial? And what age were the trial participants? Lawrence Young, a professor of molecular oncology at Warwick Medical School, described it as a "very timely and encouraging development". He pointed out that it would be a challenge to distribute this vaccine as it needs to be stored at -70 to -80C. He added: It is difficult to fully evaluate the interim data without more information but it appears that the vaccine is able to protect against Covid-19 disease. The big question is whether the vaccine can block virus infection and subsequent transmission. Hello and welcome to today's live pandemic blog. I'll be bringing you the latest from around the world for the next while. You can get in touch here. As the US passes 10m coronavirus cases, the highest in the world and a fifth of the global total of 50m, pharmaceutical firms Pfizer and BioNTech revealed interim results of large-scale trials which showed that its Covid-19 vaccine was 90% effective. World leaders and scientists reacted to the news with cautious optimism. You can read Sarah Boseley's analysis of the vaccine announcement here and a Q&A by Nicola Davis here. There is also this piece by Philip Oltermann on the husband and wife dream team behind BioNTech and how the news was a shot in the arm for Germany's Turkish community. Here are the key developments from the last few hours: Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly. The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter." Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce. A senior World Health Organisation official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive". There was also positive news from Belgium, where health officials said a second wave of Covid-19 hospital admissions appeared to have peaked and would now begin to decline. About 400 people were hospitalised due to coronavirus complications on Sunday, compared with 879 on 3 November. Iran was one of a number of countries reporting a record rise in the daily number of coronavirus cases. It said the figure had reached 10,463 over the previous 24 hours, the first time the numbers for new infections had reached five figures. Russia also reported its highest 24-hour tally of new infections. Doctors in Italy have warned there will be an additional 10,000 Covid-19 deaths in a month in the country unless a national lockdown is imposed. As Italy edges towards a million coronavirus infections since the start of the pandemic, 32,616 new cases were registered on Sunday, a more than sevenfold increase since 8 October The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has tested positive for coronavirus. Zelenskiy said he "feels good" and was self-isolating, adding on Twitter: "It's gonna be fine!"48755falsefalseArchie Bland (now) and Helen Sullivan (earlier)A Sri Lankan Police officer undergoes a Covid-19 swab test at a bus terminal amid the coronavirus pandemic in Colombo, Sri Lanka. A patient suspected of contracting coronavirus at the emergency service of the Robert Boulin hospital in Libourne, southwestern France.Saeb Erekat (centre0 with Bill Clinton and Yassar Arafat during the 1994 Camp David summit.Matt Hancock.A worker wearing a face mask fixes a decoration shaped like the Eiffel tower next to others displayed for sale on a road in San Fernando, Pampanga province in the Philippines, 6 October 2020.A woman wears a mask as a precaution against coronavirus in Melbourne, Australia.The Governor of the state of Sao Paulo, Joao Doria (L), and the director of the Butantan Institute, Dimas Covas (R), present a version of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine during a press conference in Sao Paulo, Brazil, 9 November 2020.Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director General of the World Health Organization, speaks during a visit of the Presidents of the Swiss Federal Chambers, at the WHO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, 15 October 2020.

Italy will ramp up coronavirus restrictions in Tuscany and four other regions from Wednesday to rein in the second wave of the pandemic, a health ministry source said on Monday. Last week, the government imposed nationwide curbs including a nightly curfew, and divided the country into three zones based on the intensity of their Covid-19 outbreaks, calibrating additional limitations accordingly.

The US president-elect Joe Biden led the tone for much of the reaction from world leaders. He said it could be "many months" before the vaccine is widely available - providing it passes several more hurdles in the approval and distribution process - and warned Americans: "We're still facing a very dark winter."

Sir John Bell, one of the UK's most eminent vaccines experts, said he believed "with some confidence" that life should return to normal by spring next year following the Pfizer/BioNTech announcement. Bell went further than many of peers in the scientific community but his prediction carries significant weight given his role on the UK's vaccines taskforce.

A senior World Health Organisation official said a Covid-19 vaccine may be rolled out by March 2021 to the most vulnerable. Bruce Aylward told the WHO's annual ministerial assembly that interim results from Pfizer's late-stage vaccine trial were "very positive".

There was also positive news from Belgium, where health officials said a second wave of Covid-19 hospital admissions appeared to have peaked and would now begin to decline. About 400 people were hospitalised due to coronavirus complications on Sunday, compared with 879 on 3 November.

Iran was one of a number of countries reporting a record rise in the daily number of coronavirus cases. It said the figure had reached 10,463 over the previous 24 hours, the first time the numbers for new infections had reached five figures. Russia also reported its highest 24-hour tally of new infections.

Doctors in Italy have warned there will be an additional 10,000 Covid-19 deaths in a month in the country unless a national lockdown is imposed. As Italy edges towards a million coronavirus infections since the start of the pandemic, 32,616 new cases were registered on Sunday, a more than sevenfold increase since 8 October

The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has tested positive for coronavirus. Zelenskiy said he "feels good" and was self-isolating, adding on Twitter: "It's gonna be fine!"