The Morrison government has renewed its concerns with China over delays clearing dozens of ships carrying Australian coal, amid wider uncertainty over import quotas that will apply this year.

About 40 ships carrying coal of Australian origin were still awaiting clearance at Chinese ports as of 8 March - fewer than the more than 60 ships that were waiting in November  - amid the protracted standoff.

Most of the coal is believed to be metallurgical, the kind used in steelmaking.

It comes as changes to China's environmental laws threaten sales of iron ore, which have continued at record pace despite the trade dispute.

Analysis of UN trade figures by Guardian Australia shows the immense rise in exports to China, driven mostly by the iron ore boom but also fuelled by a growing desire for goods such as wine and travel by the country's increasingly large middle class.

Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said the government remained "concerned about delays affecting vessels carrying coal, including from Australia".

"We have raised our concerns with Chinese authorities on multiple occasions and continue to do so," a Dfat spokesperson told Guardian Australia.

"We continue to monitor the situation closely."

Labor's trade spokesperson, Madeleine King, said her primary concern was "for the seafarers who are stuck off the coast with no clear plan for how they are able to unload their cargoes and get about their lives and potentially get home".

She also called on the Australian government to step up efforts to diversify trade links, while noting China would continue to be an important economic partner because "there is no alternative market of the magnitude of the Chinese market".

Guardian Australia understands the Australian government most recently raised concerns about barriers to coal exports on 2 March, which followed concerns about the vessels and the impact on crew welfare on 8 February.

Guardian Australia understands Canberra is yet to receive any official information about coal import quotas that China will apply to Australian coal in 2021.

Meanwhile, some of the coal that had been awaiting clearance has since been on-sold to Vietnam and India.

The Dfat spokesperson said the current impasse involved private commercial arrangements and that Australia urged all parties to reach a resolution as soon as possible.

"A quick resolution will allow vessels to unload in a timely manner to satisfy Chinese buyers and consumer needs and ensure the wellbeing of crew aboard these vessels," the spokesperson said.

While China can buy coal elsewhere, it is heavily dependent on ore from Australia because it is one of the world's biggest producers and closer and therefore cheaper to ship from than iron from other producing countries in Africa and South America.

Australia has also economically benefited from the collapse in 2019 of a dam at Brumadinho in Brazil, which killed 270 people. The mine's operator, Vale, has been unable to restore production to previous levels.

This, together with surging demand from China's construction industry, which is going through a post-Covid building boom, has created a shortage of iron ore in China, driving the price to as much as US$175 a tonne.

However, in a note to clients this week Marius van Straaten, a mining analyst at investment bank Morgan Stanley, said new emissions controls on steel mills could cut production by as much as 2.3% this year.

This could result in a "balanced or even over-supplied market on a full-year basis", putting "significant downward pressure on the 62% Fe benchmark price", he said.

Relations between China and Australia have been deteriorating for the past few years, with Beijing objecting to Canberra's increasingly tight foreign investment rules, its ban on Chinese telco Huawei in the 5G network, and new foreign interference laws.

But the relationship sank to new lows last year after Beijing felt it was the target of Canberra's early public calls for an independent investigation into the origins and handling of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Chinese authorities subsequently rolled out actions targeting a range of Australian export sectors including coal , barley  and wine.

Beijing has also taken umbrage at the Australian government's statements criticising the crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong and the repression of the Uighur Muslim minority in Xinjiang - with China describing such comments as meddling in its "internal affairs".

In a sign of the ongoing tensions between the two countries, China in a statement to the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on Friday said it was "deeply concerned" by Australia's operation of offshore detention centres and called for them to be closed immediately.

Earlier in the week China's foreign minister, Wang Yi, specifically raised Australia's record on Indigenous people when brushing off claims that China was engaged in a campaign of genocide in Xinjiang.

"Speaking of genocide, many people would have in their minds the native Americans of the 16th century, African slaves of the 19th century, the Jewish people of the 20th century, and the Aboriginal Australians who are still struggling even today," Wang said at a press event on Monday.