Young people have hit back against the suggestion from senior politicians across the UK that they might be responsible for increases in coronavirus cases.

England has experienced the largest rise in confirmed Covid-19 cases since May and there are fears of a second wave across the four nations, with the Conservative mayor for the West Midlands, Andy Street, highlighting a marked increase in cases in Birmingham and Solihull among under-40s.

He raised the fear of "very stringent restrictions preventing people enjoying the things they've been looking forward to" if they did not follow the coronavirus precautions, while Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, pleaded for older people to "be even more vigilant" if spending time with young relatives who might recently have visited pubs and restaurants.

However, Alice Hope, a 24-year-old public engagement coordinator in Didcot, Oxfordshire, thinks blaming young people is unfair, particularly following the eat out to help out scheme, which encouraged people to visit high streets with the promise of half-price food.

"There are so many different problems with comparing data across the pandemic," she said. "Previously the government was looking at people with serious symptoms and those dying in hospital, even though there were probably plenty of young people at the time who may have had it but couldn't get tested.

"The government has actively encouraged people to socialise, and being less vulnerable surely young people have been best placed to re-stimulate the economy? Also, house parties and other such gatherings are only being attended by a minority. This is a time for unity, and unfairly reprimanding young people will only lead to fewer people following the guidance."

Moby Wells, who is studying history at the University of Cambridge, also felt young people were being undeservedly cast as "careless and selfish" as a diversion from the government's failings.

"We didn't lock down early enough and now the government is just diverting the blame on to us," said the 19-year-old from south Norfolk. "Only recently have I grown comfortable meeting my friends and, unlike some people, I wear my mask frequently, especially outside.

"I'm worried that people are becoming too relaxed but equally I worry about losing my youth. We're just trying to make the best out of a bad situation."

In Sunderland, Callum, 19, who did not wish his surname to be published, has been working 65 hours a week at a walk-in coronavirus test centre and believes the government is seeking excuses to extend "draconian" restrictions.

"Yes there has been a rise among young people, but I don't think it's as concerning as it's being made out to be," he said. "We have to learn to live with this. I think any comparisons with the number of positive tests during lockdown and now is trivial, too, given the disparity between positive cases per tests in mid-March compared with now.

"The narrative at the moment appears to just be an excuse for the government to continue its draconian restrictions, especially on young people, who are already having their lives and futures drained."

In north London, 17-year-old Matthew Woolf, who attends the Jewish community secondary school, said Tory messaging throughout the pandemic had been contrasting and hypocritical. "For them to blame our age group while telling us to get back to school, that we can now see friends and that we can play full contact football is typical of their strategy," he said.

Woolf thought the government has been "deliberately vague" throughout the coronavirus crisis as a ploy to "reappropriate blame at every opportunity".

"It's really infuriating that they're blaming us for the rise now," he said. "The government relaxed the regulations but didn't really say what you couldn't do ... We were so restrained for so long and I didn't see people at all for at least three months. And then only did so outside. Then, [suddenly] pubs were jam-packed."

In Derbyshire, David Chan, a 17-year-old sixth former, said it felt that young people were doomed if they stayed in, because of the mental-health consequences, and doomed if they went out - as they could be spreading the virus.

"For some people it might be quite hard to self-isolate," he added. "I was allowed to go into school during lockdown. You would feel a sense of guilt that there is a chance that you could pass it on."

Chan, who is British of Chinese and English heritage, drew parallels with prejudices during the onset of the pandemic, when there was a rise in hate crime against people of Asian origin, and now, with the blame on young people.

He said that the government had eased lockdown prematurely. "I have not wanted to return to 'normal' because it terrifies me that I could be asymptomatic and pass on the virus to a much more vulnerable person who would become seriously ill," he said. "I do not think that I could forgive myself for potentially causing someone else to become seriously ill."

This article was amended on 9 September 2020 to correct a typographical error. An earlier version said Nicola Sturgeon had called for older people to be "even more vigilante", when obviously "vigilant" was meant.