block-time published-time 11.29am GMT

Oxford and Pfizer jabs may protect against Brazil variant

The vaccines from Oxford University/ AstraZeneca and Pfizer/BioNTech may be more effective against the P1 Brazil variant of coronavirus than previously thought, a new Oxford University study suggests.

PA reports:

Research from Oxford University, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, measured the level of antibodies that can neutralise - or stop infection from - variants that are circulating in South Africa, Brazil and elsewhere.

It found that vaccines do not work as well against the variants as against the original strain of coronavirus, but that the P1 Brazilian variant may be less resistant to vaccine-induced antibodies than first feared.

Prof Gavin Screaton, lead scientist on the study, said: "This study extends our understanding the role of changes in the spike protein in escape from the human immune response, measured as neutralising antibody levels. The results suggest that P1 might be less resistant to vaccine and convalescent immune responses than B1351 (South Africa), and similar to B117 (Kent)."

The study used blood samples from people who have natural antibodies generated from a Covid-19 infection and from those whose antibodies were induced by the Oxford or Pfizer vaccines.

It found a nearly three-fold reduction in the level of virus neutralisation by the antibodies generated by the Oxford and Pfizer vaccines for the Kent and Brazil variants when compared to the original strain, and a nine-fold and 7.6-fold reduction respectively against the South Africa variant.

Related:  Brazilian Covid variant: what do we know about P1?

block-time published-time 11.11am GMT

An eruption of protests in Senegal has shone a spotlight on simmering frustrations over joblessness and a year of coronavirus restrictions.

AFP reports:

Usually seen as a haven of stability in volatile West Africa, Senegal was rocked by a week of clashes between opposition supporters and police in early March.

At least five people were killed in the unrest, sparked by the arrest of opposition leader Ousmane Sonko, a government critic popular with Senegalese youths. But many argue that anger also boiled over because of deepening poverty in the nation of 16 million people, especially among the young.

"Senegalese people are fed up because they're hungry," said Gorra Sarr, 42, who sells colourful handmade bags at a craft market in the capital Dakar. "It's not easy, but we survive."

Senegal's economy was growing before the pandemic, with its GDP increasing 5.3 percent in 2019, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, despite the IMF forecasting a recovery this year after a slowdown in 2020, coronavirus restrictions have ravaged Senegal's large informal sector, and growing numbers of people are struggling to make ends meet.

Demba Moussa Dembele, a Senegalese economist, told AFP that he estimated about two million people had fallen into poverty since the onset of the coronavirus crisis.

Riot police clash with demonstrators earlier this month in Dakar. Photograph: Léo Corrêa/AP

This is Mattha Busby here taking over from my colleague Rachel Hall. Hello to everyone reading around the world. Please do drop me a line on Twitter  or via email (mattha.busby.freelance@guardian.co.uk) with any tips or thoughts.

block-time published-time 10.17am GMT

Both the World Health Organization 's Europe director, Hans Kluge, and the African Union have said that the benefits of the Astrazeneca shot outweigh any risks in statements encouraging its continued use to save lives.

Their announcements come a day after the World Health Organization backed the vaccine and as more than a dozen European countries have suspended the use of it amid concerns over the risk of blood clots.

WHO Europe's Kluge said public trust was crucial to any vaccination campaign, recommending that authorities show transparency, competence and empathy.

Reuters reports:

AstraZeneca said on Sunday a review of safety data of more than 17 million people vaccinated in the United Kingdom and European Union with its vaccine had shown no evidence of an increased risk of blood clots

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.07am GMT

block-time published-time 10.05am GMT

Ukraine's capital to go into lockdown

The Ukrainian capital Kyiv will go into a strict lockdown for three weeks from 20 March to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Reuters reports:

Theatres and shopping centres will be closed, spectators banned from sporting events, cafes and restaurants can only provide takeaway food, schools will introduce remote learning and all state employees will work from home.

block-time published-time 9.55am GMT

The World Health Organization 's vaccine safety panel will issue its findings on the AstraZeneca Covid-19 shot on Friday, a WHO spokesman said.

Reuters reports:

The WHO's global advisory committee on vaccine safety examined the data on Tuesday and reviewed reports of rare blood coagulation disorders in people who had received the shot, the agency has said.

block-time published-time 9.18am GMT

Optimism is spreading in the US as Covid-19 deaths plummet and states ease restrictions and open vaccinations to younger adults, but experts say that the third wave crashing in Europe should serve as a warning against dropping safeguards too early, Jessica Glenza reports.

Related:  Health experts warn the US should learn from Europe's Covid mistakes

block-time published-time 9.01am GMT

Pakistan  has reported a big jump in new coronavirus infections, driven by a resurgence in its richest state and the spread of the UK variant of the virus.

Reuters reports:

3,495 people tested positive in the past 24 hours, the most daily infections since early December. Total cases rose past 615,000. Deaths rose by 61 to 13,717.

Most of the new cases came from Pakistan's largest and richest province, Punjab. Pakistani minister Asad Umar said on Twitter that hospital beds were filling fast, warning of stricter curbs if rules were not followed.

Meanwhile, the country reversed a decision taken in early February to allow private companies to import coronavirus vaccines and exempt these from price caps following criticism that it has sparked inequality.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.32am GMT

block-time published-time 8.58am GMT

Britain  has formally challenged South Korea  on regional rules singling out foreign workers for mandatory coronavirus testing as several other countries make similar moves. Reuters reports:

The capital Seoul and neighbouring Gyeonggi Province are among a number of local governments that have ordered all foreign workers to be tested, drawing accusations of xenophobia.

"The British embassy has made clear to the national government and to the Seoul and Gyeonggi administrations that we consider these measures are not fair, they are not proportionate, nor are they likely to be effective," ambassador Simon Smith said in a video posted on Twitter.

He said he had also raised the issue with South Korea's human rights commission.

Canada's ambassador retweeted the video and said several diplomatic missions were making similar representations.

block-time published-time 8.37am GMT

Bulgaria announces new restrictions

Bulgaria will close schools, restaurants and shopping malls for 10 days from March 22 in a bid to stem rising Covid-19 infections that are putting pressure on its hospitals.

Reuters reports:

The Balkan country, which is due to hold a national election on 4 April, reported 4,201 new cases on Thursday, with 7,804 people in hospitals, including 609 in intensive care. There were 136 deaths related to Covid-19 in the past 24 hours.

In total, the country of 7 million people has reported 291,769 coronavirus cases and 11,715 deaths.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.37am GMT

block-time published-time 8.35am GMT

Now on BBC radio, UK housing secretary Robert Jenrick said it's not yet the time for a formal public inquiry into the government's handling of the Covid-19 pandemic, but that this might be warranted in future to look back and learn lessons. He said the focus now must be on the rollout of the vaccine, Reuters reports.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.35am GMT

block-time published-time 8.21am GMT

UK  housing, communities and local government minister Robert Jenrick told LBC radio it is too early to speculate whether foreign holidays would be allowed the summer.

He is planning a staycation instead, though he said he hoped foreign travel would be an option. Transport minister Grant Shapps is currently looking at the issue of holidays abroad, Reuters reports.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.21am GMT

block-time published-time 8.02am GMT

Tanzania  's president, John Magufuli, one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life that prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease, Jason Burke reports.

Related:  Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, dies aged 61

block-time published-time 7.57am GMT

Japan will end its months-long state of emergency in Tokyo on Thursday to reopn its economy, despite concerns of a coronavirus resurgence during its spring party season and next week's Olympic torch relay.

Associated Press reports:

Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures have been under emergency measures since 7 January, mainly requests for restaurants and bars to close at 8 p.m. and take preventive measures, as well as asking companies and employees to do more remote work. Similar emergency measures were lifted in six urban areas late last month.

Japan has managed to keep virus cases and deaths relatively low without enforcing a hard lockdown, with deaths related to Covid-19 at about 8,700 people.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.57am GMT

block-time published-time 7.45am GMT

A migration committee has advised the Australian government to reserve seats on flights and rooms in hotel quarantine for skilled migrants, as part of a suite of changes to make it easier for businesses to hire overseas workers.

Related:  Prioritise skilled migrants over some returning Australians, migration committee advises

block-time published-time 7.30am GMT

Coronavirus cases on the rise in India

Coronavirus cases in  India  have risen by the most in three months as the country's second wave hits, with Maharashtra, the wealthiest state, accounting for two-thirds of the latest daily tally.

Reuters reports:

Home to India's commercial capital Mumbai, the western state reported 23,179 of the country's 35,871 new cases in the past 24 hours, and the fast spreading contagion in major industrial areas raised risks of companies' production being disrupted.

India's total cases stood at 11.47 million, the highest after the United States and Brazil. Deaths rose by 172 to 159,216, according to health ministry data released on Thursday.

The country's first wave peaked in September at nearly 100,000 cases a day, with daily infections hitting a low of just over 9,000 early last month.

Cases have been rising in Maharashtra since the reopening of most economic activities in February. Mumbai's suburban trains, which carry millions of people daily, also resumed services.

The state, of 112 million people, ordered a fresh lockdown in some districts and put curbs on cinemas, hotels and restaurants until the end of the month after infections rose to a multi-month high earlier this week.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.36am GMT

block-time published-time 7.14am GMT

UK housing, communities and local government secretary Robert Jenrick is on Sky News this morning. The UK is on track to meet its target of vaccinating all its priority groups one to nine by mid-April, which includes everyone over 50, those who are clinically extremely vulnerable, and frontline health and social care workers. "We have line of sight that we have enough vaccines to do that," he says.

enltrCommunities Sec Robert Jenrick says there is "no reason to believe" that the roadmap out of lockdown will be slowed down by the drop in vaccine supplies over the coming weeks. He suggests the decrease in jabs is because of international supply issues.

- Rob Powell (@robpowellnews) March 18, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.20am GMT

block-time published-time 7.11am GMT

Thai  businesses will procure an additional 100,000 doses of China's Sinovac Covid-19 for their employees in the first phase of a private sector vaccination scheme.

Reuters reports:

Other Southeast Asian countries including Indonesia and the Philippines have also launched private schemes, which proponents say will help kick-start key industries and cut the state burden, though some health experts warn that workers could be prioritised over more vulnerable sections of the population.

About 50,000 individuals in 109 companies, mostly in the food and drug sectors, are joining the scheme after an initial survey, FTI's deputy secretary-general, Panitarn Pavarolavidya, said.

Rachel Hall here taking over from Helen Sullivan for the rest of the morning. Do send over any thoughts, ideas or tips to rachel.hall@theguardian.com

block-time published-time 7.01am GMT

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan , from Australia - where we may have almost no coronavirus, but we sure as Sheila have a mouse plague:

Related:  Three hospital patients bitten by mice as 'absolute plague' sweeps western NSW

block-time published-time 6.52am GMT

Summary

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•Delaying England's winter lockdown 'caused up to 27,000 extra Covid deaths'. Delaying the winter lockdown caused up to 27,000 extra deaths in England, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has claimed as it accused the government of a "huge mistake" which should be central to any public inquiry into the UK's handling of the pandemic.•EU regulator to report on AstraZeneca Covid vaccine safety. Europe's medicines regulator is under mounting pressure to clear up safety concerns over the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine as experts warned that arguably political decisions to pause it in many countries risked seriously delaying the continent's already sluggish vaccination drive.•Brazil cases topped 90,000 for the first time. Brazil on Wednesday registered an unprecedented 90,303 new coronavirus cases, a day after the country reported a fresh record for deaths related to the virus, Reuters reports.Infections now total 11,693,838.Deaths rose by 2,648, the second highest tally after the record reported on Tuesday, bringing the total to 284,775.•Poorest countries will suffer most from Covid downturn, the UN said. The poorest and most vulnerable countries will be the biggest losers from a pandemic downturn that will leave the global economy nursing $10tn (£7.2tn) of losses by the end of the year, according to the UN.•Japan to lift Tokyo area state of emergency as planned on Sunday - minister. The Japanese government's advisory panel on coronavirus countermeasures on Thursday approved a plan to let the state of emergency expire in the Tokyo area as scheduled on March 21, Economy Minister Yasuhisa Nishimura said.•Older people more likely to catch Covid a second time. Older people who have recovered from Covid cannot assume they are immune from a second attack, according to a new study that shows the under-65s are much less susceptible to reinfection.•Indian state of Maharashtra accounts for 65% of new daily cases. India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that.•Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, died aged 61. Tanzania 's president, John Magufuli , one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease.Magufuli's death was announced on Wednesday by the country's vice-president Samia Suluhu, who said the president died of heart failure. He was 61.•UK foreign secretary said EU threat to block exports of vaccine needs 'some explaining'. The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.•NHS chiefs fear collision course with ministers over Covid backlog. Hospital bosses are bracing themselves for a clash with ministers over how quickly they can clear the backlog of NHS care that built up during the pandemic.•Blanket 'do not resuscitate' orders imposed on English care homes, finds CQC. Blanket orders not to resuscitate some care home residents at the start of the Covid pandemic have been identified in a report by England's care regulator.•Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by end of April. Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by the end of April, Radio New Zealand reports. Ministers are working on the proposal, which could be put to Cabinet as soon as Monday. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson says he is "very optimistic" about the travel bubble being opened soon.•Taiwan began AstraZeneca rollout. Taiwan could begin distributing the AstraZeneca vaccine next Monday , according to its Central Epidemic Command Center, following the arrival of a first batch of nearly 200,000 doses earlier this month.•China doubled down on Covid narrative ahead of WHO report. Chinese state media are doubling down on Beijing's narrative about the origins of the Covid-19 ahead of the much anticipated release of the World Health Organization's findings. Liang Wannian, who led the Chinese side of the joint WHO investigation in January, told the Global Times that China did not find evidence of the virus earlier than December 8, 2019.

Delaying England's winter lockdown 'caused up to 27,000 extra Covid deaths'. Delaying the winter lockdown caused up to 27,000 extra deaths in England, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has claimed as it accused the government of a "huge mistake" which should be central to any public inquiry into the UK's handling of the pandemic.

EU regulator to report on AstraZeneca Covid vaccine safety. Europe's medicines regulator is under mounting pressure to clear up safety concerns over the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine as experts warned that arguably political decisions to pause it in many countries risked seriously delaying the continent's already sluggish vaccination drive.

Brazil cases topped 90,000 for the first time. Brazil on Wednesday registered an unprecedented 90,303 new coronavirus cases, a day after the country reported a fresh record for deaths related to the virus, Reuters reports.Infections now total 11,693,838.Deaths rose by 2,648, the second highest tally after the record reported on Tuesday, bringing the total to 284,775.

Poorest countries will suffer most from Covid downturn, the UN said. The poorest and most vulnerable countries will be the biggest losers from a pandemic downturn that will leave the global economy nursing $10tn (£7.2tn) of losses by the end of the year, according to the UN.

Japan to lift Tokyo area state of emergency as planned on Sunday - minister. The Japanese government's advisory panel on coronavirus countermeasures on Thursday approved a plan to let the state of emergency expire in the Tokyo area as scheduled on March 21, Economy Minister Yasuhisa Nishimura said.

Older people more likely to catch Covid a second time. Older people who have recovered from Covid cannot assume they are immune from a second attack, according to a new study that shows the under-65s are much less susceptible to reinfection.

Indian state of Maharashtra accounts for 65% of new daily cases. India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that.

Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, died aged 61. Tanzania 's president, John Magufuli , one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease.Magufuli's death was announced on Wednesday by the country's vice-president Samia Suluhu, who said the president died of heart failure. He was 61.

UK foreign secretary said EU threat to block exports of vaccine needs 'some explaining'. The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.

NHS chiefs fear collision course with ministers over Covid backlog. Hospital bosses are bracing themselves for a clash with ministers over how quickly they can clear the backlog of NHS care that built up during the pandemic.

Blanket 'do not resuscitate' orders imposed on English care homes, finds CQC. Blanket orders not to resuscitate some care home residents at the start of the Covid pandemic have been identified in a report by England's care regulator.

Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by end of April. Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by the end of April, Radio New Zealand reports. Ministers are working on the proposal, which could be put to Cabinet as soon as Monday. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson says he is "very optimistic" about the travel bubble being opened soon.

Taiwan began AstraZeneca rollout. Taiwan could begin distributing the AstraZeneca vaccine next Monday , according to its Central Epidemic Command Center, following the arrival of a first batch of nearly 200,000 doses earlier this month.

China doubled down on Covid narrative ahead of WHO report. Chinese state media are doubling down on Beijing's narrative about the origins of the Covid-19 ahead of the much anticipated release of the World Health Organization's findings. Liang Wannian, who led the Chinese side of the joint WHO investigation in January, told the Global Times that China did not find evidence of the virus earlier than December 8, 2019.

block-time published-time 6.29am GMT

Poorest countries will suffer most from Covid downturn, says UN

The UN has said the poorest and most vulnerable countries will be the biggest losers from a pandemic downturn that will leave the global economy nursing $10tn (£7.2tn) of losses by the end of the year.

Despite becoming the latest international body to revise its growth forecast for 2021 upwards, the UN's conference on trade and development (Unctad) said there were signs the pandemic would end with pre-crisis problems unresolved:

Related:  Poorest countries will suffer most from Covid downturn, says UN

block-time published-time 6.15am GMT

NHS chiefs fear collision course with ministers over Covid backlog

In England, hospital bosses are bracing themselves for a clash with ministers over how quickly they can clear the backlog of NHS care  that built up during the pandemic.

They are warning that it will take "years" to treat all those whose care was cancelled because Covid disrupted so many hospital services, particularly surgery and diagnostic tests.

Staff shortages, exhaustion among frontline personnel after tackling the pandemic and their need to have a break mean that progress will be slower than the government expects, NHS  trust chiefs say:

Related:  NHS chiefs fear collision course with ministers over Covid backlog

block-time published-time 5.32am GMT

Indian state of Maharashtra accounts for 65% of new daily cases

India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that. Total infections have now risen to 11.47 million, the highest after the United States and Brazil. Deaths rose by 172 to 159,216, data from the health ministry showed.

An Indian man walks past a wall showing a graffiti honoring frontline workers in the fight against the spread of coronavirus COVID-19, in Mumbai, India, 17 March 2021. India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that. Photograph: Divyakant Solanki/EPA

block-time published-time 5.22am GMT

EU regulator to report on AstraZeneca Covid vaccine safety

Europe's medicines regulator is under mounting pressure to clear up safety concerns over the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine as experts warned that arguably political decisions to pause it in many countries  risked seriously delaying the continent's already sluggish vaccination drive.

The European Medicines Agency (EMA) is due on Thursday to announce the findings of its investigation into cases of bleeding, blood clots and low platelet counts in 30 of the vaccine's recipients that have led many European countries to suspend it:

Related:  EU medicines regulator to report on AstraZeneca Covid vaccine safety

block-time published-time 5.00am GMT

In Australia, inundated general practitioners say the government has undersupplied them with Covid-19 vaccine doses, mixed up their contact details on its national booking system, and failed to properly forewarn the sector of the content of Wednesday's public announcement.

Some GP clinics are continuing to report scenes of chaos and huge demand from the public after the government's troubled launch of its website to coordinate Covid vaccination appointments as part of stage 1b of the vaccine rollout.

However, the health minister, Greg Hunt , has played down reports of GP clinics frustrated at the website launch, reacting to concerns by saying "you would rather be in Australia than anywhere else in the world".

The Guardian's Christopher Knaus  and Elias Visontay  report:

Related:  Doctors complain of Covid vaccine undersupply as phone lines flooded with bookings

block-time published-time 4.21am GMT

Podcast: What do progressives make of Joe Biden's presidency so far?

Lauren Gambino, political correspondent for Guardian US, discusses the  $1.9tn Covid relief package, which was passed by Congress last week. It was seen as a major legislative victory for Joe BidenWhat do progressives make of Joe Biden's presidency so far?

Lauren Gambino, political correspondent for Guardian US, discusses the $1.9tn Covid relief package, which was passed by Congress last week. It was seen as a major legislative victory for Joe Biden

Related:  What do progressives make of Joe Biden's presidency so far - podcast

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.23am GMT

block-time published-time 3.43am GMT

China doubles down on Covid narrative ahead of WHO report

Chinese state media are doubling down on Beijing's narrative about the origins of the Covid-19 ahead of the much anticipated release of the World Health Organization's findings. Liang Wannian, who led the Chinese side of the joint WHO investigation in January, told the Global Times  that China did not find evidence of the virus earlier than December 8, 2019. He also repeated major talking points that the virus was of "natural origin" and began at the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, with "cold chain transmission" playing an important role in the spread of the virus. He said a lab leak was unlikely. Liang also shot back at concerns raised by the US about the transparency of the WHO investigation and the upcoming report. "Recently, some politicians and the media in the world insisted on politicizing the scientific issue of tracing the source of Covid, regardless of scientific facts, for their own personal gain, arbitrarily misinterpreting the scientific findings and reports of our joint team, which is a huge disrespect to the work of our scientists," he said. Liang denied reports of any conflicts between Chinese and international researchers during the investigation and said the international community should safeguard the "scientific spirit."

block-time published-time 3.15am GMT

China reported six new mainland Covid cases on 17 March up from four cases a day earlier, the country's national health authority said on Thursday. The National Health Commission said in a statement all of the new cases were imported infections originating from overseas. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to six from 15 a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid cases in mainland China now stands at 90,066, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

block-time published-time 2.54am GMT

Taiwan begins AstraZeneca rollout

Taiwan could begin distributing the AstraZeneca vaccine next Monday , according to its Central Epidemic Command Center, following the arrival of a first batch of nearly 200,000 doses earlier this month. The vaccine was obtained through the World Health Organisation's Covax program, although Taiwan is neither a member nor observer of the global health body due to objections from Beijing. Minister of Health and Welfare Chen Shih-chung said that health authorities would continue to review the side effects of Astra Zeneca after concerns were raised in Europe that it can lead to blood clots and other concerns. Priority will be given first to health workers and people employed in quarantine centres, according to the government. Taiwan's Food and Drug Administration granted  emergency approval of the vaccine in February although a domestically produced vaccines is still under way. Taiwan previously agreed to purchase around 10 million doses of Astra Zeneca and another 10 million doses from Covax and Moderna. Vaccine rollout has been slower in Taiwan than some of its East Asian neighbours as it has seen just 10 deaths and less than 1,000 cases, according to the CECC.  Strict border controls and aggressive contact tracing in the early days of the pandemic have kept numbers low. Travellers are still required to undergo 14 days of quarantine and an additional week of "self-help management" following their arrival.

block-time published-time 2.42am GMT

Older people more likely to catch Covid a second time

Older people who have recovered from Covid cannot assume they are immune from a second attack, according to a new study that shows the under-65s are much less susceptible to reinfection.

The study carried out in Denmark  found that the under-65s had about 80% protection for at least six months from catching Covid a second time. But the over-65s had only 47% protection.

The authors of the research, published in the Lancet medical journal , say this means it is vital to take measures to protect elderly people, who also are more likely to die from Covid. "Our study confirms what a number of others appeared to suggest: reinfection with Covid-19 is rare in younger, healthy people, but the elderly are at greater risk of catching it again," said Dr Steen Ethelberg from the Statens Serum Institut in Denmark:

Related:  Older people more likely to catch Covid a second time

block-time published-time 2.10am GMT

Japan to lift Tokyo area state of emergency as planned on Sunday -minister

The Japanese government's advisory panel on coronavirus countermeasures on Thursday approved a plan to let the state of emergency expire in the Tokyo area as scheduled on March 21, Economy Minister Yasuhisa Nishimura said. Reuters: Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga had flagged the plan late on Wednesday, saying the availability of hospital beds had improved in Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures.

"There was no objection to the plan," Nishimura, who also heads Japan's coronavirus response, said after a meeting with the advisory panel. He added, however, that experts noted that infections had been creeping up in recent days, and that a resurgence was bound to occur. "The important thing is to make sure the rebound is not a big one - to keep the waves small," Nishimura said. "We ask our citizens to continue to take the basic precautions to prevent the spread of infections." The government's task force will meet later Thursday to finalise the plan, followed by a news conference by Prime Minister Suga at 7pm (10.00 GMT).

People wearing face masks are reflected in a window as they walk through Shibuya on March 17, 2021 in Tokyo, Japan. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images

Tokyo, the capital, and neighbouring Kanagawa, Chiba and Saitama prefectures have remained under state of emergency restrictions since early January, with curbs asking restaurants and bars to close by 8pm and companies to allow more telecommuting. While under pressure to bring Covid under control ahead of the Tokyo Olympics this summer, the government is eager to jumpstart economic activity in the Tokyo area, whose 36 million residents account for 30% of Japan's population. After the lifting of the emergency, the four prefectures will continue to ask eateries to close by 9pm, at least until the end of March, to reduce the chance of a resurgence in infections, Kanagawa Governor Yuji Kuroiwa said on Wednesday. So far in Japan, roughly 447,000 people have tested positive and 8,676 have died from Covid as of Tuesday.

block-time published-time 1.59am GMT

The head of New Zealand's Olympics mission is hopeful that his team of 600 will get priority access to the Covid-19 vaccine so as to represent New Zealand in the Tokyo Games.Chef de mission Rob Waddell told Stuff  he was waiting on government approval, with less than four months to go before the Games.

The Olympics, delayed a year, are due to start on 23 July, though there are still doubts about them going ahead.Last week Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said that the government was considering a special category in the vaccination rollout for people representing New Zealand at a national level, though no decisions have been made yet.

block-time published-time 1.29am GMT

Delaying England's winter lockdown 'caused up to 27,000 extra Covid deaths'

Delaying the winter lockdown caused up to 27,000 extra deaths in England, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has claimed as it accused the government of a "huge mistake" which should be central to any public inquiry into the UK's handling of the pandemic.

In an assessment of policy over the last year, it said delaying the start of the latest lockdown until January, despite evidence of fast-rising cases before Christmas, led to around a fifth of all fatalities caused by the virus. It said these could have been avoided if restrictions were put in place quickly enough to prevent the death rate rising from early December.

While it praised the vaccination programme - delivering jabs three times faster than Europe - and financial support for firms and workers which has included £6,700 for every household on average, it said mistakes on lockdowns were repeated "three tragic times". It added that allowing extra deaths did not limit economic impacts, but rather increased them, because it only precipitated longer and more onerous lockdowns:

Related:  Delaying England's winter lockdown 'caused up to 27,000 extra Covid deaths'

block-time published-time 1.01am GMT

Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by end of April

Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by the end of April, Radio New Zealand reports.  Ministers are working on the proposal, which could be put to Cabinet as soon as Monday. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson says he is "very optimistic" about the travel bubble being opened soon. It would be conditional on there being no coronavirus outbreaks or lockdowns in the meantime.After a year of closed borders, New Zealanders have greeted the news with enthusiasm, particularly those with family in Australia and the tourism industry, which has been struggling in the absence of international visitors.The National party has been pressuring the government to open a travel bubble between the two countries immediately.

block-time published-time 12.49am GMT

Blanket 'do not resuscitate' orders imposed on English care homes, finds CQC

Blanket orders not to resuscitate some care home residents at the start of the Covid pandemic have been identified in a report by England's care regulator.

A report published by the Care Quality Commission (CQC) found disturbing variations in people's experiences of do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation (DNACPR) decisions during the pandemic.

Best practice is for proper discussions to be held with the person involved and/or their relatives. While examples of good practice were identified, some people were not properly involved in decisions or were unaware that such an important decision about their care had been made. Poor record-keeping, and a lack of oversight and scrutiny of the decisions being made, was identified:

Related:  Blanket 'do not resuscitate' orders imposed on English care homes, finds CQC

block-time published-time 12.26am GMT

Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, dies aged 61

Tanzania  's president, John Magufuli , one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease.

Magufuli's death was announced on Wednesday by the country's vice-president Samia Suluhu, who said the president died of heart failure. He was 61.

"The president of the United Republic of Tanzania , the honourable Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli ... [has] died of a heart condition, at hospital Mzena in Dar es Salaam, where he was receiving treatment," she said on state broadcaster TBC.

Magufuli had not been seen in public since 27 February and rumours swirled online that he was sick and possibly incapacitated from illness. Government officials had insisted Magufuli was working normally and citizens should ignore rumours from outside the country. Last week, the country's opposition leader, Tundu Lissu, told the BBC that Magafuli was critically ill in a hospital in Kenya  after contracting Covid-19:

Related:  Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, dies aged 61

block-time published-time 12.16am GMT

Brazil cases top 90,000 for the first time

Brazil on Wednesday registered an unprecedented 90,303 new coronavirus cases, a day after the country reported a fresh record for deaths related to the virus, Reuters reports.

Infections now total 11,693,838.

Deaths rose by 2,648, the second highest tally after the record reported on Tuesday, bringing the total to 284,775.

block-time published-time 12.03am GMT

UK foreign secretary says EU threat to block exports of vaccine needs 'some explaining'

The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.

Raab told Reuters:

I think it takes some explaining, because the world's watching. We've, all of us, including with our European friends, been saying throughout the pandemic that you'd be wrong to curtail or interfere with lawfully-contracted supply. We all said it last year on PPE. We've been saying it this year, on vaccines and other things.

Frankly, I'm surprised we're having this conversation. It is normally what the UK and EU team up with to reject when other countries with less democratic regimes than our own engage in that kind of brinkmanship.

block-time published-time 11.55pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

As always, you can find me on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

Tanzania's president, John Magufuli, one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 sceptics, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease.

Meanwhile the British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that tthe commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.

•The UK will see a significant reduction in the amount of vaccines available from the end of March due to a cut in supply, a letter sent around the state-run health service said. National Health Service trusts in England were informed by the UK government's vaccines task force that there will be "a significant reduction in vaccine supply" from 29 March, "meaning volumes for first doses will be significantly constrained." Pfizer Inc said it was on track to meet its delivery targets for Covid-19 vaccines in the UK in line with an agreed monthly schedule.•White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the US has received requests for Covid-19 vaccines from both Mexico and Canada and is considering them carefully, Reuters reports.•Mexico has registered 6,455 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 789 additional deaths, Reuters reports. It brings the total in the country to 2,175,462 cases and 195,908 deaths, health ministry data showed on Wednesday.•The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.•Poland's president, Andrzej Duda, has announced a tough new nationwide lockdown amid surging infections. The country's health minister said shopping centres, theatres, cinemas and hotels will close from Saturday, while schools will have to switch to online learning.•A World Health Organization vaccine safety panel said on Wednesday that it considers the benefits of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine to outweigh its risks and recommends that vaccinations continue.•Norway is experiencing a third wave of coronavirus infections, health minister Bent Høie said. From 16 March tougher measures came into force in Oslo and the whole of Viken county, affecting about 1.2 million residents in a region where 82% of the country's coronavirus infections are clustered, according to Høie.   5183 2021-03-17T23:55:27Z false false 2021-03-18T11:29:02Z true AUS theguardian.com https://www.theguardian.com/p/gn3de false true https://media.guim.co.uk/57beea78e29a2768a9a44767a532a0173ce81d55/0_0_3334_2001/500.jpg false en true The vaccines from Oxford University/AstraZeneca and Pfizer/BioNTech may be more effective against the P1 Brazil variant of coronavirus than previously thought, a new Oxford University study suggests. PA reports: Research from Oxford University, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, measured the level of antibodies that can neutralise - or stop infection from - variants that are circulating in South Africa, Brazil and elsewhere. It found that vaccines do not work as well against the variants as against the original strain of coronavirus, but that the P1 Brazilian variant may be less resistant to vaccine-induced antibodies than first feared. Prof Gavin Screaton, lead scientist on the study, said: "This study extends our understanding the role of changes in the spike protein in escape from the human immune response, measured as neutralising antibody levels. The results suggest that P1 might be less resistant to vaccine and convalescent immune responses than B1351 (South Africa), and similar to B117 (Kent)." The study used blood samples from people who have natural antibodies generated from a Covid-19 infection and from those whose antibodies were induced by the Oxford or Pfizer vaccines. It found a nearly three-fold reduction in the level of virus neutralisation by the antibodies generated by the Oxford and Pfizer vaccines for the Kent and Brazil variants when compared to the original strain, and a nine-fold and 7.6-fold reduction respectively against the South Africa variant. An eruption of protests in Senegal has shone a spotlight on simmering frustrations over joblessness and a year of coronavirus restrictions. AFP reports: Usually seen as a haven of stability in volatile West Africa, Senegal was rocked by a week of clashes between opposition supporters and police in early March. At least five people were killed in the unrest, sparked by the arrest of opposition leader Ousmane Sonko, a government critic popular with Senegalese youths. But many argue that anger also boiled over because of deepening poverty in the nation of 16 million people, especially among the young. "Senegalese people are fed up because they're hungry," said Gorra Sarr, 42, who sells colourful handmade bags at a craft market in the capital Dakar. "It's not easy, but we survive." Senegal's economy was growing before the pandemic, with its GDP increasing 5.3 percent in 2019, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, despite the IMF forecasting a recovery this year after a slowdown in 2020, coronavirus restrictions have ravaged Senegal's large informal sector, and growing numbers of people are struggling to make ends meet. Demba Moussa Dembele, a Senegalese economist, told AFP that he estimated about two million people had fallen into poverty since the onset of the coronavirus crisis. This is Mattha Busby here taking over from my colleague Rachel Hall. Hello to everyone reading around the world. Please do drop me a line on Twitter or via email (mattha.busby.freelance@guardian.co.uk) with any tips or thoughts. Both the World Health Organization's Europe director, Hans Kluge, and the African Union have said that the benefits of the Astrazeneca shot outweigh any risks in statements encouraging its continued use to save lives. Their announcements come a day after the World Health Organization backed the vaccine and as more than a dozen European countries have suspended the use of it amid concerns over the risk of blood clots. WHO Europe's Kluge said public trust was crucial to any vaccination campaign, recommending that authorities show transparency, competence and empathy. Reuters reports: AstraZeneca said on Sunday a review of safety data of more than 17 million people vaccinated in the United Kingdom and European Union with its vaccine had shown no evidence of an increased risk of blood clots The Ukrainian capital Kyiv will go into a strict lockdown for three weeks from 20 March to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Reuters reports: Theatres and shopping centres will be closed, spectators banned from sporting events, cafes and restaurants can only provide takeaway food, schools will introduce remote learning and all state employees will work from home. The World Health Organization's vaccine safety panel will issue its findings on the AstraZeneca Covid-19 shot on Friday, a WHO spokesman said. Reuters reports: The WHO's global advisory committee on vaccine safety examined the data on Tuesday and reviewed reports of rare blood coagulation disorders in people who had received the shot, the agency has said. Optimism is spreading in the US as Covid-19 deaths plummet and states ease restrictions and open vaccinations to younger adults, but experts say that the third wave crashing in Europe should serve as a warning against dropping safeguards too early, Jessica Glenza reports. Pakistan has reported a big jump in new coronavirus infections, driven by a resurgence in its richest state and the spread of the UK variant of the virus. Reuters reports: 3,495 people tested positive in the past 24 hours, the most daily infections since early December. Total cases rose past 615,000. Deaths rose by 61 to 13,717. Most of the new cases came from Pakistan's largest and richest province, Punjab. Pakistani minister Asad Umar said on Twitter that hospital beds were filling fast, warning of stricter curbs if rules were not followed. Meanwhile, the country reversed a decision taken in early February to allow private companies to import coronavirus vaccines and exempt these from price caps following criticism that it has sparked inequality. Britain has formally challenged South Korea on regional rules singling out foreign workers for mandatory coronavirus testing as several other countries make similar moves. Reuters reports: The capital Seoul and neighbouring Gyeonggi Province are among a number of local governments that have ordered all foreign workers to be tested, drawing accusations of xenophobia. "The British embassy has made clear to the national government and to the Seoul and Gyeonggi administrations that we consider these measures are not fair, they are not proportionate, nor are they likely to be effective," ambassador Simon Smith said in a video posted on Twitter. He said he had also raised the issue with South Korea's human rights commission. Canada's ambassador retweeted the video and said several diplomatic missions were making similar representations. Bulgaria will close schools, restaurants and shopping malls for 10 days from March 22 in a bid to stem rising Covid-19 infections that are putting pressure on its hospitals. Reuters reports: The Balkan country, which is due to hold a national election on 4 April, reported 4,201 new cases on Thursday, with 7,804 people in hospitals, including 609 in intensive care. There were 136 deaths related to Covid-19 in the past 24 hours. In total, the country of 7 million people has reported 291,769 coronavirus cases and 11,715 deaths. Now on BBC radio, UK housing secretary Robert Jenrick said it's not yet the time for a formal public inquiry into the government's handling of the Covid-19 pandemic, but that this might be warranted in future to look back and learn lessons. He said the focus now must be on the rollout of the vaccine, Reuters reports. UK housing, communities and local government minister Robert Jenrick told LBC radio it is too early to speculate whether foreign holidays would be allowed the summer. He is planning a staycation instead, though he said he hoped foreign travel would be an option. Transport minister Grant Shapps is currently looking at the issue of holidays abroad, Reuters reports. Tanzania's president, John Magufuli, one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life that prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease, Jason Burke reports. Japan will end its months-long state of emergency in Tokyo on Thursday to reopn its economy, despite concerns of a coronavirus resurgence during its spring party season and next week's Olympic torch relay. Associated Press reports: Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures have been under emergency measures since 7 January, mainly requests for restaurants and bars to close at 8 p.m. and take preventive measures, as well as asking companies and employees to do more remote work. Similar emergency measures were lifted in six urban areas late last month. Japan has managed to keep virus cases and deaths relatively low without enforcing a hard lockdown, with deaths related to Covid-19 at about 8,700 people. A migration committee has advised the Australian government to reserve seats on flights and rooms in hotel quarantine for skilled migrants, as part of a suite of changes to make it easier for businesses to hire overseas workers. Coronavirus cases in India have risen by the most in three months as the country's second wave hits, with Maharashtra, the wealthiest state, accounting for two-thirds of the latest daily tally. Reuters reports: Home to India's commercial capital Mumbai, the western state reported 23,179 of the country's 35,871 new cases in the past 24 hours, and the fast spreading contagion in major industrial areas raised risks of companies' production being disrupted. India's total cases stood at 11.47 million, the highest after the United States and Brazil. Deaths rose by 172 to 159,216, according to health ministry data released on Thursday. The country's first wave peaked in September at nearly 100,000 cases a day, with daily infections hitting a low of just over 9,000 early last month. Cases have been rising in Maharashtra since the reopening of most economic activities in February. Mumbai's suburban trains, which carry millions of people daily, also resumed services. The state, of 112 million people, ordered a fresh lockdown in some districts and put curbs on cinemas, hotels and restaurants until the end of the month after infections rose to a multi-month high earlier this week. UK housing, communities and local government secretary Robert Jenrick is on Sky News this morning. The UK is on track to meet its target of vaccinating all its priority groups one to nine by mid-April, which includes everyone over 50, those who are clinically extremely vulnerable, and frontline health and social care workers. "We have line of sight that we have enough vaccines to do that," he says. Thai businesses will procure an additional 100,000 doses of China's Sinovac Covid-19 for their employees in the first phase of a private sector vaccination scheme. Reuters reports: Other Southeast Asian countries including Indonesia and the Philippines have also launched private schemes, which proponents say will help kick-start key industries and cut the state burden, though some health experts warn that workers could be prioritised over more vulnerable sections of the population. About 50,000 individuals in 109 companies, mostly in the food and drug sectors, are joining the scheme after an initial survey, FTI's deputy secretary-general, Panitarn Pavarolavidya, said. Rachel Hall here taking over from Helen Sullivan for the rest of the morning. Do send over any thoughts, ideas or tips to rachel.hall@theguardian.com That's it from me, Helen Sullivan, from Australia - where we may have almost no coronavirus, but we sure as Sheila have a mouse plague: Here are the key developments from the last few hours: Delaying England's winter lockdown 'caused up to 27,000 extra Covid deaths'. Delaying the winter lockdown caused up to 27,000 extra deaths in England, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has claimed as it accused the government of a "huge mistake" which should be central to any public inquiry into the UK's handling of the pandemic. EU regulator to report on AstraZeneca Covid vaccine safety. Europe's medicines regulator is under mounting pressure to clear up safety concerns over the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine as experts warned that arguably political decisions to pause it in many countries risked seriously delaying the continent's already sluggish vaccination drive. Brazil cases topped 90,000 for the first time. Brazil on Wednesday registered an unprecedented 90,303 new coronavirus cases, a day after the country reported a fresh record for deaths related to the virus, Reuters reports.Infections now total 11,693,838.Deaths rose by 2,648, the second highest tally after the record reported on Tuesday, bringing the total to 284,775. Poorest countries will suffer most from Covid downturn, the UN said. The poorest and most vulnerable countries will be the biggest losers from a pandemic downturn that will leave the global economy nursing $10tn (£7.2tn) of losses by the end of the year, according to the UN. Japan to lift Tokyo area state of emergency as planned on Sunday - minister. The Japanese government's advisory panel on coronavirus countermeasures on Thursday approved a plan to let the state of emergency expire in the Tokyo area as scheduled on March 21, Economy Minister Yasuhisa Nishimura said. Older people more likely to catch Covid a second time. Older people who have recovered from Covid cannot assume they are immune from a second attack, according to a new study that shows the under-65s are much less susceptible to reinfection. Indian state of Maharashtra accounts for 65% of new daily cases. India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that. Tanzania's Covid-denying president, John Magufuli, died aged 61. Tanzania's president, John Magufuli , one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease.Magufuli's death was announced on Wednesday by the country's vice-president Samia Suluhu, who said the president died of heart failure. He was 61. UK foreign secretary said EU threat to block exports of vaccine needs 'some explaining'. The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself. NHS chiefs fear collision course with ministers over Covid backlog. Hospital bosses are bracing themselves for a clash with ministers over how quickly they can clear the backlog of NHS care that built up during the pandemic. Blanket 'do not resuscitate' orders imposed on English care homes, finds CQC. Blanket orders not to resuscitate some care home residents at the start of the Covid pandemic have been identified in a report by England's care regulator. Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by end of April. Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by the end of April, Radio New Zealand reports. Ministers are working on the proposal, which could be put to Cabinet as soon as Monday. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson says he is "very optimistic" about the travel bubble being opened soon. Taiwan began AstraZeneca rollout. Taiwan could begin distributing the AstraZeneca vaccine next Monday, according to its Central Epidemic Command Center, following the arrival of a first batch of nearly 200,000 doses earlier this month. China doubled down on Covid narrative ahead of WHO report. Chinese state media are doubling down on Beijing's narrative about the origins of the Covid-19 ahead of the much anticipated release of the World Health Organization's findings. Liang Wannian, who led the Chinese side of the joint WHO investigation in January, told the Global Times that China did not find evidence of the virus earlier than December 8, 2019. The UN has said the poorest and most vulnerable countries will be the biggest losers from a pandemic downturn that will leave the global economy nursing $10tn (£7.2tn) of losses by the end of the year. Despite becoming the latest international body to revise its growth forecast for 2021 upwards, the UN's conference on trade and development (Unctad) said there were signs the pandemic would end with pre-crisis problems unresolved: In England, hospital bosses are bracing themselves for a clash with ministers over how quickly they can clear the backlog of NHS care that built up during the pandemic. They are warning that it will take "years" to treat all those whose care was cancelled because Covid disrupted so many hospital services, particularly surgery and diagnostic tests. Staff shortages, exhaustion among frontline personnel after tackling the pandemic and their need to have a break mean that progress will be slower than the government expects, NHS trust chiefs say: India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that. Total infections have now risen to 11.47 million, the highest after the United States and Brazil. Deaths rose by 172 to 159,216, data from the health ministry showed. Europe's medicines regulator is under mounting pressure to clear up safety concerns over the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine as experts warned that arguably political decisions to pause it in many countries risked seriously delaying the continent's already sluggish vaccination drive. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) is due on Thursday to announce the findings of its investigation into cases of bleeding, blood clots and low platelet counts in 30 of the vaccine's recipients that have led many European countries to suspend it: In Australia, inundated general practitioners say the government has undersupplied them with Covid-19 vaccine doses, mixed up their contact details on its national booking system, and failed to properly forewarn the sector of the content of Wednesday's public announcement. Some GP clinics are continuing to report scenes of chaos and huge demand from the public after the government's troubled launch of its website to coordinate Covid vaccination appointments as part of stage 1b of the vaccine rollout. However, the health minister, Greg Hunt, has played down reports of GP clinics frustrated at the website launch, reacting to concerns by saying "you would rather be in Australia than anywhere else in the world". The Guardian's Christopher Knaus and Elias Visontay report: Podcast: What do progressives make of Joe Biden's presidency so far? Lauren Gambino, political correspondent for Guardian US, discusses the $1.9tn Covid relief package, which was passed by Congress last week. It was seen as a major legislative victory for Joe BidenWhat do progressives make of Joe Biden's presidency so far? Lauren Gambino, political correspondent for Guardian US, discusses the $1.9tn Covid relief package, which was passed by Congress last week. It was seen as a major legislative victory for Joe Biden Chinese state media are doubling down on Beijing's narrative about the origins of the Covid-19 ahead of the much anticipated release of the World Health Organization's findings. Liang Wannian, who led the Chinese side of the joint WHO investigation in January, told the Global Times that China did not find evidence of the virus earlier than December 8, 2019. He also repeated major talking points that the virus was of "natural origin" and began at the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, with "cold chain transmission" playing an important role in the spread of the virus. He said a lab leak was unlikely. Liang also shot back at concerns raised by the US about the transparency of the WHO investigation and the upcoming report. "Recently, some politicians and the media in the world insisted on politicizing the scientific issue of tracing the source of Covid, regardless of scientific facts, for their own personal gain, arbitrarily misinterpreting the scientific findings and reports of our joint team, which is a huge disrespect to the work of our scientists," he said. Liang denied reports of any conflicts between Chinese and international researchers during the investigation and said the international community should safeguard the "scientific spirit." China reported six new mainland Covid cases on 17 March up from four cases a day earlier, the country's national health authority said on Thursday. The National Health Commission said in a statement all of the new cases were imported infections originating from overseas. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to six from 15 a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid cases in mainland China now stands at 90,066, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636. Taiwan could begin distributing the AstraZeneca vaccine next Monday, according to its Central Epidemic Command Center, following the arrival of a first batch of nearly 200,000 doses earlier this month. The vaccine was obtained through the World Health Organisation's Covax program, although Taiwan is neither a member nor observer of the global health body due to objections from Beijing. Minister of Health and Welfare Chen Shih-chung said that health authorities would continue to review the side effects of Astra Zeneca after concerns were raised in Europe that it can lead to blood clots and other concerns. Priority will be given first to health workers and people employed in quarantine centres, according to the government. Taiwan's Food and Drug Administration granted emergency approval of the vaccine in February although a domestically produced vaccines is still under way. Taiwan previously agreed to purchase around 10 million doses of Astra Zeneca and another 10 million doses from Covax and Moderna. Vaccine rollout has been slower in Taiwan than some of its East Asian neighbours as it has seen just 10 deaths and less than 1,000 cases, according to the CECC. Strict border controls and aggressive contact tracing in the early days of the pandemic have kept numbers low. Travellers are still required to undergo 14 days of quarantine and an additional week of "self-help management" following their arrival. Older people who have recovered from Covid cannot assume they are immune from a second attack, according to a new study that shows the under-65s are much less susceptible to reinfection. The study carried out in Denmark found that the under-65s had about 80% protection for at least six months from catching Covid a second time. But the over-65s had only 47% protection. The authors of the research, published in the Lancet medical journal, say this means it is vital to take measures to protect elderly people, who also are more likely to die from Covid. "Our study confirms what a number of others appeared to suggest: reinfection with Covid-19 is rare in younger, healthy people, but the elderly are at greater risk of catching it again," said Dr Steen Ethelberg from the Statens Serum Institut in Denmark: The Japanese government's advisory panel on coronavirus countermeasures on Thursday approved a plan to let the state of emergency expire in the Tokyo area as scheduled on March 21, Economy Minister Yasuhisa Nishimura said. Reuters: Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga had flagged the plan late on Wednesday, saying the availability of hospital beds had improved in Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures. "There was no objection to the plan," Nishimura, who also heads Japan's coronavirus response, said after a meeting with the advisory panel. He added, however, that experts noted that infections had been creeping up in recent days, and that a resurgence was bound to occur. "The important thing is to make sure the rebound is not a big one - to keep the waves small," Nishimura said. "We ask our citizens to continue to take the basic precautions to prevent the spread of infections." The government's task force will meet later Thursday to finalise the plan, followed by a news conference by Prime Minister Suga at 7pm (10.00 GMT). Tokyo, the capital, and neighbouring Kanagawa, Chiba and Saitama prefectures have remained under state of emergency restrictions since early January, with curbs asking restaurants and bars to close by 8pm and companies to allow more telecommuting. While under pressure to bring Covid under control ahead of the Tokyo Olympics this summer, the government is eager to jumpstart economic activity in the Tokyo area, whose 36 million residents account for 30% of Japan's population. After the lifting of the emergency, the four prefectures will continue to ask eateries to close by 9pm, at least until the end of March, to reduce the chance of a resurgence in infections, Kanagawa Governor Yuji Kuroiwa said on Wednesday. So far in Japan, roughly 447,000 people have tested positive and 8,676 have died from Covid as of Tuesday. The head of New Zealand's Olympics mission is hopeful that his team of 600 will get priority access to the Covid-19 vaccine so as to represent New Zealand in the Tokyo Games.Chef de mission Rob Waddell told Stuff he was waiting on government approval, with less than four months to go before the Games. The Olympics, delayed a year, are due to start on 23 July, though there are still doubts about them going ahead.Last week Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said that the government was considering a special category in the vaccination rollout for people representing New Zealand at a national level, though no decisions have been made yet. Delaying the winter lockdown caused up to 27,000 extra deaths in England, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has claimed as it accused the government of a "huge mistake" which should be central to any public inquiry into the UK's handling of the pandemic. In an assessment of policy over the last year, it said delaying the start of the latest lockdown until January, despite evidence of fast-rising cases before Christmas, led to around a fifth of all fatalities caused by the virus. It said these could have been avoided if restrictions were put in place quickly enough to prevent the death rate rising from early December. While it praised the vaccination programme - delivering jabs three times faster than Europe - and financial support for firms and workers which has included £6,700 for every household on average, it said mistakes on lockdowns were repeated "three tragic times". It added that allowing extra deaths did not limit economic impacts, but rather increased them, because it only precipitated longer and more onerous lockdowns: Quarantine-free travel to Australia from New Zealand could be in place by the end of April, Radio New Zealand reports. Ministers are working on the proposal, which could be put to Cabinet as soon as Monday. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson says he is "very optimistic" about the travel bubble being opened soon. It would be conditional on there being no coronavirus outbreaks or lockdowns in the meantime.After a year of closed borders, New Zealanders have greeted the news with enthusiasm, particularly those with family in Australia and the tourism industry, which has been struggling in the absence of international visitors.The National party has been pressuring the government to open a travel bubble between the two countries immediately. Blanket orders not to resuscitate some care home residents at the start of the Covid pandemic have been identified in a report by England's care regulator. A report published by the Care Quality Commission (CQC) found disturbing variations in people's experiences of do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation (DNACPR) decisions during the pandemic. Best practice is for proper discussions to be held with the person involved and/or their relatives. While examples of good practice were identified, some people were not properly involved in decisions or were unaware that such an important decision about their care had been made. Poor record-keeping, and a lack of oversight and scrutiny of the decisions being made, was identified: Tanzania's president, John Magufuli , one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 deniers, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease. Magufuli's death was announced on Wednesday by the country's vice-president Samia Suluhu, who said the president died of heart failure. He was 61. "The president of the United Republic of Tanzania, the honourable Dr John Pombe Joseph Magufuli ... [has] died of a heart condition, at hospital Mzena in Dar es Salaam, where he was receiving treatment," she said on state broadcaster TBC. Magufuli had not been seen in public since 27 February and rumours swirled online that he was sick and possibly incapacitated from illness. Government officials had insisted Magufuli was working normally and citizens should ignore rumours from outside the country. Last week, the country's opposition leader, Tundu Lissu, told the BBC that Magafuli was critically ill in a hospital in Kenya after contracting Covid-19: Brazil on Wednesday registered an unprecedented 90,303 new coronavirus cases, a day after the country reported a fresh record for deaths related to the virus, Reuters reports. Infections now total 11,693,838. Deaths rose by 2,648, the second highest tally after the record reported on Tuesday, bringing the total to 284,775. The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself. Raab told Reuters: I think it takes some explaining, because the world's watching. We've, all of us, including with our European friends, been saying throughout the pandemic that you'd be wrong to curtail or interfere with lawfully-contracted supply. We all said it last year on PPE. We've been saying it this year, on vaccines and other things. Frankly, I'm surprised we're having this conversation. It is normally what the UK and EU team up with to reject when other countries with less democratic regimes than our own engage in that kind of brinkmanship. Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. As always, you can find me on Twitter @helenrsullivan. Tanzania's president, John Magufuli, one of Africa's most prominent Covid-19 sceptics, has died after a two-week absence from public life which prompted speculation that he had contracted the disease. Meanwhile the British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that tthe commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself. The UK will see a significant reduction in the amount of vaccines available from the end of March due to a cut in supply, a letter sent around the state-run health service said. National Health Service trusts in England were informed by the UK government's vaccines task force that there will be "a significant reduction in vaccine supply" from 29 March, "meaning volumes for first doses will be significantly constrained." Pfizer Inc said it was on track to meet its delivery targets for Covid-19 vaccines in the UK in line with an agreed monthly schedule. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the US has received requests for Covid-19 vaccines from both Mexico and Canada and is considering them carefully, Reuters reports. Mexico has registered 6,455 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 789 additional deaths, Reuters reports. It brings the total in the country to 2,175,462 cases and 195,908 deaths, health ministry data showed on Wednesday. The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself. Poland's president, Andrzej Duda, has announced a tough new nationwide lockdown amid surging infections. The country's health minister said shopping centres, theatres, cinemas and hotels will close from Saturday, while schools will have to switch to online learning. A World Health Organization vaccine safety panel said on Wednesday that it considers the benefits of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine to outweigh its risks and recommends that vaccinations continue. Norway is experiencing a third wave of coronavirus infections, health minister Bent Høie said. From 16 March tougher measures came into force in Oslo and the whole of Viken county, affecting about 1.2 million residents in a region where 82% of the country's coronavirus infections are clustered, according to Høie. 32788 false false  Mattha Busby (now); Rachel Hall and Helen Sullivan (earlier)      Frontline workers wait to get inoculated with the Covid-19 coronavirus vaccine at a government hospital in Chennai, India.        Riot police clash with demonstrators earlier this month in Dakar.        An Indian man walks past a wall showing a graffiti honoring frontline workers in the fight against the spread of coronavirus COVID-19, in Mumbai, India, 17 March 2021. India reported 35,871 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest in more than three months, with the worst-affected state of Maharashtra alone accounting for 65% of that.        People wearing face masks are reflected in a window as they walk through Shibuya on March 17, 2021 in Tokyo, Japan.

The UK will see a significant reduction in the amount of vaccines available from the end of March due to a cut in supply, a letter sent around the state-run health service said. National Health Service trusts in England were informed by the UK government's vaccines task force that there will be "a significant reduction in vaccine supply" from 29 March, "meaning volumes for first doses will be significantly constrained." Pfizer Inc said it was on track to meet its delivery targets for Covid-19 vaccines in the UK in line with an agreed monthly schedule.

White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the US has received requests for Covid-19 vaccines from both Mexico and Canada and is considering them carefully, Reuters reports.

Mexico has registered 6,455 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 789 additional deaths, Reuters reports. It brings the total in the country to 2,175,462 cases and 195,908 deaths, health ministry data showed on Wednesday.

The British foreign minister, Dominic Raab, said on Wednesday that the European commission's threat to ban exports of Covid-19 vaccines cut across previous assurances, adding that the commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, needed to explain herself.

Poland's president, Andrzej Duda, has announced a tough new nationwide lockdown amid surging infections. The country's health minister said shopping centres, theatres, cinemas and hotels will close from Saturday, while schools will have to switch to online learning.

A World Health Organization vaccine safety panel said on Wednesday that it considers the benefits of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine to outweigh its risks and recommends that vaccinations continue.

Norway is experiencing a third wave of coronavirus infections, health minister Bent Høie said. From 16 March tougher measures came into force in Oslo and the whole of Viken county, affecting about 1.2 million residents in a region where 82% of the country's coronavirus infections are clustered, according to Høie.