A Liberal senator has poured cold water on Scott Morrison's push for weapons inspector-style powers for the World Health Organization, arguing it could be counterproductive to focus on such reforms.

Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, a NSW senator with a long record of taking a hard line on Beijing, instead called on the Coalition government to lessen Australia's economic dependence on China and even to seek compensation for the impact of the coronavirus.

"The push for an inspection regime is commendable, but it will be a 'herding cats exercise' especially given the UN veto power of China and Russia," she told Guardian Australia.

"Indeed, how many UN 'inspections' of totalitarian regimes have succeeded? Iraq? Iran? North Korea?"

Fierravanti-Wells said it could take years to advance the proposal on inspection powers and she was sceptical about the prospects of securing meaningful reforms.

"Rather, it may be counterproductive to focus on this push and consequently delay focusing on those issues that are within our power to control, namely a plan for reparations and a plan to decouple from China," she said.

The pointed comments come as the government is close to finishing a review on how Australia engages with a raft of international agencies including the WHO.

This domestic "audit" is separate from Morrison's call for an independent international investigation into the origins of Covid-19 and its early handling - a move that has attracted fierce pushback from Beijing.

Morrison has also sounded out a number of international allies on potential reforms to the WHO to ensure public health investigators could visit member countries to verify key facts about disease outbreaks, likening the powers to those of weapons inspectors dispatched by the International Atomic Energy Agency.

In the latest such call, the prime minister spoke to his British counterpart, Boris Johnson, on Sunday evening about the WHO.

We swapped notes on our virus responses, how we're dealing with restrictions & looking to safely open up our economies & the international issues around @WHO & the need to learn the lessons from the outbreak that has taken so many lives & threatened his own. We'll keep in touch.- Scott Morrison (@ScottMorrisonMP)            May 4, 2020

Hardliners within the Coalition hope the forthcoming review of Australia's international engagement will be an opportunity to wind back some funding and shift priorities - moves embraced over the past few years by Donald Trump, the US president.

Fierravanti-Wells said there was growing scepticism in the Australian community about the effectiveness of the UN multilateral system, which she argued was "mired by inefficiencies, duplication and undue political influences".

She said the Covid-19 pandemic had demonstrated "that when push came to shove, countries made their own decisions".

Referring to Morrison's comments to the Lowy Institute last year that freedom depended on dedication to national sovereignty, Fierravanti-Wells said that could only now be achieved through a serious reassessment of Australia's international engagement.

"For a start, Australians will expect that it will not be 'business as usual' with the communist regime in China," she said.

While Australia's policy is to support Taiwan's observer status at the WHO, she called on the government to go further and review the one-China policy "and formally recognise Taiwan".

Such a policy shift - in the unlikely event the government pursued it - would dramatically escalate tensions between Canberra and Beijing.

Fierravanti-Wells, who served as minister for international development and the Pacific from February 2016 until August 2018 when she quit after backing Peter Dutton in the leadership spill, once caused a stir with her accusations about China saddling up Pacific countries with debts and building "roads to nowhere". At the time the Chinese foreign ministry hit back at the "irresponsible remarks".

Fierravanti-Wells said on Monday she had been "the tip of the spear" when she had issued those warnings in early 2018, but noted some of her Coalition colleagues were now becoming more concerned about China.

"I am pleased to see more colleagues finally speaking out, albeit somewhat opportunistically getting on the bandwagon," she said.

"I suppose better late than never. Whether they will have the political stamina to sustain the push for reparations and decoupling from China remains to be seen."

Fierravanti-Wells said the Australian government needed to be more strategic in how it committed taxpayer funding, and may need to consider a shift from multilateral efforts to greater bilateral engagements where it was in the national interest to do so.

Priority should be given to building resilience in Pacific countries, she added.

Morrison said last month that the report by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade would be "coming back very soon" and Australia was "always going to consider where we put our funds and we always want value for money".

Labor's Senate leader, Penny Wong, has argued Australia cannot afford to turn its back on global bodies, noting it needed international cooperation because it was not a superpower that could just throw its weight around.

Kevin Rudd, the former prime minister, said last week he was sceptical of the government's review because centre-right and far-right parties around the world saw attacking the UN as "good raw meat to throw out to the would-be nationalist political constituencies within your countries in order to bolster your own domestic political base".