block-time published-time 10.16am BST

What happened in Australia this Friday 11 September

We're closing our live coverage of coronavirus news and other major developments for the day. Thanks to Amy Remeikis,  who led you through most of the day.

You can still follow developments around the world on our global coronavirus live blog.

So here's what happened today:

•NSW deputy premier John Barilaro performed a brisk climb-down this morning, after threatening to lead the Nationals away from the state's coalition over new laws to better protect koalas. NSW Labor said Barilaro's position was now untenable.•Three Rio Tinto executives, including chief executive Jean-Sébastien Jacques, left the global miner over its decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia.•Victoria saw 43 new cases of Covid-19 and 9 more deaths. Australia has seen 797 deaths from the disease, with 710 in Victoria.•Queensland recorded 2 new cases of the virus and New South Wales reported 10.•The Northern Territory government will open its borders to people from greater Sydney in a month's time. Those visitors will not need to quarantine.•Victorian assistant police commissioner Luke Cornelius said significant resources would be needed for planned anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne on Saturday. Protesters were "selfish" and made him feel "a bit like a dog returning to eat its own vomit".

NSW deputy premier John Barilaro performed a brisk climb-down this morning, after threatening to lead the Nationals away from the state's coalition over new laws to better protect koalas. NSW Labor said Barilaro's position was now untenable.

Three Rio Tinto executives, including chief executive Jean-Sébastien Jacques, left the global miner over its decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia.

Victoria saw 43 new cases of Covid-19 and 9 more deaths. Australia has seen 797 deaths from the disease, with 710 in Victoria.

Queensland recorded 2 new cases of the virus and New South Wales reported 10.

The Northern Territory government will open its borders to people from greater Sydney in a month's time. Those visitors will not need to quarantine.

Victorian assistant police commissioner Luke Cornelius said significant resources would be needed for planned anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne on Saturday. Protesters were "selfish" and made him feel "a bit like a dog returning to eat its own vomit".

Thanks for being with us today. We'll do it all again tomorrow. Take care.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian leaves the NSW parliamentary offices in Sydney on Friday. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.24am BST

block-time published-time 9.37am BST

enltr?? Public Health Alert ?? Queensland Health has expanded its list of venues where confirmed COVID-19 cases have visited. For an extensive list of locations, times and dates, please visit: https://t.co/MKUDNs1f7K #COVID19 pic.twitter.com/zjQfMP6Ujj

- Queensland Health (@qldhealthnews) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 9.17am BST

School leavers attending formals in NSW have been given some Covid-19 guidelines.

AAP reports on the guidelines for formals announced by the state's education minister, Sarah Mitchell.

So how will it be to party like it's 2020?

Avoid spontaneous crowds, have live-streams for people who can't attend, restrict guest numbers, don't mingle before and after events, and schools should stick to the 4-sq-metre rule for each attendee.

Oh, and students should bring their own pen (for signing the yearbook).

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.40am BST

block-time published-time 8.56am BST

Victoria's judicial inquiry into its hotel quarantine program continued today, with evidence coming from two health department employees suggesting there was ambiguity over who was in charge of the program.

AAP reports that Pam Williams and Merrin Bamert, of the Department of Health and Human Services, shared the role of commander of Operation Soteria, the taskforce that ran the program.

Both were asked who was in charge at each hotel.

Williams said the department took responsibility for their own staff and contractors, but hotel managers looked after their own staff. Security companies managed their guards.

She said:

We were working as a team. It was a difficult team to manage. This was an environment where the usual things that you do to develop a team weren't possible.

The inquiry was shown an email written by Bamert in which she said she was "not sure who you would say was in charge" of the program.

"This operation was being managed out of a range of sites with no clear operational structure," Bamert wrote in the email on 21 May.

She was replying to an email from Safer Care Victoria, an authority investigating the death of a man in hotel quarantine in April.

Williams said more than 20,000 people went through the quarantine program from 29 March until it was suspended in June.

She said:

Of those, seven people in three rooms were implicated in the spread. So in fact, 96.8% of the people who were positive in hotel quarantine did not go on to spread the virus.

About 99% of the state's second wave of Covid-19 can be traced back to returned overseas travellers who quarantined at two hotels.

Deputy chief health officer Annaliese van Diemen did not appear before the inquiry as scheduled.

She will appear next week, alongside chief health officer Brett Sutton, emergency management commissioner Andrew Crisp, the chief commissioner of Victoria police, Shane Patton, and former top cop Graham Ashton.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.02am BST

block-time published-time 8.27am BST

Our Friday started with NSW deputy premier John Barilaro 's on-again off-again threat to blow up the state's Coalition over new laws to better protect koalas.

But was it really all about the marsupial non-bear?

Guardian Australia environment editor Adam Morton  has this run down.

Related:  The NSW deputy premier threatened to blow up the Coalition: was it really all about koalas?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.34am BST

block-time published-time 8.18am BST

"We all make mistakes..."

enltrWe all make mistakes and Rio executives have paid a price today for some made. JS and his team helped create 1000s of jobs. The Amrun mine was a shining achievement providing lots of jobs in the Cape. Never forget that Mining gives so many Indigenous Aussies a start

- Matthew Canavan (@mattjcan) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.58am BST

Senior Victorian police officer says he's sick of selfish anti-lockdown protesters

Victoria's assistant police commissioner Luke Cornelius says responding to anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne has him feeling "a bit like a dog returning to eat its own vomit".

In comments reported by AAP this afternoon, Cornelius  said he was sick of the protests. There's another proposed for the city on Saturday - a "Melbourne Freedom Walk" - that would need significant police resources, he said.

"I feel a bit like a dog returning to eat his own vomit... I'm sick of it.

If people were less selfish and a bit more grown up, we wouldn't have to keep doing this.

Cornelius hinted that anyone claiming the walk was "exercise" that's allowed under the city's lockdown may be treated sceptically.

"Don't take us for fools," he said. "We'll have no hesitation in issuing fines."

Victoria police assistant commissioner Luke Cornelius says anti-lockdown protesters in Melbourne make him feel like a 'dog returning to eat its own vomit'. Photograph: James Ross/EPA

Police had directly warned a number of people planning to protest in the city, he said.

Cornelius urged anti-lockdown protesters to "be creative" at home in speaking out, without encouraging gatherings.

Also on Friday, Victorian premier Daniel Andrews told protesters: "All you're potentially doing is spreading the virus."

About 1,100 people had shown interest in the walk and 340 had committed to attend before Facebook took down the event's online page on Wednesday.

Victoria police chief commissioner Shane Patton has flagged the possibility of more protests at other locations at the weekend.

"Freedom" rally posters for this Sunday and every Saturday until restrictions end are circulating online.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.11am BST

block-time published-time 7.38am BST

Victoria's inquiry into the state's hotel quarantine program will hear evidence from the state's chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton next week.

The inquiry has announced its witness list for next week with Sutton scheduled to appear on Wednesday. Victoria's police chief commissioner Shane Patton will appear on Thursday.

The inquiry is looking at how and why cases of Covid-19 managed to escape from the state's hotel quarantine scheme.

On Tuesday the inquiry released pictures of "quarantined" guests going to a convenience store. A former police officer had also sent emails to the police, the inquiry heard, raising concerns about how private security firms were managing the facilities.

Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton will appear as a witness before the state's hotel quarantine inquiry next week. Photograph: James Ross/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.42am BST

block-time published-time 7.18am BST

Afternoon folks. Graham Readfearn here taking over from Amy Remeikis.

If sporting events are on your list of "things to look forward to in a pandemic" then Rugby Australia boss Rob Clarke has been delighting in their news today.

He's just been speaking to the ABC about Rugby Australia's announcement that Australia will host what he described as a "mini world-cup" in November and December. It's the 2020 Rugby Championship.

Argentina, New Zealand, South Africa and Australia will play 12 matches over six weeks with five rounds in NSW and a game in Brisbane.

Rugby Australia interim Chief Executive Rob Clarke and Rugby Australia chairman Hamish McLennan at Mrs Macquarie's point on 11 September 2020. Photograph: Mark Metcalfe/Getty Images

As AAP reports, Argentina currently has Covid-19 cases in their camp and the South Africa team will need their government to relax travel restrictions.

Clarke was asked by the ABC if it was fair for sports squads to be flying in and out at a time when millions of Victorians are still facing harsh lockdowns. He said:

I think sport has a really important role to play in helping give Australians something to lack forward to. If there isn't anything greater than looking forward to a mini World Cup, with rugby, then I don't know what is. And I hope that people get behind our teams.

I understand the difficulty that people are going through, particularly in Victoria right now. But by the time this competition comes around in November, I really hope that it unifies Australia and gives them something to cheer for.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.34am BST

block-time published-time 7.01am BST

I am going to hand over the blog to Graham Readfearn  now for the rest of the afternoon.

I'll be back bright and early on Monday, but most likely not bushy tailed, because, well, it's Monday.

Thank you to everyone for joining me again this week. I truly appreciate it. Take some time to switch off and do nothing this weekend - whatever doing nothing or switching off looks like to you. There's a lot of information out there and sometimes, you just need to turn it off.

Again, thanks for joining us. Take care of you. Ax

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.05am BST

block-time published-time 6.45am BST

Penny Wong  has released this statement:

Labor's thoughts are with Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert and her family, as the second anniversary of her detention approaches.

In their words, this has been two years of "unimaginable pain" - a pain that will no doubt continue until Dr Moore-Gilbert is brought home. Until that day comes, we wish them continued strength.

Labor supports the Government's efforts to secure Dr Moore-Gilbert's release and seek regular consular access until that happens.

We reject the charges under which she is being held.

Dr Moore-Gilbert's family, friends and colleagues have worked tirelessly to ensure she is not forgotten - and Labor will continue to advocate for her safe return to them soon.

Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert. Photograph: Department Of Foreign Affairs And Trade Handout/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.52am BST

block-time published-time 6.44am BST

Deputy CHO Michael Kidd  is giving the national Covid update today - it includes this tidbit:

Today, leaders of the contact tracing process in Victoria and New South Wales have been meeting, along with Australia's chief scientist, Alan Finkel, to share experiences and ideas about how measures can be streamlined even further in both states.

Tackling Covid-19 requires a dynamic and comprehensive response. This has been the hallmark of the response to Covid-19, both at a national level and in each of our states and territories.

I note the improvements which have been announced by the Victorian premier in the contact tracing process in that state. I wish to commend everyone who is involved in the public health efforts in Victoria for their dedication and commitment to bringing this second wave rapidly under control.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.56am BST

block-time published-time 6.27am BST

The Law Council is not overly comfortable with the extension of insolvency emergency measures from Josh Frydenberg and Christian Porter  - which put a pause of any issues for companies which may be trading while insolvent:

The Law Council of Australia has raised a number of concerns over the federal government's announcement this week that it intends to extend temporary insolvency emergency measures, introduced as a result of the Covid-19 crisis, into 2021.

The joint announcement, made by the treasurer and the attorney general, proposed extending the temporary increase in the threshold at which creditors can issue a statutory demand, extending temporary bankruptcy protections, and extending the temporary relief for directors from any personal liability for trading while insolvent.

Law Council of Australia president, Pauline Wright, noted the commendable rationale for the proposed extension of these measures was to lessen the threat of actions that could unnecessarily push businesses into insolvency and external administration at a time when they continue to be impacted by health restrictions.

However, drawing on the recommendations of the Insolvency & Restructuring Committee (Committee) of the Business Law Section of the Law Council of Australia, Ms Wright urged the government to carefully review all temporary insolvency emergency measures before extending them beyond 31 December 2020 in order to avoid unintended consequences.

Delaying steps that would otherwise lead to the liquidation of unviable businesses exposes more viable businesses to becoming substantial creditors of those unviable businesses. This has the potential to spread the contagion, making the eventual insolvency wave more widespread and difficult to resolve.

The temporary emergency measures and all other relief being afforded distressed businesses during the current pandemic will eventually be removed. When that happens the insolvent entities that remain will likely be so bereft of assets or possible recoveries that external administrators - who themselves generally conduct small business enterprises - may be reluctant to take on the arduous tasks of liquidating insolvent entities.

Furthermore, extending the inevitable commencement of liquidations and bankruptcies allows even more time to pass from the date of otherwise potentially voidable transactions, thus increasing the opportunities for pre-insolvency advisors to assist in structuring of an insolvent entity's affairs to defeat the claims of creditors. Such prolongation could give rise to illegal phoenix activity.

As a result of these concerns, the Law Council considers that in order to avoid unintended negative consequences, any further extensions to the temporary insolvency emergency measures should be reviewed carefully and, if continued beyond 31 December 2020, any ongoing measures should only be formulated after extensive consultation.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.58am BST

block-time published-time 6.07am BST

Victoria Health has put out its official data for the day:

The average number of cases diagnosed in the last 14 days for metropolitan Melbourne is 65.3 and regional Victoria is 4.7. The rolling daily average case number is calculated by averaging out the number of new cases over the past 14 days.

The total number of cases from an unknown source in the last 14 days is 134 for metropolitan Melbourne and seven for regional Victoria. The 14-day period for the source of acquisition data ends 48 hours earlier than the 14-day period used to calculate the new case average due to the time required to fully investigate a case and assign its mode of acquisition.

People wearing face masks exercise in Williamstown in Melbourne. Photograph: James Ross/EPA

In Victoria at the current time:

•4,303 cases may indicate community transmission - a decrease of 3 since yesterday.•1,336 cases are currently active in Victoria.•140 cases of coronavirus are in hospital, including 12 in intensive care.•17,661 people have recovered from the virus.•A total of 2,456,924 test results have been received which is an increase of 13,341 since yesterday.

4,303 cases may indicate community transmission - a decrease of 3 since yesterday.

1,336 cases are currently active in Victoria.

140 cases of coronavirus are in hospital, including 12 in intensive care.

17,661 people have recovered from the virus.

A total of 2,456,924 test results have been received which is an increase of 13,341 since yesterday.

Of the 1,336 current active cases in Victoria:

•1,249 are in metropolitan Melbourne under stage 4 restrictions.•74 are in regional local government areas under stage 3 restrictions.•Nine are either unknown or subject to further investigation.•Four are interstate residents.•Colac Otway has 33 active cases, Greater Geelong has 10 active cases, Greater Bendigo has two active cases and Ballarat has no active cases.

1,249 are in metropolitan Melbourne under stage 4 restrictions.

74 are in regional local government areas under stage 3 restrictions.

Nine are either unknown or subject to further investigation.

Four are interstate residents.

Colac Otway has 33 active cases, Greater Geelong has 10 active cases, Greater Bendigo has two active cases and Ballarat has no active cases.

Of the total cases:

•18,397 cases are from metropolitan Melbourne, while 1,195 are from regional Victoria.•Total cases include 9,425 men and 10,329 women.•Total number of healthcare workers: 3397, active cases: 223.•There are 665 active cases relating to aged care facilities.    A window of a closed pub in Melbourne. Photograph: James Ross/AAP

18,397 cases are from metropolitan Melbourne, while 1,195 are from regional Victoria.

Total cases include 9,425 men and 10,329 women.

Total number of healthcare workers: 3397, active cases: 223.

There are 665 active cases relating to aged care facilities.

Active aged care outbreaks with the highest cumulative case numbers are as follows:

•240 cases have been linked to BaptCare Wyndham Lodge Community in Werribee.•217 cases have been linked to Epping Gardens Aged Care in Epping.•210 cases have been linked to St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner.•165 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Ardeer.•139 cases have been linked to Kirkbrae Presbyterian Homes in Kilsyth.•127 cases have been linked to Twin Parks Aged Care in Reservoir.•127 cases have been linked to BlueCross Ruckers Hill Aged Care Facility in Northcote.•124 cases have been linked to Cumberland Manor Aged Care Facility in Sunshine North.•119 cases have been linked to Japara Goonawarra Aged Care Facility in Sunbury.•118 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Heidelberg.

240 cases have been linked to BaptCare Wyndham Lodge Community in Werribee.

217 cases have been linked to Epping Gardens Aged Care in Epping.

210 cases have been linked to St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner.

165 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Ardeer.

139 cases have been linked to Kirkbrae Presbyterian Homes in Kilsyth.

127 cases have been linked to Twin Parks Aged Care in Reservoir.

127 cases have been linked to BlueCross Ruckers Hill Aged Care Facility in Northcote.

124 cases have been linked to Cumberland Manor Aged Care Facility in Sunshine North.

119 cases have been linked to Japara Goonawarra Aged Care Facility in Sunbury.

118 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Heidelberg.

In Victoria there are currently 13 active cases in residential disability accommodation:

•Total resident cases: 6, total Staff cases: 7.•Active cases in NDIS homes: 13 (6 residents).•Active cases in 'transfer' homes (State regulated/funded): 0.•Active cases in state government delivered and funded homes: 0.

Total resident cases: 6, total Staff cases: 7.

Active cases in NDIS homes: 13 (6 residents).

Active cases in 'transfer' homes (State regulated/funded): 0.

Active cases in state government delivered and funded homes: 0.

Non-aged care outbreaks with the highest number of active cases include:

•17 active cases are currently linked to Bulla Dairy Foods in Colac.•13 active cases are currently linked to Dandenong Police Station.•10 active cases are currently linked to Vawdrey Australia Truck Manufacturer.•10 active cases are currently linked to Peninsula Health Frankston Hospital.

17 active cases are currently linked to Bulla Dairy Foods in Colac.

13 active cases are currently linked to Dandenong Police Station.

10 active cases are currently linked to Vawdrey Australia Truck Manufacturer.

10 active cases are currently linked to Peninsula Health Frankston Hospital.

The Department is investigating cases linked to two family clusters in Melbourne's south-east and a ward at Monash Health.

Street art in Melbourne. Photograph: William West/AFP/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.25am BST

block-time published-time 5.47am BST

The Anglican Dean of Brisbane, Peter Catt, has released a statement in support of the environmental activist, Ben Pennings, and said a court-ordered injunction against him was a "sad indictment".

The injunction, sought by the miner Adani and granted by the Queensland supreme court, orders Pennings to remove social media posts and other content soliciting information about Adani's Carmichael mine.

Environmental activist Ben Pennings seen outside Brisbane supreme court in Brisbane, 11 September 2020. Photograph: Cheryl Goodenough/AAP

In a statement, Catt compared Pennings to anti-slavery and suffrage activists, who were "punished by the legal or political systems of the day".

It is a sad indictment that a local man who has been fighting for transparency has been gagged - including from engaging in personal social media activities. The irony of this is not lost on any of us who support the right of individuals to use their personal social media channels for the common good.

Despite today's setback, I join the many others who are inspired and encouraged by people like Mr Pennings who strive to keep our communities healthy and safe - and at great personal and financial expense.

His courageous example will surely motivate other Australians to join the growing movement to protect our iconic Great Barrier Reef and the underground water sources that our farmers are so reliant upon.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.03am BST

block-time published-time 5.32am BST

Sure.

enltrJohn Barilaro says he told his party room he would resign last night, "but I've never seen a party room so united, unaninmously backing me, that gave me the strength to get in there and negotiate this morning."

- Lucy Cormack (@LucyCormack) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 5.10am BST

The parliamentary committee which was looking at what happened at Juukan Gorge has responded to today's Rio Tinto news:

The Northern Australia Committee has welcomed news of the resignations of senior Rio Tinto executives in the wake of the destruction of Indigenous heritage sites at Juukan Gorge.

Committee chair, Warren Entsch, observed that the need for high level accountability for the Juukan Gorge incident had become obvious to all interested stakeholders.

"The evidence received by the Committee has made clear that the internal culture at Rio Tinto was a significant factor in the destruction of these sites.

New leadership, new structures and new operating principles within the company are essential to preventing such catastrophes in the future.

Committee chairman Warren Entsch. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP

The Committee welcomed the commitment made by Rio Tinto chairman Simon Thompson, to ensuring that "the destruction of a heritage site of such exceptional archaeological and cultural significance never occurs again at a Rio Tinto operation". Entsch expressed the hope that similar commitments would be forthcoming from other mining companies.

The Committee also expressed a desire to meet at the earliest opportunity with the outgoing executives to further discuss Rio Tinto's previous evidence to the inquiry and explore the implications of the announced changes at the company.

Earlier this week, the Committee announced the inquiry into the destruction of the Juukan Gorge sites will continue, despite having to postpone its planned visit to Western Australia because of difficulties associated with interstate travel.

Further details of the inquiry can be found on the Committee's website.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.16am BST

block-time published-time 5.09am BST

The Victorian hotel quarantine program was not bound by decisions of national cabinet, minutes of meetings held in May for the operation to manage hotel quarantine have revealed.

In meeting minutes of Operation Soteria from 10 April released to the hotel quarantine inquiry on Friday, the notes for the meeting stated:

Commonwealth makes some border decisions. Victoria makes its own decisions around detention. In some cases we have aligned with decisions made at the national level but in other cases we have varied and it has been accepted at national level that states and territories aren't bound.

The accommodation commander for the operation running hotel quarantine in the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Pam Williams, said she understood the discussion related to Victoria having a much tighter policy around maritime arrivals.

Williams was asked whether the lack of a defined leader within hotel quarantine environments made the situation worse.

She said it was complicated because it was operating in a hotel, and the Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions managed the contracts, in addition to DHHS's role. She said before she left her position and the Department of Justice took over managing hotel quarantine, she was in the process of developing clearer structures, and more skilled team leaders.

If I had the ability, as time went on to have a more skilled and capable group of people as team leaders, and I could have expected more of them [then] I would have required a management structure above them that was more conventional for [the] program, than what we had.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.18am BST

block-time published-time 5.08am BST

Incredible. May we all have the confidence of a middle-aged man.

John Barilaro:

What regrets is there? Today is a win for the regions.

It's a win for farmers, it's a win for those that have been fighting the koalas habitat, our stakeholders, the forestry industry. We now get a chance to get it on the agenda, off cabinet, high on the agenda, but the conversations I had with the premier, I had a lot of confidence in where this will end up.

John Barilaro outside the NSW Parliamentary offices in Sydney, 11 September 2020. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.23am BST

block-time published-time 5.08am BST

John Barilaro has taken the 'always look on the bright side of life' approach to his complete and utter capitulation in face of Gladys Berejiklian's unwavering 'no' to his demands.

People know what the koalas are and the impact it has on rural New South Wales. Any agreement with the premier was all about stability.

We never wanted to blow up the coalition, but yesterday we had to do what we had to do to bring it up on the agenda of the government and of the cabinet.

With the agreement of the premier this morning, this will be the next agenda item, high up, but it will put some transparency, because all of you will be asking what is the outcome of the step and every single cabinet minister now has to point to their session position.

So yesterday was all about policy, all about the regions and getting this to the executive.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.23am BST

block-time published-time 4.48am BST

Dr Hugh Heggie, the chief health officer for the NT, explains his decision:

This is interesting times, because we have been monitoring what's happening in other places, to serve the purpose of advising travel either to those locations or from those locations.

And those geographical areas of risk, we can use them in the Territory for a response, whether it be in an urban setting or a remote community or an aged care facility.

And we have had in place the plans for those responses, and we have been scenario-testing them.

For the purposes, though, of people who are going to travel to places such as Sydney, I recognise that this has been a great impost, because there are people there who are relatives or friends, and important events have been missed.

And I reflect that yesterday was R U OK?Day, and I'd ask the community here to look out, to reach out to people around you who have missed those hugs, missed those special events.

Colourful steps seen in Darwin. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP

The other purpose, of course, is for people travelling from those locations to understand that they're coming here to the Territory to enjoy our space, our lifestyle, which is probably unique. It's certainly unique in the country, it might be unique in the world. But the risk here is not completely gone.

So, we can put controls in place. We use a risk matrix framework, a risk assessment, and you look at the controls. And we've had controls, like border controls, clearly as a risk. But for people who come here, the controls need to be themselves, their behaviours, so we would advise people coming here from areas of - where there's some cases, or outbreaks, but small numbers, such as Sydney, that maybe you consider not being close to people you haven't seen for a good while.

In other words, kissing and hugging. In places like pubs and bars, which are wonderful places for us to be. But also to consider maybe not going and visiting vulnerable persons immediately, because there's places such as aged care and residential disability care where people are susceptible to this virus.

There's also the reality that we may end up with a case, or cases, here. We've seen the difference in the world from the beginning of the pandemic to those who were affected, including, sadly, those whose lives were lost. And some of us may actually know someone where that is the case. We need to consider our own personal responsibility.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.55am BST

block-time published-time 4.45am BST

Michael Gunner is also sick of people using the NT as a backdoor into places like Queensland, where quarantine is more expensive (you don't have to quarantine in Queensland if you come from an area which is not a declared hotspot), without spending money in the NT:

Gunner:

There is a fair bit of discussion around the cost of quarantining people here in the Northern Territory. We charge people $2,500. I can assure you it costs us a lot more than that.

It has been previously calculated $3,300, but we are recalculating that, given all quarantining now occurs at Howard Springs in the Top End, we expect the figure to be higher.

The priority for us, the reason we have Howard Springs set up, is to keep Territorians safe.

When it comes to keeping the Territory safe, any cost is worth it. We are confident that most Northern Territorians who quarantine here are coming to spend time here in the Territory.

But we do have an issue with some people who quarantine in the Northern Territory because it's the best set-up in the country, and then use us as a back door to other states, like Queensland. Territorians do not want to subsidise someone's trip to Brisbane to watch the AFL grand final.

Territorians do not want to subsidise holidays to the Gold Coast. I have raised this issue with national cabinet before, that the Territory is carrying a heavy load of quarantine, while others get the benefits.

It's not the biggest issue, but it is an issue. It is getting a bit annoying and it is costing us money. I will keep raising it in national cabinet with the prime minister. I am confident we can come to an arrangement, an agreement, that recognises the important national role the Territory is playing here.

But I also have a message to people who intend to spend 14 days at Howard Springs. If you're gonna take advantage of our awesome quarantine, then once you're out, we simply ask that you stick around for a while and enjoy the rest of the Territory, because it is pretty awesome too. I can guarantee you, the Northern Territory is a whole lot more and a whole lot better than the village at Howard Springs. It's the best place in the world.

So, please stick around and enjoy it a while before you bugger off.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.51am BST

block-time published-time 4.42am BST

That is going to put more pressure on Queensland's chief health officer to reassess her advice.

The NT has some of the most vulnerable communities, in terms of the virus, in Australia. If they say it is OK to have people from greater Sydney, it is hard to see how Queensland can keep saying it's not.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.45am BST

block-time published-time 4.41am BST

Michael Gunner:

I know this decision will be welcomed by some and condemned by others.

That happens with every decision we make. For those who are concerned by this, I would just say, look at our record.

Every decision on every day for the last six months has been about protecting Territorians, putting them first, and that will never change.

Every time we make a decision, I get people calling me and emailing me, saying I've stuffed it all up, that it will end in disaster, that I will kill people. People have the right to think that, if they want.

But I would just say, I have been told that a million times so far, and it hasn't happened yet. Our hot spots policy is nation-leading, and it is working. It is keeping the Territory the safest place in Australia, while also keeping the Territory open for business.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44am BST

block-time published-time 4.40am BST

NT to open borders to greater Sydney in one month's time

NT chief minister Michael Gunner is announcing changes to his jurisdiction's declaration of greater Sydney as a hotspot, following new advice from his chief medical officer:

This is for the following reasons: first, there is now a sustained downward trend of new cases in Sydney over time, including seven straight days of 10 or fewer new cases. Second, the contact tracing and containment system in New South Wales is superb. They are catching and containing the virus very quickly.

It is not spreading.

Third, the level of testing being done, and the links of almost all new cases to known clusters, gives a high degree of confidence that there are no known outbreaks occurring.

For these reasons, the Northern Territory will plan to remove the hot spot status declaration for greater Sydney in 28 days' time.

From Friday, 9 October, arrivals from greater Sydney will not need to undertake 14 are days of supervised quarantine. We are deliberately waiting another four weeks - two full replication cycles - so we can keep seeing the trend go down.

Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner. Photograph: Aaron Bunch/AAP

A four-week buffer gives Sydney more time to keep beating the virus, and gives us the time and flexibility we need to change our plan, if necessary.

This is the same cautious approach we took with our borders the first time around, and it worked. When we were told to open the borders straightaway, we said no.

And when things got worse in Victoria and Sydney, we kept them closed. We cannot predict the future, but we can plan for it.

So, if something happens, if things change, if the trend goes back up in Sydney, we will not hesitate to keep their hot spot status in place for as long as we need to.

But if they continue to make the progress they are making - as we expect they will - we can welcome Sydneysiders back to the Territory next month.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.58am BST

block-time published-time 4.31am BST

Alex Hawke has announced Australia has extended an additional $130m in support to Papua New Guinea, to help our Pacific neighbour deal with the pandemic. It's a loan - and comes on top of the $300m Australia recently loaned PNG for the same thing.

Hawke told the ABC:

The Australian government has decided to extend our support to PNG following a direct request from the PNG Government, in response to the deteriorating budget situation because of Covid and the economic impacts of Covid on the region. Obviously, PNG has worked very hard with international institutions, like the IMF, the World Bank, and they've got a program in place, which we have great confidence in. And in response, the Australian government has agreed to the request from PNG to loan money to them, to support that effort, to get their finances under control in this critical time.

A nurse from Warangoi clinic in East New Britain province of Papua New Guinea. Photograph: Kalo Fainu/The Guardian

This comes as Julie Bishop admitted Australia's foreign aid cuts were "regrettable" Bishop was foreign minister while many of the cuts were implemented.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.42am BST

block-time published-time 4.22am BST

The Victorian department of health and human services struggled to get security guards to follow its advice of precautions on how to avoid contracting Covid-19 while working in hotel quarantine.

The accommodation commander for the operation running hotel quarantine in the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Pam Williams, told the inquiry that security guards wanted much more protection than the advice suggested.

The security guards wanted as many barriers as they could, between them and what they perceived as this invisible threat.

They really wanted to wear gloves, they wanted to wear things, even though the advice was, keep your distance, wash your hands, only use a mask when you're within 1.5 metres.

Staff inside the Stamford Hotel in Melbourne. Photograph: Darrian Traynor/Getty Images

Williams said she approached the behavioural insights unit in DHHS to get an idea on how to get the message across to the security guards and companies, but said it was complicated by the fact that at the time the advice was changing as more became known about how the virus transmits.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.28am BST

block-time published-time 4.12am BST

I don't think they will go back to day grand finals after this, but AAP has an update on the AFL grand final:

This year's AFL grand final will be the first to be held at night.

On Friday, the AFL confirmed the 2020 decider, to be held at the Gabba on Saturday, October 24, will begin at 6.30pm local time - 7.30pm AEDT.

AFL general manager of clubs and broadcasting Travis Auld said the start time accommodated broadcasters and pre-match entertainment, while also factoring in daylight savings times for fans around the country.

With shorter quarters this year, Auld expected the grand final to be wrapped up and the 2020 premier to be crowned just before 10pm AEDT.

The MCG in Melbourne. Photograph: Speed Media/REX/Shutterstock

"Historically a really special part of grand final day is the build-up and anticipation, and we want to ensure we can share the electricity and atmosphere of the night with as many people as possible around the country," he said.

"A night grand final is sure to be a fantastic spectacle for both the fans in stadium and the millions watching around the country and overseas."

The AFL grand final has traditionally been held at 2.30pm Melbourne time.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.30am BST

block-time published-time 4.06am BST

What Annika said.

This started yesterday, and shows no signs of slowing down, but it doesn't make it right.

enltrI have been contacted by seven people now asking if this fake text is true. I can't believe I need to say this but... A military general is not being parachuted in to lead Victoria out of lockdown. No need to man the barricades As you were https://t.co/kgLcXKibDZ

- Annika Smethurst (@annikasmethurst) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 3.56am BST

While we are still on border closures, the federal border remains closed.

ABS has an update on arrivals:

Overseas arrivals and departures statistics are international travel movements of persons arriving in, and departing from Australia with a focus on short term trips (less than 1 year). It is the number of international border crossings rather than the number of people.

For all Short-term Visitor Arrivals (STVA) and Short-term Resident Returns (STRR) series, the trend estimates have been suspended from February 2020 and the seasonally adjusted estimates have been suspended from April 2020 due to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on international travel.

July 2020 original estimates for short-term trips:

•Overseas visitor arrivals to Australia decreased 34.6% since the previous month to 3,530 trips.Australian resident returns from overseas decreased 34.7% since the previous month to 10,280 trips.    Passengers prepare to board a Virgin Australia flight bound for Darwin at Brisbane Airport. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP

Overseas visitor arrivals to Australia decreased 34.6% since the previous month to 3,530 trips.Australian resident returns from overseas decreased 34.7% since the previous month to 10,280 trips.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.04am BST

block-time published-time 3.30am BST

And again, the comments from Dr Jeannette Young about exemptions for economic reasons was part of a wider statement on exemptions which includes personal reasons.

And everyone has to go into quarantine regardless of the reason for the exemption.

Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeanette Young. Photograph: Bradley Kanaris/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.52am BST

block-time published-time 3.29am BST

Liberal MP Andrew Laming  has proposed a new idea to take the hard edges off the state border restrictions: the nursecort (or, nurse escort).

Under the plan, when circumstances like that of Sarah Caisip, a Canberra woman who was denied permission to attend her father's funeral in Brisbane, arise again, family members excluded by the Queensland border could pay for a nurse to escort them to the funeral, checking that they are wearing PPE and are socially distanced. Then it would be back into quarantine or across the border.

He told Guardian Australia:

"It would make the insufferable refusals a little less insufferable. Every family would say yes to it."

Laming believes the politicisation of chief health officer advice has been exposed in two states this week: Brett Sutton did not advise a curfew in Victoria, and  Jeannette Young  cited revenue for Queensland as a reason major events (movie filming, the AFL) were given exemptions.

Laming said he was not criticising Young, who had been honest, but complained that some decisions like denying Caisip showed decisions are being made to "hold the line" against funerals rather than considering the individual circumstances.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.35am BST

block-time published-time 3.28am BST

Malcolm Turnbull is no longer prime minister of the government and Barnaby Joyce  is no longer leader of the Nationals.

enltrfrank admission from @Barnaby_Joyce : "There were a lot of times that Turnbull couldn't stand the sight of me but we still managed to get a lot done." #auspol

- Deborah Snow (@DeborahSnow) September 11, 2020

So that story didn't end particularly well

block-time published-time 3.25am BST

The joint statement from Gladys Berejiklian and John Barilaro is very, very telling:

Following a meeting this morning between the Premier and Deputy Premier, the NSW Liberal & Nationals Coalition remains in place.

This includes a commitment to supporting Cabinet conventions and processes.

The matter will be dealt with at an upcoming Cabinet meeting.

block-time published-time 3.06am BST

It is worth noting that Victoria is being criticised for not having its CHO set up its health response, while Queensland is being criticised for having its CHO set up its health response.

block-time published-time 3.00am BST

Daniel Andrews  is asked about not being able to pinpoint who came up with the curfew decision:

There are cabinet records of all decisions. I don't agree with the way you have characterised it. Anyone who finds fault with that measure, well, they can... They can find fault with me... Every decision ultimately is something that I'm accountable for as the head of the government. Let me be really clear with you - the curfew position at the moment will not be changing. Because it is working. It is working. And if you don't limit movement, you won't limit the number of cases. And what everyone wants to get up and stay open simply won't happen. This is - always happy to have a debate. But, ultimately, our policy will not change.

Q: We heard yesterday that Prof Sutton disagreed with the decision to not have him in charge of the overall pandemic response. Why not put him in charge now? Or at any stage?

Andrews:

I think it is really important to understand that the state controller is a multiagency coordination function. Dr Sutton has got enough to get on with, providing detailed expert epidemiological and public health advice.

That is where his focus is and needs to be. The role of the state controller is a broader role. If you ask someone to provide expert advice in their primary field, as well as coordination of many things that are well away from medicine and science and public health, I don't think that's the best use of the best skills.

The arrangements we have in place are working well. There will always be debates and discussions about whether they could be otherwise. I don't have the luxury of having those debates.

It makes sense. They are working. Regional Victorians are about to see the first dividend, the first significant reword for the amazing effort we are putting in.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.09am BST

block-time published-time 2.57am BST

On Tim Wilson  taking the curfew issue to the Human Rights Commission, Daniel Andrews says:

This is not about human rights. It is about human life. That is my answer to Mr Wilson. And what he chooses to do with his team is a matter for him. Police need rules they can enforce.

This strategy only works if we limit movement. The traffic data I've given you today makes it very, very clear that the curfew does limit movement.

If we want our police to be spending all their time having to move people on from Macca's car parks, where there are pop-up social gatherings that are not lawful - I'm going to have police wasting their time doing that. There are very few legal reasons to leave your home.

The curfew doesn't change that. It simply means police have an easier job. Given the year that Victoria police has had, and the sterling work they're doing, we ought to do everything we can to make their job just a little bit easier.

A general view of the Arts centre spire and the deserted arts centre precinct during curfew on September 10, 2020 in Melbourne, Australia. Photograph: Asanka Ratnayake/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.14am BST

block-time published-time 2.56am BST

What about locking down the areas of Melbourne where there are issues, but easing restrictions in other areas? (which is how Melbourne started this lockdown).

Daniel Andrews:

I have seen suggestions that, for instance, we should lock up the north and west of Melbourne ,where we have the greatest concentration of cases.

As hard as the lockdowns are, they are not a total lockdown there... There are still people who are going to work. Unless we are going to say to entire communities literally no one can leave their home, for any reason, or no one can leave the postcode for any reason whatsoever, you could still see movement.

That poses in the view of the scientists, the experts, and I think commonsense tells you, you know, you lock done half-a-dozen postcodes. Well, there are nurses who live there and work elsewhere.

There are doctors, teachers, there are ambos, there are supermarket workers, the list goes on and on. So, the judgment is that that that sort of segmentation won't work. The border won't be hard enough. You won't be able to limit movement.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.58am BST

block-time published-time 2.52am BST

Will Victoria be divided into zones?

Daniel Andrews:

This is an academic exercise.

I'm not asking regional Victorians to wait three months or two months.

We might be able to take these steps as early as next week.

Given that it was such a short timeframe, where we were confident we can reach these triggers, the notion of dividing up regional Victoria for, what, one week, people would barely be familiar with the rules before we took them off and said, "All of regional Victoria can open."

That's - I don't think that is a bad thing. The notion of regional Victoria moving together as one is what we want. Not in six weeks' time, but as early as next week.

That is why I'm so proud of every single regional Victorian for doing the amazing job they have done.

I can understand there is a notion of, "We have had no cases. Why do we have the rules?"... Whether it be Apollo Bay and wastewater testing finding traces or Echuca, finding a case, no cases that we know of - that's the key point here.

This thing is silent. Rapid and some people can have it and the symptoms are so mile they don't register. That is the challenge.

I'm confident regional Victoria can move and take steps as one as early as next week.

That is exactly the strategy working. It is something every regional Victorian should be proud of.

If I might finally make the point that we will have more to say next week about some changes and some - even further measures to make sure that that Melbourne regional Victoria border is as hard as it can be.

Because one thing - consistent feedback from regional Victorians, whilst they love to have tourism, for instance, and lots of movement, they jealously guard the low virus status across regional Victoria and they want that protected.

That's exactly what we will do.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.01am BST

block-time published-time 2.50am BST

Will the mystery case in Echuca change how Daniel Andrews  and the government looks at lifting restrictions in regional Victoria as a whole?

Andrews:

We with look at that at the appropriate time. I don't want something occurring on the one side of the state to impact rules on the other side of the state.

And as I've said a few times, if we had - if we'd forecast that it would take eight to 10 weeks, something like that, six to eight weeks, a longer period of time, to see regional Victoria take those steps forward, then we would have divided regional Victoria up. That is not, in fact, the case.

We are on track at 4.7.

We are on track.

Let's deal with that Echuca issue and be in no doubt there is a significant amount of work going on to understand that and whether there is any more virus in that community. And we are poised to be able to take not just one but potentially two steps as early as next week.

That's - that is a very different thing than saying to regional Victoria you will have to wait six to eight weeks. That isn't what we're asking.

I think the plan is working well. Let's get to the bottom of that Echuca matter. Hopefully next week we can have good new for regional Victoria. That is the best way to thank them, congratulate them for everything they have done. That's to take the safe and steady steps and to find the Covid normal.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.01am BST

block-time published-time 2.48am BST

Marise Payne  and Linda Reynolds have released a statement on the transfer of prisoners from US detention to Afganistan. It is a very, very sensitive issue for Australia, given Hekmatullah murdered three Australian soldiers inside their base in 2012:

Afghan Army deserter Hekmatullah, who murdered three off-duty Australian soldiers in 2012 in a cold-blooded crime of betrayal, is being transferred to a detention facility in Qatar by the Government of Afghanistan.

We understand Hekmatullah will be held in detention in Qatar with five other highly sensitive prisoners. These six prisoners were convicted of killing Coalition soldiers, or civilian humanitarian workers, in a series of insider attacks. The Government of Qatar has undertaken to the Government of Afghanistan and to the United States to keep these detainees confined and isolated.

Australia has steadfastly maintained that Hekmatullah must not be released. We have communicated our position repeatedly and consistently and at the highest level to the Government of Afghanistan, which is solely responsible for his custody, and to the United States.

In February 2020, the United States and the Taliban agreed to a number of steps, including the release of Afghan Government and Taliban prisoners, as goodwill pre-conditions that oblige the Taliban to enter into intra-Afghan negotiations with the Government of Afghanistan.

Australia has worked hard with the United States, the Government of Afghanistan and other nations, including the British and French Governments, since February 2020 to keep Hekmatullah in detention, and to keep these six sensitive prisoners separate from the wider goodwill agreement. That agreement has already seen the release of some 5,000 Taliban-associated prisoners and detainees.

Australia is not the only country that objects to the release of this most dangerous group of prisoners. Other countries, including France, have joined calls for dangerous criminals not to be released.

Australia is not a party to the intra-Afghan negotiations, nor the US-Taliban discussions. We are not standing in the way of peace talks. We fully support an Afghan-owned and led peace process, and all genuine steps taken towards a just, durable, and resilient peace arrangement. We recognise that there is no military solution to violence in Afghanistan. A negotiated political peace settlement is the only way to find a genuine conclusion to conflict, external militant interference, and terrorism. Australia appreciates that the Afghan Government, in making the decision to move the prisoners to Qatar, is doing its best to recognise and respect the concerns of the countries that want to see justice served.

The transfer of these last six sensitive prisoners, including Hekmatullah, from Afghanistan to a detention facility in Qatar, is a measure decided by the Government of Afghanistan and the United States as a means of facilitating the start of the Intra-Afghan Negotiations, scheduled to begin on 12 September, while keeping the prisoners detained.

The Australian Government's long-standing position is that Hekmatullah should serve a full custodial sentence for the crimes for which he was convicted by an Afghan court, and that he should not be released as part of a prisoner amnesty. Australia has communicated this position clearly to the Afghan Government and has not provided any authorisation for Hekmatullah's release as part of any arrangement with the Afghan Government. We will continue to advocate our position robustly, wherever he is being held. Justice and peace are not incompatible. Both have a place in peace arrangements.

A just outcome for the prisoner Hekmatullah remains a sensitive issue. The Australian Government once more extends its condolences to the families, loved ones and friends of our three fallen Australian soldiers.

block-time published-time 2.43am BST

And from the Labor leader herself:

enltrOn behalf of NSW Labor and millions of people across our state who are disgusted by what we have seen, I will move a Motion of No Confidence in the Berejiklian Government in Parliament next week.

- Jodi McKay (@JodiMcKayMP) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.39am BST

What will Christmas look like in Victoria?

Daniel Andrews:

I won't be a normal Christmas. We want it to be - we don't want it to be a lockdown Christmas.

We want it to be a Christmas that can be as close to normal as possible, a Covid-normal Christmas.

That means it will look different in lots of different ways. But the aim is to take these safe and steady steps and find that Covid-normal and have a Christmas that's much closer to last Christmas than otherwise it would be.

It's going to look different in lots of different ways. We have got a clear plan, the regional experience shows that it is working, it will continue to work in Melbourne, as these numbers come down.

It is five weeks ago, 725 cases. Today we have got in the low 40s.

Now, we have to keep that trend going.

And the key point there is get tested and get tested as soon as you have any symptoms.

And all of us keep following the rule, as challenging as they are. They are working.

That will get us a Christmas that is not a normal Christmas, but a Covid-normal Christmas.

Many of these recalls will seem a long time ago, because we will have moved to a very different set of rules by then.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02am BST

block-time published-time 2.36am BST

Deputy CHO Professor Allen Cheng is asked how things are looking in regional Victoria:

We have been looking at this closely. As the Premier mentioned, the average over the last 14 days is 4.7. The unknown cases in 14 days is seven.

Of the ones that have been diagnosed yesterday, so there was one in Geelong that was a contact of a known case, one in Bendigo, that was part of another - a family cluster, four cases in Colac, which, again, was part of a cluster.

So, all those are known cases, and - sorry, known origins and not unknown source. There was one in Echuca yesterday that we're looking into a bit more closely.

So, a case was reported from Echuca yesterday. We haven't had any cases from - for quite some time. There's a special team, committee, that's been stood up to look at the details of that more closely. There is ongoing testing. That hasn't been confirmed completely as yet.

And there's a going to be some more thinking about that to see if that is an unknown source.

What that means for people in Echuca is that if you do have any symptoms, please go down to the Echuca regional health centre - I think it is in Mitchell Street - and please get tested while we're still trying to work this out.

I understand we have been - also been talking to our colleagues in Albury, local health district in New South Wales to stand up testing on that side of the border.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.39am BST

block-time published-time 2.34am BST

The vote will be moved on Tuesday.

enltrLabor leader Jodi McKay says John Barilaro must be sacked for continuously disrupting the government. "This is not a victory for Gladys Berejiklian because she should have dealt with this issue earlier."

- James O'Doherty (@jmodoh) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.31am BST

NSW Labor to move no confidence motion against Berejiklian governement

Back in NSW, the Labor leader is addressing the media:

enltrJohn Barilaro has taken the Government to the brink, then capitulated. He has been humiliated. His behaviour is completely unacceptable in a time of pandemic and economic crisis. His position as NSW Deputy Premier is untenable. pic.twitter.com/aPK73iIlM0

- Jodi McKay (@JodiMcKayMP) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.29am BST

On religious rites and celebrations, Daniel Andrews says:

In relation to sacraments at the end of a person's life, I know and understand the government - the government knows and understands how critical important that is for people of faith and their families.

There was a little bit of confusion about this.

Under the care and compassion grounds, it is completely permissible for you to have a minister come - a priest - whomever it might be, rabbi - to come to you and administer the end-of-life sacraments.

There will be always some finer details in relation to the way individual hospitals have got their own rules in place. Those rules are there for the best of purposes. They're there to try and protect staff and fellow patients.

But in the broadest of terms, last rites and similar sacraments are, in fact, allowed. And we obviously apologise if there's been any confusion about that matter.

I have, in a broader sense, I have been in contact with the archbishop this morning. I wanted to make a point and send a message to people of faith - all faiths right across our state. I know 2020 has been a very difficult year.

The notion of being able to connect, to share that important part of your life to be part of that network in a very tangible, physical sense, to be in the same pace together, celebrating those things that you hold dear, the things that are core values for you. That not being an option, that not being a feature of 2020 for so many months is a really significant issue.

And I want to thank all of those multi-faith leaders who have engaged with us so, so well on so many different issues. We know there are Jewish high holidays coming up.

We are working closely with the community to make sure those celebrations - the important occasions - are as close to normal as they can be.

The key point here, though, is this virus doesn't discriminate. You have got to be as cautious as you can be.

We have to try and put in place sensible rules, compassionate rules, but it can't quite be normal. It's got to be Covid normal, as safe as possible.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.40am BST

block-time published-time 2.28am BST

The Victorian health minister, Jenny Mikakos,  is at the press conference urging Victorians to keep going to the doctor and emergency departments when sick:

It's important that whilst we remain vigilant against coronavirus, that we don't neglect our other health needs.

My health services are reporting that there are declining and concerning attend dances at our emergency departments, and this does suggest that people are putting off seeking urgent and important medical care that could make that critical difference to their life.

Our emergency departments, for example, are reporting significant declines in presentations at a time of the year where typically they are at their busiest.

The month of August is typically a very, very busy month for our emergency departments.

They're usually in the peak of the flu season. Flu numbers are thankfully significantly down this year, compared to the last three years, they're down about 80% compared to the last three years' average.

But it's clear that people are deferring important medical care for very serious conditions.

For example, presentations to our EDs for heart attacks are down 18%, compared to this time last year. For strokes, they're down 24%, compared to this time last year.

And also people are deferring important cancer screening which has meant that we are seeing about a 30% reduction in reports for the five most common cancers - rectal, prostate, breast, melanoma and lung cancer.

This is concerning because deferred care can lead to worse health outcomes. It can lead to longer hospitalisation stay, it can lead to tragedy. So, we are urging Victorians today to continue to visit their GP, to take their regular medication, and if they have any lumps or bumps or symptoms that they are concerned about, please do not defer seeking medical care. That may well mean turning up to an emergency department, or calling 000 if you have symptoms of concern. It is important that you continue to seek that medical care. It may, in fact, save your life.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.40am BST

block-time published-time 2.21am BST

On contact tracing, Daniel Andrews  says:

I just wanted to take you through the latest snapshot in relation to contact tracing.

This will be on the website but I thought it was important to read some of these out.

For the week to 8 September, the percentage of new positive cases contacted within 24 hours - 100%.

The percentage of new positive cases interviewed within 24 hours, 92.3%.

As we've always said, there will be a small number of people that we just can't find within that 24 period.

That is where doorknock, coming in, repeated phone call, old-fashioned leg work, to make sure we can ultimately get to those people, but the metric - performance is 92.3%.

Percentage of known contacts notified within 48 hours, 98.3%.

And, again, there will be that very small number of people who you can't find, just because numbers are incorrect, addresses may be incorrect, all of those quite understandable reasons.

If you look at data for the week to 1 September, again, positive cases being contacted within 24 hours, 100%. Percentage of new cases being interviewed within 24 hours, 91. 9%. And the personal of known contacts contacted within 48 hours, 98.4%.

So, that is a testament to the work that a very large team is doing and in some of those - some of those measures, just - one week to the next, there is even off a very high base, there is still some improvement.

We will continue to try and drive those numbers right the way up to 100% in each of those categories. That is challenges, of course, for the reasons I've mentioned.

But it is a testament to a very big team that are working very hard to make sure that we have the best public health response and recent outbreak responses

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.22am BST

block-time published-time 2.17am BST

Daniel Andrews  addresses the curfew, again, ahead of questions:

You will receive some latest information in relation to traffic movement as it relates to the hours when the curfew is on. What I can say is there is an immediate - there was an immediate and pronounced and sustained drop in road use in all metropolitan local government areas between the hours of 7 and midnight again, between midnight and 6:00am.

Some - not quite as big a reduction in some of the outer suburbs, but our data analytics team pretty well convinced that that relates to key workers moving within those - within those suburbs and not just - I shouldn't say key workers, those who have a permit and are allowed to be at work.

What it shows you is quite massive - quite a massive drop in the amount of movement that we have seen right across Melbourne while ever the curfew has been on, and what's clear, if you can limit movement, you will limit the spread of this virus.

If you can limit movement, then you will see less people doing the wrong thing. It is a much more easily enforced by Victoria police.

What's more, you get the case number reductions with thereafter. That is what we want.

That is what we're working towards. That makes opening up possible and it means that it happens much, much sooner. I think Victoria police will be out today to talk about those matters and I will leave it to them.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24am BST

block-time published-time 2.13am BST

Cleaners who were recruited to do infection cleaning in the Rydes on Swanston quarantine hotel were kept in the dark over the fact the hotel was used for Covid-positive travellers.

Speaking at the Victorian hotel quarantine inquiry on Friday, IKON Services Australia general manager Michael Girgis  said his company cleaned over 1,000 rooms during the hotel quarantine, including dozens at the Rydges.

He said when IKON went to clean the Rydges in May and June, he was aware some of the rooms had been used by people who had been infected with Covid-19 but he said he wasn't aware it could have been an issue in common areas, and this would have been useful information for the safety of staff when putting on personal protective equipment (PPE).

"Normally the hotels would give us a room within the vicinity, so we didn't want to walk too far, obviously, once we've put on all the gear. So it was always somewhere within the vicinity," he says.

Girgis said his company was brought in to do a deep clean of the hotel in early June, and he was not informed all hotel guests were moved out for the clean.

On 13 June, an independent inspection of the hotel recommended the hotel be cleaned again before reopening, but Girgis said he was not asked to return to clean again before the hotel opened up again for returned travellers at the end of June.

Girgis said routinely after an infection cleaning done by his company, the organisation that hired IKON would hire another contractor to do a swab test of the room to ensure no infections but he said as far as he was aware no swab testing of the rooms in hotel quarantine were done after they were cleaned.

block-time published-time 2.12am BST

Just dipping across to NSW for a moment - there have been 10 new cases diagnosed in the last 24 hours.

Six are in hotel quarantine, four are linked to known clusters.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.14am BST

block-time published-time 2.12am BST

Regional Victoria 'poised' for restrictions to be lifted

There are 74 active cases in regional Victoria.

Colac - four new case

Greater Geelong - one new case

Greater Bendigo - one new

Daniel Andrews:

The rolling average 28 August to 10 September Metro is 65. 3. Regional Victoria is 4.7. So, regional Victoria is poised to take at least a step and potentially two steps. We will have more to say about that next week as we get closer to that 14 day marker.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.25am BST

block-time published-time 2.10am BST

Daniel Andrews press conference

Daniel Andrews is giving the daily update. He said there were 13,341 tests in the last 24 hours:

I am sad to say there are now 710 Victorian whose have passed away because of this global pandemic. That is an increase of nine since yesterday's report.

One female in her 50s, one female in her 70s, three males in their 80s, and four females in their 90s. Seven of those nine deaths are connected to outbreaks in aged care.

We of course send our sympathies and condolences to each of those nine families.

There are 140 Victorians in hospital, 12 are in intensive care, and eight of those 12 are on a ventilator.

block-time published-time 2.04am BST

The National Native Title Council has released a statement on Rio Tinto

enltrStatement from @NNTCAust welcoming the dismissal of @RioTinto three executives, CEO Jean-Sebastien Jacques, Iron Ore boss Chris Salisbury and corporate affairs boss Simone Niven, under whose leadership the 46,000-year-old #JuukanGorge caves were destroyed. pic.twitter.com/t5sweRR9vY

- Human Rights Law Centre (@rightsagenda) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.00am BST

It is almost like there is no consistency on any of these issues

enltrToday Tim Wilson invokes the Human Right's Commission as part of his campaign to undermine the state government's public health response to the pandemic. Only days ago he ignored the Commission when he voted for a blanket ban on people in immigration detention having phones.

- Andrew Giles MP (@andrewjgiles) September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 1.34am BST

We are expecting Daniel Andrews to step up in about half an hour for his daily press conference.

This is his 71st in a row for those playing at home.

block-time published-time 1.24am BST

Greg Hunt mentioned the Victorian human rights charter in his comments yesterday, while questioning the need for the Melbourne curfew. Tim Wilson has picked it up:

enltrLiberal MP Tim Wilson has asked the Australian Human Rights Commission to examine whether Victoria's arbitrary curfews were a violation of people's "rights and freedoms", given they were not based on health advice. #auspol https://t.co/AR78HFGWBD

- Greg Brown (@gregbrown_TheOz) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 1.19am BST

Ben Pennings has responded to the Queensland supreme court granting an injunction, sought by miner Adani, restraining him from soliciting leaks from the company and its contractors

Adani claims their legal strategy is not about inflicting hardship on me. Despite this successful injunction, Adani is still undertaking court action that could bankrupt my family. I shouldn't have to sell our suburban family home to make a multi-billionaire even richer. So long as Adani threatens my family and the environment we all share I will do everything lawfully in my powers to stop them.

The urgent need to stop new thermal coal mines is much bigger than any one individual. The global movement to stop Adani's coal mine will not be deterred by the cold-hearted bullying tactics of a billionaire's mining company targeting one individual. The Australian public will continue to oppose Adani's destructive climate wrecking mine."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.29am BST

block-time published-time 1.17am BST

It's almost like they didn't actually have a plan

enltrHearing joint statement could be in doubt. Barilaro apparently telling MPs Gladys has assured compromises. Govt sources saying only committed to discussions. Parties seem to be fracturing again. It's very messy.

- Alex Hart (@alexhart7) September 11, 2020

block-time published-time 1.14am BST

By the way, John Barilaro  couldn't even get Gladys Berejiklian to agree to discus the koala protection legislation at the next cabinet meeting.

He got a "sorry, not sorry, it's not on the agenda" response.

He got nada. No concessions. Not even input into when the issue that caused the tantrum could be discussed.

It's almost like his Oma didn't make him read The Art of War at least once a year.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.29am BST

block-time published-time 1.10am BST

Barnaby Joyce was in the Daily Telegraph this morning where he was lamenting not being able to kill kangaroos, snakes or frogs with impunity.

He has a little bit of egg on his face, given the (inevitable) conclusion of the Nats rolling over, but to be honest, he is probably used to that, and now just uses it to make an omelette like that was always his intention.

Anyway, his musings this morning have not aged well:

The NSW Nationals are making a stand and putting their people ahead of others' views on koalas. Others predominantly from far away with little skin in the game apart from virtuous grandstanding.

At the core of Nationals' philosophy is the primacy of the individual over the state. For an individual to have rights they must have the ownership of property unfettered by imposed arbitrary caveats of the state.

You can't shoot roos without a permit as they hop across your crops in their hundreds. You can't shoot a snake in your yard, you have to get it "removed". You can't build a dam or fix a road if a certain frog is present.

All these "you can'ts" means I am not the free person that I once was in my country. It means I have the state looking over my shoulder and breathing down my neck.

We are sick of picking up the tab of another person's latest guilt trip or hobby horse.

If koalas are so important that you believe taking the listed tree species from 10 to 123 then offer a price and buy them. Then pay the rates, public indemnity insurance, weed control and keep out the rabbits, pigs, goats, deer, wild dogs and other ferals.

Good on the state Nats for saying enough is enough.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.15am BST

block-time published-time 1.03am BST

So in the last hour:

NSW leader Nationals leader John Barilaro has completely backed down from his threat to withdraw Nationals support for government policy

Rio Tinto executives have stepped down in the wake of the Juukan Gorge destruction scandal and shareholder anger

Melbourne Covid case numbers have dropped below 50 (although nine deaths are tragic).

The Queensland premier has stood by not intervening in decisions made by her chief health officer.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.31am BST

block-time published-time 12.54am BST

Barilaro leadership 'untenable'

Nationals leader John Barilaro has backed off his threat to pull the Nationals out of the Coalition, and instead agreed to a compromise offered by the the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, agreeing to further talks over the state's new koala protections at cabinet on 6 October.

The Nationals had earlier agree to push for early talks in September, and compromises on the policy but Brejiklian has insisted on the normal processes. No compromises have been offered on the policy at this stage, but are possible during the talks.

Sources said Barilaro's leadership was now untenable.

"He has broken the marriage and there is no ability to repair the relationship" a government source said.

"The premier is the hardest working in the country and he's done this."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.31am BST

block-time published-time 12.48am BST

And for those wondering on exemptions that are not AFL or Tom Hanks related in regards to Queensland:

enltr @AnnastaciaMP told the economic and governance committee there has been: - 229 exemptions for specialist workers, health workers and for compassionate cases. - 170,000 border zone resident exemptions - 31,000 freight exemptions #qldpol #auspol

- @MartySilk (@MartySilkHack)

September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 12.45am BST

The Queensland supreme court has granted an injunction, sought by miner Adani, restraining an environmental activist from soliciting leaks from the company and its contractors.

Ben Pennings, a spokesman for the group Galilee Blockade, has been ordered to remove material posted online, including a "Dob in Adani" page that sought details about work on the Carmichael coalmine.

The court has also ordered Pennings to remove social media posts by 22 September.

Last week, it emerged Adani had twice unsuccessfully sought to conduct announced searches at Pennings's family home.

block-time published-time 12.43am BST

Rio Tinto chief executive steps down

Goodness, it is all happening.

As Ben Butler reports:

Rio Tinto boss Jean-Sébastien Jacques has bowed to investor pressure over the Juukan Gorge debacle and is leaving the company.

Also going are head of iron ore, Chris Salisbury, and head of corporate affairs Simone Niven.

Rio Tinto chairman Simon Thompson :

"What happened at Juukan was wrong and we are determined to ensure that the destruction of a heritage site of such exceptional archaeological and cultural significance never occurs again at a Rio Tinto operation.

"We are also determined to regain the trust of the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura people and other traditional owners.

"We have listened to our stakeholders' concerns that a lack of individual accountability undermines the group's ability to rebuild that trust and to move forward to implement the changes identified in the board review." We'll have a full news story soon.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.46am BST

block-time published-time 12.40am BST

A joint statement is coming out, but Gladys Berejiklian has not blinked and John Barilaro  has backed down.

He lost. And now has to fight for his own leadership.

The Nationals will stay where they are until the next election, and support government policies.

block-time published-time 12.38am BST

Annastacia Palaszczuk  gets emotional as she addresses the last question, which was on  Mathias Cormann's  comments this morning that he did not understand how someone could be "so cold, so cold hearted" to not allow an exemption:

I say to Mathias, I say, these are difficult decisions and they're heartbreaking. I'm human just like everyone else. These issues hurt me deeply. They hurt me deeply because during this pandemic I have lost loved ones as well. I know exactly what people are going through.

Yesterday, Scott Morrison got emotional talking about the loss of her father on Sydney radio 2GB

block-time published-time 12.36am BST

NSW Nationals 'roll over' - reports

This has just come out as the Queensland press conference was going on

enltr #BREAKING : NSW Deputy Premier John Barilaro has "rolled over" in a meeting with Premier Gladys Berejiklian - agreeing that the NSW Nationals will stay in a coalition with the Liberal Party. #9News pic.twitter.com/Qz8eau4Nqt

- Nine News Queensland (@9NewsQueensland) September 10, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.38am BST

block-time published-time 12.34am BST

Asked about the exemptions again, Annastacia Palaszczuk says:

I feel these issues very personally. Just like everyone else does. That's why we've put in place this specialist care unit. We have more than - we have 80 people in this exemptions unit looking at these issues.

And these people are human beings as well. They're having to go through all the details, and make really difficult and tough decisions.

But this is happening in other states as well. It's happening around the world. It's not nice.

Who wouldn't be touched? Honestly, who wouldn't?

Who wouldn't be touched by these cases? They are heartbreaking.

We're in a global pandemic and my job is to keep Queenslanders safe. That's my job. My job is to keep 5 million Queenslanders safe.

I just have to do my job to the best of my ability.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.39am BST

block-time published-time 12.33am BST

What is Queensland doing with the hotspot definition the federal government wants?

Annastacia Palaszczuk:

What I said very clearly is that I support a national cabinet doing some further work. But I reserve the state's right to see how it goes and see some detail. We haven't seen any details. There may be two states that give it a trial and see how it goes. But if you have a look federal court case, the federal court case said that hot spots don't necessarily work. There's been a federal court case on this as well.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.39am BST

block-time published-time 12.32am BST

Why is the ACT still a hotspot, given there have been no cases in the territory for more than two months?

That's the advice of the chief health officer. What I said, I made it many times at these press conferences and I'll say it again.

As a nation, if we can focus on getting Victoria and New South Wales under control, then you can set a date for the whole country to open up.

I have been absolutely consistent here on this. Absolutely consistent. But the parameter is two incubation periods, 28 days... That's the chief health officer's advice.

Pushed on why, given there are no cases, she says:

From memory, someone came through Canberra into Queensland with the virus. That's my memory.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.41am BST

block-time published-time 12.31am BST

Annastacia Palaszczuk says she does not believe the national cabinet has fractured:

I think national cabinet has a role to play. I do think that national cabinet works in the best interests of the nation.

She is asked if she stands by her comments that she was "bullied" by Scott Morrison:

Yes. I said that very clearly yesterday. I'm not commenting any more today.

These are - these are very, very heartbreaking issues. And as I said to the prime minister, I don't make these decisions. I was very clear. I do not make these decisions. The chief health officer does.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.32am BST

block-time published-time 12.29am BST

'It is absolutely tragic' - Palaszczuk addresses border heartbreak

Annastacia Palaszczuk  says she referred the decision to the CHO, as is required under the act, but she understands the heartbreak:

It is absolutely heartbreaking.

Everyone, anyone who would've seen those images is heart broken. Everyone is human. You know. We're in a global pandemic at the moment. It is tough on everyone.

And let me make it very clear, I don't make those decisions. I said to the Prime Minister... I said... No. I said to the Prime Minister, I would refer it to the chief health officer and I did that.

It's her decision. Under the act, it's her decision.

You've got to have someone - you've got to take the clinical advice here. We're dealing with a health pandemic. It is absolutely tragic.

It is heartbreaking. Families are not together at the moment.

There are people at Heathrow waiting to come back home. There's people all around the world waiting to come back home.

There's people who can't see babies and loved ones in Victoria. There's people who can't go and see people in Western Australia.

It's absolutely heartbreaking and gut-wrenching.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.33am BST

block-time published-time 12.27am BST

Dr  Sonya Bennett  is asked about the case of Mark Keans, a terminally ill father, whose family is attempting to visit, but will need to pay more than $15,000 in quarantine costs:

So my understanding is that there's very active discussion with both the family and Mark and that's ongoing, trying to find, you know, a solution that is, will support both Mark and his family in moving forward.

I think - I mean, I just like to say, I think we all recognise these are difficult situations. Every one of us. And there are reasons the restrictions are in place. And I think we've all seen the good outcome of that.

But in every situation with Mark Keans and others, the department works closely with applying for exemptions and the patient to find a solution to support what they would like. But at the same time recognising we need to continue to mitigate any risk of transmission.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.29am BST

block-time published-time 12.23am BST

Dr Sonya Bennett, the deputy chief health officer, is taking the health questions today instead.

block-time published-time 12.23am BST

Queensland's chief health officer, Dr Jeanette Young, is not at the press conference - she is on, what the deputy premier calls "a well earned weekend off" - no word whether that was pre-arranged or not.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.29am BST

block-time published-time 12.22am BST

Queensland has had two new cases of Covid in the last 24 hours.

Both people are in quarantine.

block-time published-time 12.21am BST

John Barilaro has entered his meeting with Gladys Berejiklian

block-time published-time 12.20am BST

And yet

enltrNationals "holding firm". Meeting underway with premier on Level 20 of 52 Martin Place #nswpol

- Linda Silmalis (@LindaSilmalis) September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 12.19am BST

There has been no official announcement as yet

enltrThe deadline for the future of the Coalition Government has been reached. I understand Nationals leader John Barilaro will remain Deputy Premier for now with the Koala issue to go to Cabinet in early October. @2GB873

- Clinton Maynard (@ClintMaynard2GB) September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 12.17am BST

Peter Dutton was on the Nine network again this morning, continuing his attack on Queensland's border closures (he was one of the first federal MPs to criticise the policy, and has not relented) but his comment here has raised some eyebrows, given his role as home affairs minister and the blanket policy there:

We all want to make sure that everybody's health is taken care of but at the moment this indiscriminate application of the border restrictions is really having a very negative impact on people's mental health and it is really devastating families, as we have seen in the interviews this morning and there is no consistency.

If you are Tom Hanks  from California*, you are OK. If you are Tom Hanks from Chermside or Castle Hill, sorry, you are not coming in, even to your brother's funeral or your dying daughter. It is just unacceptable.

And, I think the consequences are very far reaching and the premier needs to fix the problem. It is a problem of her making and it needs to be fixed sooner than later.

In 2018, Peter Dutton warned against compassion for refugees and asylum seekers who had attempted to reach Australia by boat:

It's essential that people realise that the hard-won success of the last few years could be undone overnight by a single act of compassion in bringing 20 people from Manus to Australia.

*Again, Tom Hanks is in quarantine. And anyone who meets the exemptions can apply for entry to Queensland. They have to quarantine as well.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.19am BST

block-time published-time 12.11am BST

There are reports a compromise has emerged that could stave off a damaging split within the NSW coalition with the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, agreeing to further talks over the state's new koala protections.

The premier has offered to put the new koala state environment protection policy at the top of the agenda at the next cabinet meeting in two weeks' time, in a bid to try and address the Nationals' concerns about the policy.

The move could stave off for now the dissolution of the Coalition, which the National party leader, J ohn Barilaro, had threatened to end by moving his 13 Nationals to the crossbenches and abstaining from voting.

Berejiklian said if he insisted on this position she would go to the governor and swear-in a new ministry this morning.

Earlier this morning senior Liberals indicated they were open to further talks and changes to the koala policy.

"You don't always get policies right, there might be some challenges with this one," NSW treasurer Dominic Perrottet said.

Planning minister Rob Stokes also left the door open to compromise but said the Nationals had misrepresented the policy.

"My colleague in the NSW government said farmers can't build a feed shed or a driveway on their property without a koala study. This is not the case," he wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald.

"You can erect farm sheds, pour driveways, clear fence lines and engage in any routine agricultural practice that has occurred for generations without the need for development consent or a koala study."

Stokes said koala protection "should not be about dividing our community between the city and the bush, between urban dwellers and country folk".

"Protecting the koala is protecting our shared identity as Australians," he wrote.

But the damaging split could have further implications for both the Nationals and the Liberals.

Barilaro's leadership now seems untenable. But there could also be ramifications for Berejiklian who has ambitious members of her own cabinet.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.26am BST

block-time published-time 12.10am BST

The Nationals want to keep their ministries, apparently, but negotiate a compromise over the changes which have sparked all of this.

The 9 o'clock deadline has come and passed.

Gladys Berejiklian  was in NO MOOD to negotiate yesterday, following John Barilaro's  announcement he was effectively withdrawing the Nationals (all but one, who has not agreed) from the Coalition and basically told him the party was in or out, but wasn't getting a slice of each way.

No one really knows how this will end.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.13am BST

block-time published-time 12.01am BST

It's 9am.

No word as yet.

block-time published-time 12.00am BST

The budget lockup details are out:

The Morrison Government will hand down the 2020-21 Budget on Tuesday 6 October 2020.

As with the recent sittings of Parliament, this year's lock-up arrangements will need to be adapted to ensure they are compliant with health restrictions imposed as a result of COVID-19.

Arrangements for giving embargoed access to the Budget material have been arrived at in consultation with the Presiding Officers, the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, the ACT Chief Health Officer, the Department of Parliamentary Services and the Press Gallery Committee.

To ensure the security and integrity of the Budget, and the health and safety of participants, the usual arrangements for the lock-up have been significantly modified by Treasury.

Numbers of organisations and individuals that will be able to attend the lockup has been necessarily reduced, meaning not all organisations and individuals who have had embargoed access to the Budget in the past will have access this year.

The media will be given embargoed access to Budget material in the Press Gallery at Parliament House, and will be limited to those Press Gallery pass holders for whom the Press Gallery is a place of work.

There will also be limited arrangements in the capital cities of Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney. In light of significant complexities posed by the pandemic, including location of attendees and maintaining COVID-safe room capacities, Treasury will make arrangements with media organisations directly.

Due to the heightened health risks and restrictions, smaller than usual stakeholder lock-ups will be held in Sydney and Canberra. With all COVID-19 mitigations and controls in place, these secure events will be strictly limited. Treasury will make arrangements with stakeholders directly.

The Treasury will implement the strictest physical and digital security protocols to ensure information security and the health and safety of attendees.

Strict security and embargo conditions will apply in every location to ensure that Budget information is not to broadcast, published or made publicly available prior to its official release at 7.30 pm.

All attendees will be required to execute a Deed of Confidentiality. In the event of a Breach of the deed, all legal options available to the Commonwealth will be pursued and the organisation and/or individual involved risks not being able to participate in any future Treasury lockup.

As in previous years, Budget documents will be available via www.budget.gov.au from 7.30 pm on Tuesday 6 October.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.01am BST

block-time published-time 11.59pm BST

Unsurprisingly, the federal Labor party president, and former federal Queensland MP, Wayne Swan, defended the Queensland Labor government while talking to the Nine Network this morning about the same issue:

We're in the midst of a one in-100-year event and tough decisions are taken but if the prime minister was really serious, he wouldn't have turned it into a media event.

He would have simply got the head of his department to talk directly to the health officer who takes the decisions because consider the alternative. Do they really want the premier to be making the health decisions? I don't think so."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.02am BST

block-time published-time 11.57pm BST

The Queensland opposition leader, Deb Frecklington, was on the Seven Network this morning, talking about the woman who was unable to go to her father's funeral yesterday (she was given an exemption to attend a private viewing instead).

Frecklington:

What would I done is I would let Sarah go to her father's funeral, I would have let her hug her mum, I would have let her hug her mum, I would have let her hug her little sister, Isabel. When I spoke to Sarah, because Sarah was reaching out to anyone that would listen, Sarah hadn't even heard back from the premier's office. This is so unacceptable. What we need is, yes, we need strong border controls but we need strong border controls but we need compassion in this decision-making. It is not good enough for the premier to say it's an authority's decision.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.02am BST

block-time published-time 11.53pm BST

The NSW premier appears quite unbothered this morning.

enltrDon't worry. The Premier is fuelling up again this morning #cheds https://t.co/LCsOECnumR pic.twitter.com/10p1N0qqku

- Charlotte Goodlet (@cgoodlet) September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 11.46pm BST

So it's going well then

enltrNSW Nationals crisis meeting underway in Parliament House with MPs not present joining via Zoom. One Nat just gave me their private mobile number "in case we're all sacked" #nswpol

- Linda Silmalis (@LindaSilmalis)

September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 11.37pm BST

Victoria records 43 new cases and nine deaths

We will get additional details, like test numbers, very soon.

enltr #COVID19VicData for 11 September, 2020. Yesterday there were 43 new cases reported. Sadly, 9 lives were lost and our thoughts are with those affected. More information will be available later today. pic.twitter.com/Y5dxX1ixEK

- VicGovDHHS (@VicGovDHHS)

September 10, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.56pm BST

block-time published-time 11.35pm BST

It is just one week short of a year since this photo was taken - which was the last time Gladys Berejiklian's  colleagues tested her leadership over legislation. When the Ched debate happened, Tanya Davies, Matthew Mason-Cox and Lou Amato had announced they were calling a spill motion over the state's abortion laws.

Berejiklian stared them down as well. There was no spill motion. But what there was, was a debate over whether she was carrying Saladas (as reported in the Tele) or Cheds for breakfast.

I was on the winning side of history - they were confirmed as Cheds.

But as Angus Livingston, the journalist who kicked off Chedgate just tweeted - it is once again Chedtempter and we should have known something like this was coming.

enltrbig day in NSW politics and you know what that means - the Cheds are back pic.twitter.com/rjdUatDGgV

- Angus Livingston (@anguslivingston) September 10, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.42pm BST

block-time published-time 11.27pm BST

Still don't see how you can have members in cabinet shaping and agreeing to government policy, which members, en masse, don't support in the vote.

enltrIt's understood if Nats Ministers decide to stay in Govt and only send backbenchers "effectively" to crossbench, they will still lose Cabinet spots due to Lib/Nat ratios changing. Nats discussed this as a possible way forward last night. #nswpol @7news

- Alex Hart (@alexhart7) September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 11.25pm BST

And this is the crux of it

enltrNationals Chris Gulaptis admits the Nats have "blindly followed the Liberals" on policies on @RNBreakfast. Nats have worked out they have more leverage by speaking out but will they make it official, give up the extra $$$ and power of ministry to go to the cross bench?

- Gabrielle Chan (@gabriellechan)

September 10, 2020

block-time published-time 11.19pm BST

We all await the outcome of the NSW's Coalition's Koala Crisis.

The deadline is in less than an hour.

block-time published-time 11.17pm BST

John Barilaro  continued in his chat with Ben Fordham, who says it sounds like Gladys Berejiklian has called his bluff and he has blinked:

Really, is that how you read it, Ben? How about we do it on media, just on social media, what people are saying about the Nats standing tall," Barilaro replies.

We obviously have very different feeds.

block-time published-time 11.13pm BST

John Barilaro on 2GB:

They say a week is a long time. Guess what? An hour is a long time in politics and I will trust my party room to come to a decision, and I as the leader will take back to the premier.

What that looks like at this stage, I don't know what it looks like. And I am prepared to continue to accept that what we are doing is the right thing on behalf of regional and rural communities.

The support, the outcry that we have received overnight - unbelievable. And I am not here to bring down the government, I'm not here to destroy the Coalition. We have been a bloody good government and it is not the Liberals have been a good government, we've  been a good government, including the Nationals and I [don't] think we really get the respect, or the acknowledgement of our  role in this government, since 2011.

It was National party seats that were won which got us government in 2011. It was National party seats that were won in the last election, including my own seat, holding it at 2% at the start, today I hold it with almost 12%."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.24pm BST

block-time published-time 11.07pm BST

John Barilaro:

This isn't about a koala protection bill, what we are fighting for is the protection of farmers, the protection of community, the protection of the regions and if that is not fighting for, I don't know what is.

Will he back away from his threat:

This isn't John Barilaro steering his party to a position, this was driven from my own members... and that is why the partyroom had made those decisions yesterday. I am the leader, I take responsibility, I lead the team, the party room. The premier has given us her view, we'll have to respond in due course. I won't be saying much about that until I have the party room meeting at 8 o'clock. I respect my party room too much.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm BST

block-time published-time 10.59pm BST

John Barilaro says he doesn't believe the Nationals get the respect they deserve in NSW.

I don't think really we get the, we get the respect, or the acknowledgement of our role in this government. Since 2011. It was national seats that were won, that got us government in 2011."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm BST

block-time published-time 10.56pm BST

NSW Nationals to meet at 8am to discuss Berejiklian ultimatum

John Barilaro  was on Sydney radio 2GB this morning, defending his position.

The Nationals leader did not sleep well - but because he cares.

Barilaro says he will take whatever his party room meeting decides to Gladys Berejiklian at 9am, but believes he is right.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm BST

block-time published-time 10.51pm BST

And we get a question on sports rorts!

(but not an answer)

That's after this story from Paul Karp  brought the issue back on the agenda.  Scott Morrison has avoided the questions from Paul in two press conferences

enltrSome #sportsrorts answers from PM's...spokesperson. denying that Morrison considered marginal/target status of seats and leaving open possibility a fourth round of sports grants will be funded to fix up aggrieved clubs. #auspol https://t.co/hpqLyZzA3D

- Paul Karp (@Paul_Karp)

September 10, 2020

Q:  The Auditor-General's office told a Senate committee an advisor in your office drafted talking points to make the pitch for more money to target more seats. Did you ever see that document and doesn't that document's existence prove it was politically motivated?

Bridget McKenzie: I have made a 6,000 word submission to that Senate inquiry. I stand by every word in that submission. There's 640 odd community clubs getting people active in our communities as a result.

block-time published-time 10.49pm BST

But given we are in the middle of a pandemic, and NSW, under Gladys Berejiklian  (Ruby Princess aside - and yes, I know it is a pretty big aside) has handled it pretty well, how does NSW trust the Nationals when they are trying to blow up the government, in the middle of a health crisis?

Bridget McKenzie:

Well, I don't see it like that, at all. I see it as a level of frustration by the deputy premier and his parliamentary colleagues having tried to reach an appropriate outcome inside the tent. They obviously feel this is their only course of action. I hope the premier and the deputy premier can actually work this out.

Australia is best served when the Liberal and the National party are presenting a stable and successful coalition government. But at the end of the day, these are two very separate independent parties with separate constituencies and values and sometimes that requires having to have very tough conversations. So I hope they can find a compromise that doesn't mean regional New South Wales and rural farmers who have also had a very tough period, I might add, with drought and bushfires, aren't paying the cost to satisfy Green votes in Sydney.

(The only course of action is, apparently, keeping all their own positions and power and titles, but doing whatever they want outside of the government.)

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.51pm BST

block-time published-time 10.42pm BST

Bridget McKenzie on why John Barilaro is right:

My understanding of this policy decision is that in November, a piece of legislation and changes were put to the government, that were going to actually severely restrict farmers' right to develop their properties and indeed, have severe impacts on the values of their properties and what they could do on that going forward. My understanding be is the New South Wales Nationals have been working within the government to address those challenges, which is their job, and it's been rebuffed.

(The restrictions is not being able to cut down trees which koalas use for habitat.)

But McKenzie stands behind Barilaro.

I think it's important to get a positive outcome for the constituents in rural and regional New South Wales.

I'm confident, having not spoken to the deputy premier, I'm confident that that is what his whole team is trying to achieve.

The fact they haven't been able to arrive at a negotiated outcome says more about Liberal ministers's inability to see the needs and interests of regional New South Wales as important to something their government can do.

I think you can protect the habitat of koalas and ensure that iconic species who has had a tough summer in New South Wales after the bushfire can have habitat protection without destroying the productive capacity and value.

You can walk and chew gum at the same time, but not if you're going to have a city-centric operation towards policy development. That's what it looks like.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.51pm BST

block-time published-time 10.37pm BST

Bridget McKenzie, the former deputy leader of the federal Nationals and a Victorian senator, is on ABC News Breakfast explaining John Barilaro's  move yesterday, as "the New South Wales Nationals are doing exactly what they were sent to Macquarie Street to do."

And that's to stand up for their constituents. I mean, I don't think it's surprising that city-centric policy decisions being made in the main by the Liberal and the Labor party are being challenged by the Nationals, whether it's in Macquarie Street, in Canberra, or in Spring Street... It's not about koalas.

(Narrator: It is about koalas.)

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.52pm BST

block-time published-time 10.34pm BST

I am sure we will hear a lot more about that today though, so stay tuned.

block-time published-time 10.34pm BST

And for the record, because this line has taken hold as well, Tom Hanks  is also in quarantine. He was allowed entry into the state, but is in quarantine for two weeks.

Same with the AFL executives. They are in quarantine and paying for the hotel.

You can get an exemption to go to Queensland if you meet any of the exemptions. That includes personal and work reasons. But everyone has to quarantine. I'm not saying it's right, I'm not saying I agree with it either way - I'm just saying the blanket rule applies and this idea that Hanks and Hollywood and sporting elites are laughing it up on Gold Coast beaches while "normal" people have to quarantine is not right.

Here is what Dr Jeannette Young said on that yesterday:

I will always give an exemption to someone who needs to come into the state because of a family reason and I have done that regularly and that will continue to happen under that new team.

So I have had many, many exemptions from people who are wanting to come up to support their grandchildren who are having children and they haven't got parents here and they need to support them because they have got to go into hospital and look after other children.

So there are lots and lots and lots of exemption requests to support family, to support close friends, and they are always granted, but they are granted with a need for quarantine. No different to all of these other exemptions.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.52pm BST

block-time published-time 10.29pm BST

There is a lot on social media featuring one quote from Queensland's chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, yesterday, as she spoke about exemptions. It was in response to a question on why movie stars and sports stars were allowed entry into Queensland:

enltrJeannette Young says she gives an exemption for film stars b/c they bring money into the state & aid the economy. Sorry, but the CHO should primarily be concerned with medical grounds. pic.twitter.com/GFMsxesUyJ

- Rohanct (@RohanCT) September 10, 2020

She did say it - but it was part of a much longer statement, where she also spoke about people entering the state for personal reasons, including funerals:

Anyone can come into Queensland who has got a reason to come in that meets one of our requirements.

So, anyone can come to Queensland if they wish to see a dying relative or, indeed, a dying close friend.

Then the next part of that exemption is what they need to do when they come - and that is the same.

I have given exemptions to people in the sporting industry for a whole range of codes because it is important that we start that work, but they all go into quarantine.

I have given exemptions for people in entertainment and film because that is bringing a lot of money into this state and, can I say, we need every single dollar in our state.

We need to make sure that our economy is going ahead as much as it can, as long as it is safe.

So my first - the first thing the - thing I do before I make a decision about anything is: it safe to the Queensland population?

If it is safe, I look at how it can be done and whether that is the AFL, the NRL, whether it is swimming, tennis - all of the sports - cricket recently because we are coming know that season. Whether it is any of those, whether it is entertainment industry, film industry, whether it is agricultural, whether it is are sources and mining, construction.

Anything that will benefit our community because I actually believe that the economy has an enormous role in determining health and the health outcomes for Queenslanders, but before I agree to anything it is whether it is safe.

Have your opinions by all means - everyone does - but have the context as well.

block-time published-time 10.24pm BST

Good morning

In just a few short hours we will find which way John Barilaro  will go after Gladys Berejiklian issued her Coalition partner an ultimatum - in, or out?

Barilaro effectively pulled the Nationals out of the coalition in NSW yesterday, over environmental laws designed to protect koalas. Apparently the ability to kill koalas is one of the hills Barilaro is prepared to die on. He declared the Nationals would sit on the crossbench, abstain from government bills, except for those related to regional NSW, and break away from joint-party room and leadership meetings.

Which is cool, but he also wants to retain all the Nationals cabinet positions.

Berejiklian has said yeah-nah.

The NSW premier has given the Nationals until 9am to either get back in the tent, or accept they'll be on the crossbench with all that entails - including giving up their ministries.

That would plunge Berejiklian into a hung parliament, but she's not blinking.

Barilaro was on Sky last night talking compromise.

This won't be about backing down. I can hit a pause button for a second. At some point in the next two or three weeks, we have to confront the issue about the koala habitats. We have tried our hardest, what gives me confidence, but I'm not going to blow up the government. I'm not going to walk away from our ministerial responsibilities. When we're at the table, the regions win.

We'll keep you up to date on that. We'll also keep you up to date on all the Covid news, which includes the border wars.

The Queensland border closure has been an ongoing flashpoint, but the closure to the ACT, which has not had a case for two months, has been a particular sore point.

That all came to ahead when Sarah Caisip, a Queensland woman, who moved to the ACT for work, was unable to attend her father's funeral, because of quarantine restrictions.

Scott Morrison made an emotional plea to allow the woman to attend the funeral. In the end, Sarah was allowed a private viewing of her father, which she was escorted to, by police, and attended wearing full PPE gear.

The state's chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, said she was sorry, but she was trying to stay two weeks ahead and funerals often included vulnerable people, so there was a blanket rule.

In the Queensland parliament, Annastacia Palaszczuk said the decision was not for her to make, but for her CHO, and accused the prime minister of attempting to "bully" her.

Morrison said it was time for premiers to start showing compassion. He had a chat to Sky last night too:

I've seen the images of when she went to see her dad and there've been some shocking days during the course of this pandemic. And today was, today just hurt. And it wasn't. It's not just about Sarah's case as, because there are others. You've just been talking about one on your program now. You know, we've got to find, if if these things have got to be up, if that's the view, they gotta find a better way. Those who have decided these measures are necessary, that they've got to find a better way to deal with with the heart here. I mean, I've dealt with many premiers on many, many different issues all the time. I've dealt with the Queensland premier on other issues. Sadly, today, I didn't have the influence that I would hope to have. But Sarah doesn't get today back.

The incident has inflamed tensions over the border closure. The Queensland election is in about 50 days, so it is not going to get any easier.

We'll bring you all the day's events, as they play out. You have Amy Remeikis with you for most of the day. And all of the coffee.

Ready?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.31pm BST

16055 2020-09-11T05:30:00Z true 2020-09-10T21:32:38Z false false 2020-09-11T13:39:26Z false AUS theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/enpcn false true https://media.guim.co.uk/2b3e5fc836dcbce98acfe41c48384d48c3dd56a5/0_106_5461_3277/500.jpg false en true We're closing our live coverage of coronavirus news and other major developments for the day. Thanks to Amy Remeikis, who led you through most of the day. You can still follow developments around the world on our global coronavirus live blog. So here's what happened today: NSW deputy premier John Barilaro performed a brisk climb-down this morning, after threatening to lead the Nationals away from the state's coalition over new laws to better protect koalas. NSW Labor said Barilaro's position was now untenable. Three Rio Tinto executives, including chief executive Jean-Sébastien Jacques, left the global miner over its decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia. Victoria saw 43 new cases of Covid-19 and 9 more deaths. Australia has seen 797 deaths from the disease, with 710 in Victoria. Queensland recorded 2 new cases of the virus and New South Wales reported 10. The Northern Territory government will open its borders to people from greater Sydney in a month's time. Those visitors will not need to quarantine. Victorian assistant police commissioner Luke Cornelius said significant resources would be needed for planned anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne on Saturday. Protesters were "selfish" and made him feel "a bit like a dog returning to eat its own vomit". Thanks for being with us today. We'll do it all again tomorrow. Take care. School leavers attending formals in NSW have been given some Covid-19 guidelines. AAP reports on the guidelines for formals announced by the state's education minister, Sarah Mitchell. So how will it be to party like it's 2020? Avoid spontaneous crowds, have live-streams for people who can't attend, restrict guest numbers, don't mingle before and after events, and schools should stick to the 4-sq-metre rule for each attendee. Oh, and students should bring their own pen (for signing the yearbook). Victoria's judicial inquiry into its hotel quarantine program continued today, with evidence coming from two health department employees suggesting there was ambiguity over who was in charge of the program. AAP reports that Pam Williams and Merrin Bamert, of the Department of Health and Human Services, shared the role of commander of Operation Soteria, the taskforce that ran the program. Both were asked who was in charge at each hotel. Williams said the department took responsibility for their own staff and contractors, but hotel managers looked after their own staff. Security companies managed their guards. She said: We were working as a team. It was a difficult team to manage. This was an environment where the usual things that you do to develop a team weren't possible. The inquiry was shown an email written by Bamert in which she said she was "not sure who you would say was in charge" of the program. "This operation was being managed out of a range of sites with no clear operational structure," Bamert wrote in the email on 21 May. She was replying to an email from Safer Care Victoria, an authority investigating the death of a man in hotel quarantine in April. Williams said more than 20,000 people went through the quarantine program from 29 March until it was suspended in June. She said: Of those, seven people in three rooms were implicated in the spread. So in fact, 96.8% of the people who were positive in hotel quarantine did not go on to spread the virus. About 99% of the state's second wave of Covid-19 can be traced back to returned overseas travellers who quarantined at two hotels. Deputy chief health officer Annaliese van Diemen did not appear before the inquiry as scheduled. She will appear next week, alongside chief health officer Brett Sutton, emergency management commissioner Andrew Crisp, the chief commissioner of Victoria police, Shane Patton, and former top cop Graham Ashton. Our Friday started with NSW deputy premier John Barilaro's on-again off-again threat to blow up the state's Coalition over new laws to better protect koalas. But was it really all about the marsupial non-bear? Guardian Australia environment editor Adam Morton has this run down. "We all make mistakes..." Victoria's assistant police commissioner Luke Cornelius says responding to anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne has him feeling "a bit like a dog returning to eat its own vomit". In comments reported by AAP this afternoon, Cornelius said he was sick of the protests. There's another proposed for the city on Saturday - a "Melbourne Freedom Walk" - that would need significant police resources, he said. "I feel a bit like a dog returning to eat his own vomit... I'm sick of it. If people were less selfish and a bit more grown up, we wouldn't have to keep doing this. Cornelius hinted that anyone claiming the walk was "exercise" that's allowed under the city's lockdown may be treated sceptically. "Don't take us for fools," he said. "We'll have no hesitation in issuing fines." Police had directly warned a number of people planning to protest in the city, he said. Cornelius urged anti-lockdown protesters to "be creative" at home in speaking out, without encouraging gatherings. Also on Friday, Victorian premier Daniel Andrews told protesters: "All you're potentially doing is spreading the virus." About 1,100 people had shown interest in the walk and 340 had committed to attend before Facebook took down the event's online page on Wednesday. Victoria police chief commissioner Shane Patton has flagged the possibility of more protests at other locations at the weekend. "Freedom" rally posters for this Sunday and every Saturday until restrictions end are circulating online. Victoria's inquiry into the state's hotel quarantine program will hear evidence from the state's chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton next week. The inquiry has announced its witness list for next week with Sutton scheduled to appear on Wednesday. Victoria's police chief commissioner Shane Patton will appear on Thursday. The inquiry is looking at how and why cases of Covid-19 managed to escape from the state's hotel quarantine scheme. On Tuesday the inquiry released pictures of "quarantined" guests going to a convenience store. A former police officer had also sent emails to the police, the inquiry heard, raising concerns about how private security firms were managing the facilities. Afternoon folks. Graham Readfearn here taking over from Amy Remeikis. If sporting events are on your list of "things to look forward to in a pandemic" then Rugby Australia boss Rob Clarke has been delighting in their news today. He's just been speaking to the ABC about Rugby Australia's announcement that Australia will host what he described as a "mini world-cup" in November and December. It's the 2020 Rugby Championship. Argentina, New Zealand, South Africa and Australia will play 12 matches over six weeks with five rounds in NSW and a game in Brisbane. As AAP reports, Argentina currently has Covid-19 cases in their camp and the South Africa team will need their government to relax travel restrictions. Clarke was asked by the ABC if it was fair for sports squads to be flying in and out at a time when millions of Victorians are still facing harsh lockdowns. He said: I think sport has a really important role to play in helping give Australians something to lack forward to. If there isn't anything greater than looking forward to a mini World Cup, with rugby, then I don't know what is. And I hope that people get behind our teams. I understand the difficulty that people are going through, particularly in Victoria right now. But by the time this competition comes around in November, I really hope that it unifies Australia and gives them something to cheer for. I am going to hand over the blog to Graham Readfearn now for the rest of the afternoon. I'll be back bright and early on Monday, but most likely not bushy tailed, because, well, it's Monday. Thank you to everyone for joining me again this week. I truly appreciate it. Take some time to switch off and do nothing this weekend - whatever doing nothing or switching off looks like to you. There's a lot of information out there and sometimes, you just need to turn it off. Again, thanks for joining us. Take care of you. Ax Penny Wong has released this statement: Labor's thoughts are with Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert and her family, as the second anniversary of her detention approaches. In their words, this has been two years of "unimaginable pain" - a pain that will no doubt continue until Dr Moore-Gilbert is brought home. Until that day comes, we wish them continued strength. Labor supports the Government's efforts to secure Dr Moore-Gilbert's release and seek regular consular access until that happens. We reject the charges under which she is being held. Dr Moore-Gilbert's family, friends and colleagues have worked tirelessly to ensure she is not forgotten - and Labor will continue to advocate for her safe return to them soon. Deputy CHO Michael Kidd is giving the national Covid update today - it includes this tidbit: Today, leaders of the contact tracing process in Victoria and New South Wales have been meeting, along with Australia's chief scientist, Alan Finkel, to share experiences and ideas about how measures can be streamlined even further in both states. Tackling Covid-19 requires a dynamic and comprehensive response. This has been the hallmark of the response to Covid-19, both at a national level and in each of our states and territories. I note the improvements which have been announced by the Victorian premier in the contact tracing process in that state. I wish to commend everyone who is involved in the public health efforts in Victoria for their dedication and commitment to bringing this second wave rapidly under control. The Law Council is not overly comfortable with the extension of insolvency emergency measures from Josh Frydenberg and Christian Porter - which put a pause of any issues for companies which may be trading while insolvent: The Law Council of Australia has raised a number of concerns over the federal government's announcement this week that it intends to extend temporary insolvency emergency measures, introduced as a result of the Covid-19 crisis, into 2021. The joint announcement, made by the treasurer and the attorney general, proposed extending the temporary increase in the threshold at which creditors can issue a statutory demand, extending temporary bankruptcy protections, and extending the temporary relief for directors from any personal liability for trading while insolvent. Law Council of Australia president, Pauline Wright, noted the commendable rationale for the proposed extension of these measures was to lessen the threat of actions that could unnecessarily push businesses into insolvency and external administration at a time when they continue to be impacted by health restrictions. However, drawing on the recommendations of the Insolvency & Restructuring Committee (Committee) of the Business Law Section of the Law Council of Australia, Ms Wright urged the government to carefully review all temporary insolvency emergency measures before extending them beyond 31 December 2020 in order to avoid unintended consequences. Delaying steps that would otherwise lead to the liquidation of unviable businesses exposes more viable businesses to becoming substantial creditors of those unviable businesses. This has the potential to spread the contagion, making the eventual insolvency wave more widespread and difficult to resolve. The temporary emergency measures and all other relief being afforded distressed businesses during the current pandemic will eventually be removed. When that happens the insolvent entities that remain will likely be so bereft of assets or possible recoveries that external administrators - who themselves generally conduct small business enterprises - may be reluctant to take on the arduous tasks of liquidating insolvent entities. Furthermore, extending the inevitable commencement of liquidations and bankruptcies allows even more time to pass from the date of otherwise potentially voidable transactions, thus increasing the opportunities for pre-insolvency advisors to assist in structuring of an insolvent entity's affairs to defeat the claims of creditors. Such prolongation could give rise to illegal phoenix activity. As a result of these concerns, the Law Council considers that in order to avoid unintended negative consequences, any further extensions to the temporary insolvency emergency measures should be reviewed carefully and, if continued beyond 31 December 2020, any ongoing measures should only be formulated after extensive consultation. Victoria Health has put out its official data for the day: The average number of cases diagnosed in the last 14 days for metropolitan Melbourne is 65.3 and regional Victoria is 4.7. The rolling daily average case number is calculated by averaging out the number of new cases over the past 14 days. The total number of cases from an unknown source in the last 14 days is 134 for metropolitan Melbourne and seven for regional Victoria. The 14-day period for the source of acquisition data ends 48 hours earlier than the 14-day period used to calculate the new case average due to the time required to fully investigate a case and assign its mode of acquisition. In Victoria at the current time: 4,303 cases may indicate community transmission - a decrease of 3 since yesterday. 1,336 cases are currently active in Victoria. 140 cases of coronavirus are in hospital, including 12 in intensive care. 17,661 people have recovered from the virus. A total of 2,456,924 test results have been received which is an increase of 13,341 since yesterday. Of the 1,336 current active cases in Victoria: 1,249 are in metropolitan Melbourne under stage 4 restrictions. 74 are in regional local government areas under stage 3 restrictions. Nine are either unknown or subject to further investigation. Four are interstate residents. Colac Otway has 33 active cases, Greater Geelong has 10 active cases, Greater Bendigo has two active cases and Ballarat has no active cases. Of the total cases: 18,397 cases are from metropolitan Melbourne, while 1,195 are from regional Victoria. Total cases include 9,425 men and 10,329 women. Total number of healthcare workers: 3397, active cases: 223. There are 665 active cases relating to aged care facilities. Active aged care outbreaks with the highest cumulative case numbers are as follows: 240 cases have been linked to BaptCare Wyndham Lodge Community in Werribee. 217 cases have been linked to Epping Gardens Aged Care in Epping. 210 cases have been linked to St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner. 165 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Ardeer. 139 cases have been linked to Kirkbrae Presbyterian Homes in Kilsyth. 127 cases have been linked to Twin Parks Aged Care in Reservoir. 127 cases have been linked to BlueCross Ruckers Hill Aged Care Facility in Northcote. 124 cases have been linked to Cumberland Manor Aged Care Facility in Sunshine North. 119 cases have been linked to Japara Goonawarra Aged Care Facility in Sunbury. 118 cases have been linked to Estia Aged Care Facility in Heidelberg. In Victoria there are currently 13 active cases in residential disability accommodation: Total resident cases: 6, total Staff cases: 7. Active cases in NDIS homes: 13 (6 residents). Active cases in 'transfer' homes (State regulated/funded): 0. Active cases in state government delivered and funded homes: 0. Non-aged care outbreaks with the highest number of active cases include: 17 active cases are currently linked to Bulla Dairy Foods in Colac. 13 active cases are currently linked to Dandenong Police Station. 10 active cases are currently linked to Vawdrey Australia Truck Manufacturer. 10 active cases are currently linked to Peninsula Health Frankston Hospital. The Department is investigating cases linked to two family clusters in Melbourne's south-east and a ward at Monash Health. The Anglican Dean of Brisbane, Peter Catt, has released a statement in support of the environmental activist, Ben Pennings, and said a court-ordered injunction against him was a "sad indictment". The injunction, sought by the miner Adani and granted by the Queensland supreme court, orders Pennings to remove social media posts and other content soliciting information about Adani's Carmichael mine. In a statement, Catt compared Pennings to anti-slavery and suffrage activists, who were "punished by the legal or political systems of the day". It is a sad indictment that a local man who has been fighting for transparency has been gagged - including from engaging in personal social media activities. The irony of this is not lost on any of us who support the right of individuals to use their personal social media channels for the common good. Despite today's setback, I join the many others who are inspired and encouraged by people like Mr Pennings who strive to keep our communities healthy and safe - and at great personal and financial expense. His courageous example will surely motivate other Australians to join the growing movement to protect our iconic Great Barrier Reef and the underground water sources that our farmers are so reliant upon. Sure. The parliamentary committee which was looking at what happened at Juukan Gorge has responded to today's Rio Tinto news: The Northern Australia Committee has welcomed news of the resignations of senior Rio Tinto executives in the wake of the destruction of Indigenous heritage sites at Juukan Gorge. Committee chair, Warren Entsch, observed that the need for high level accountability for the Juukan Gorge incident had become obvious to all interested stakeholders. "The evidence received by the Committee has made clear that the internal culture at Rio Tinto was a significant factor in the destruction of these sites. New leadership, new structures and new operating principles within the company are essential to preventing such catastrophes in the future. The Committee welcomed the commitment made by Rio Tinto chairman Simon Thompson, to ensuring that "the destruction of a heritage site of such exceptional archaeological and cultural significance never occurs again at a Rio Tinto operation". Entsch expressed the hope that similar commitments would be forthcoming from other mining companies. The Committee also expressed a desire to meet at the earliest opportunity with the outgoing executives to further discuss Rio Tinto's previous evidence to the inquiry and explore the implications of the announced changes at the company. Earlier this week, the Committee announced the inquiry into the destruction of the Juukan Gorge sites will continue, despite having to postpone its planned visit to Western Australia because of difficulties associated with interstate travel. Further details of the inquiry can be found on the Committee's website. The Victorian hotel quarantine program was not bound by decisions of national cabinet, minutes of meetings held in May for the operation to manage hotel quarantine have revealed. In meeting minutes of Operation Soteria from 10 April released to the hotel quarantine inquiry on Friday, the notes for the meeting stated: Commonwealth makes some border decisions. Victoria makes its own decisions around detention. In some cases we have aligned with decisions made at the national level but in other cases we have varied and it has been accepted at national level that states and territories aren't bound. The accommodation commander for the operation running hotel quarantine in the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Pam Williams, said she understood the discussion related to Victoria having a much tighter policy around maritime arrivals. Williams was asked whether the lack of a defined leader within hotel quarantine environments made the situation worse. She said it was complicated because it was operating in a hotel, and the Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions managed the contracts, in addition to DHHS's role. She said before she left her position and the Department of Justice took over managing hotel quarantine, she was in the process of developing clearer structures, and more skilled team leaders. If I had the ability, as time went on to have a more skilled and capable group of people as team leaders, and I could have expected more of them [then] I would have required a management structure above them that was more conventional for [the] program, than what we had. Incredible. May we all have the confidence of a middle-aged man. John Barilaro: What regrets is there? Today is a win for the regions. It's a win for farmers, it's a win for those that have been fighting the koalas habitat, our stakeholders, the forestry industry. We now get a chance to get it on the agenda, off cabinet, high on the agenda, but the conversations I had with the premier, I had a lot of confidence in where this will end up. John Barilaro has taken the 'always look on the bright side of life' approach to his complete and utter capitulation in face of Gladys Berejiklian's unwavering 'no' to his demands. People know what the koalas are and the impact it has on rural New South Wales. Any agreement with the premier was all about stability. We never wanted to blow up the coalition, but yesterday we had to do what we had to do to bring it up on the agenda of the government and of the cabinet. With the agreement of the premier this morning, this will be the next agenda item, high up, but it will put some transparency, because all of you will be asking what is the outcome of the step and every single cabinet minister now has to point to their session position. So yesterday was all about policy, all about the regions and getting this to the executive. Dr Hugh Heggie, the chief health officer for the NT, explains his decision: This is interesting times, because we have been monitoring what's happening in other places, to serve the purpose of advising travel either to those locations or from those locations. And those geographical areas of risk, we can use them in the Territory for a response, whether it be in an urban setting or a remote community or an aged care facility. And we have had in place the plans for those responses, and we have been scenario-testing them. For the purposes, though, of people who are going to travel to places such as Sydney, I recognise that this has been a great impost, because there are people there who are relatives or friends, and important events have been missed. And I reflect that yesterday was R U OK?Day, and I'd ask the community here to look out, to reach out to people around you who have missed those hugs, missed those special events. The other purpose, of course, is for people travelling from those locations to understand that they're coming here to the Territory to enjoy our space, our lifestyle, which is probably unique. It's certainly unique in the country, it might be unique in the world. But the risk here is not completely gone. So, we can put controls in place. We use a risk matrix framework, a risk assessment, and you look at the controls. And we've had controls, like border controls, clearly as a risk. But for people who come here, the controls need to be themselves, their behaviours, so we would advise people coming here from areas of - where there's some cases, or outbreaks, but small numbers, such as Sydney, that maybe you consider not being close to people you haven't seen for a good while. In other words, kissing and hugging. In places like pubs and bars, which are wonderful places for us to be. But also to consider maybe not going and visiting vulnerable persons immediately, because there's places such as aged care and residential disability care where people are susceptible to this virus. There's also the reality that we may end up with a case, or cases, here. We've seen the difference in the world from the beginning of the pandemic to those who were affected, including, sadly, those whose lives were lost. And some of us may actually know someone where that is the case. We need to consider our own personal responsibility. Michael Gunner is also sick of people using the NT as a backdoor into places like Queensland, where quarantine is more expensive (you don't have to quarantine in Queensland if you come from an area which is not a declared hotspot), without spending money in the NT: Gunner: There is a fair bit of discussion around the cost of quarantining people here in the Northern Territory. We charge people $2,500. I can assure you it costs us a lot more than that. It has been previously calculated $3,300, but we are recalculating that, given all quarantining now occurs at Howard Springs in the Top End, we expect the figure to be higher. The priority for us, the reason we have Howard Springs set up, is to keep Territorians safe. When it comes to keeping the Territory safe, any cost is worth it. We are confident that most Northern Territorians who quarantine here are coming to spend time here in the Territory. But we do have an issue with some people who quarantine in the Northern Territory because it's the best set-up in the country, and then use us as a back door to other states, like Queensland. Territorians do not want to subsidise someone's trip to Brisbane to watch the AFL grand final. Territorians do not want to subsidise holidays to the Gold Coast. I have raised this issue with national cabinet before, that the Territory is carrying a heavy load of quarantine, while others get the benefits. It's not the biggest issue, but it is an issue. It is getting a bit annoying and it is costing us money. I will keep raising it in national cabinet with the prime minister. I am confident we can come to an arrangement, an agreement, that recognises the important national role the Territory is playing here. But I also have a message to people who intend to spend 14 days at Howard Springs. If you're gonna take advantage of our awesome quarantine, then once you're out, we simply ask that you stick around for a while and enjoy the rest of the Territory, because it is pretty awesome too. I can guarantee you, the Northern Territory is a whole lot more and a whole lot better than the village at Howard Springs. It's the best place in the world. So, please stick around and enjoy it a while before you bugger off. That is going to put more pressure on Queensland's chief health officer to reassess her advice. The NT has some of the most vulnerable communities, in terms of the virus, in Australia. If they say it is OK to have people from greater Sydney, it is hard to see how Queensland can keep saying it's not. Michael Gunner: I know this decision will be welcomed by some and condemned by others. That happens with every decision we make. For those who are concerned by this, I would just say, look at our record. Every decision on every day for the last six months has been about protecting Territorians, putting them first, and that will never change. Every time we make a decision, I get people calling me and emailing me, saying I've stuffed it all up, that it will end in disaster, that I will kill people. People have the right to think that, if they want. But I would just say, I have been told that a million times so far, and it hasn't happened yet. Our hot spots policy is nation-leading, and it is working. It is keeping the Territory the safest place in Australia, while also keeping the Territory open for business. NT chief minister Michael Gunner is announcing changes to his jurisdiction's declaration of greater Sydney as a hotspot, following new advice from his chief medical officer: This is for the following reasons: first, there is now a sustained downward trend of new cases in Sydney over time, including seven straight days of 10 or fewer new cases. Second, the contact tracing and containment system in New South Wales is superb. They are catching and containing the virus very quickly. It is not spreading. Third, the level of testing being done, and the links of almost all new cases to known clusters, gives a high degree of confidence that there are no known outbreaks occurring. For these reasons, the Northern Territory will plan to remove the hot spot status declaration for greater Sydney in 28 days' time. From Friday, 9 October, arrivals from greater Sydney will not need to undertake 14 are days of supervised quarantine. We are deliberately waiting another four weeks - two full replication cycles - so we can keep seeing the trend go down. A four-week buffer gives Sydney more time to keep beating the virus, and gives us the time and flexibility we need to change our plan, if necessary. This is the same cautious approach we took with our borders the first time around, and it worked. When we were told to open the borders straightaway, we said no. And when things got worse in Victoria and Sydney, we kept them closed. We cannot predict the future, but we can plan for it. So, if something happens, if things change, if the trend goes back up in Sydney, we will not hesitate to keep their hot spot status in place for as long as we need to. But if they continue to make the progress they are making - as we expect they will - we can welcome Sydneysiders back to the Territory next month. Alex Hawke has announced Australia has extended an additional $130m in support to Papua New Guinea, to help our Pacific neighbour deal with the pandemic. It's a loan - and comes on top of the $300m Australia recently loaned PNG for the same thing. Hawke told the ABC: The Australian government has decided to extend our support to PNG following a direct request from the PNG Government, in response to the deteriorating budget situation because of Covid and the economic impacts of Covid on the region. Obviously, PNG has worked very hard with international institutions, like the IMF, the World Bank, and they've got a program in place, which we have great confidence in. And in response, the Australian government has agreed to the request from PNG to loan money to them, to support that effort, to get their finances under control in this critical time. This comes as Julie Bishop admitted Australia's foreign aid cuts were "regrettable" Bishop was foreign minister while many of the cuts were implemented. The Victorian department of health and human services struggled to get security guards to follow its advice of precautions on how to avoid contracting Covid-19 while working in hotel quarantine. The accommodation commander for the operation running hotel quarantine in the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Pam Williams, told the inquiry that security guards wanted much more protection than the advice suggested. The security guards wanted as many barriers as they could, between them and what they perceived as this invisible threat. They really wanted to wear gloves, they wanted to wear things, even though the advice was, keep your distance, wash your hands, only use a mask when you're within 1.5 metres. Williams said she approached the behavioural insights unit in DHHS to get an idea on how to get the message across to the security guards and companies, but said it was complicated by the fact that at the time the advice was changing as more became known about how the virus transmits. I don't think they will go back to day grand finals after this, but AAP has an update on the AFL grand final: This year's AFL grand final will be the first to be held at night. On Friday, the AFL confirmed the 2020 decider, to be held at the Gabba on Saturday, October 24, will begin at 6.30pm local time - 7.30pm AEDT. AFL general manager of clubs and broadcasting Travis Auld said the start time accommodated broadcasters and pre-match entertainment, while also factoring in daylight savings times for fans around the country. With shorter quarters this year, Auld expected the grand final to be wrapped up and the 2020 premier to be crowned just before 10pm AEDT. "Historically a really special part of grand final day is the build-up and anticipation, and we want to ensure we can share the electricity and atmosphere of the night with as many people as possible around the country," he said. "A night grand final is sure to be a fantastic spectacle for both the fans in stadium and the millions watching around the country and overseas." The AFL grand final has traditionally been held at 2.30pm Melbourne time. What Annika said. This started yesterday, and shows no signs of slowing down, but it doesn't make it right. While we are still on border closures, the federal border remains closed. ABS has an update on arrivals: Overseas arrivals and departures statistics are international travel movements of persons arriving in, and departing from Australia with a focus on short term trips (less than 1 year). It is the number of international border crossings rather than the number of people. For all Short-term Visitor Arrivals (STVA) and Short-term Resident Returns (STRR) series, the trend estimates have been suspended from February 2020 and the seasonally adjusted estimates have been suspended from April 2020 due to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on international travel. July 2020 original estimates for short-term trips: Overseas visitor arrivals to Australia decreased 34.6% since the previous month to 3,530 trips. Australian resident returns from overseas decreased 34.7% since the previous month to 10,280 trips. And again, the comments from Dr Jeannette Young about exemptions for economic reasons was part of a wider statement on exemptions which includes personal reasons. And everyone has to go into quarantine regardless of the reason for the exemption. Liberal MP Andrew Laming has proposed a new idea to take the hard edges off the state border restrictions: the nursecort (or, nurse escort). Under the plan, when circumstances like that of Sarah Caisip, a Canberra woman who was denied permission to attend her father's funeral in Brisbane, arise again, family members excluded by the Queensland border could pay for a nurse to escort them to the funeral, checking that they are wearing PPE and are socially distanced. Then it would be back into quarantine or across the border. He told Guardian Australia: "It would make the insufferable refusals a little less insufferable. Every family would say yes to it." Laming believes the politicisation of chief health officer advice has been exposed in two states this week: Brett Sutton did not advise a curfew in Victoria, and Jeannette Young cited revenue for Queensland as a reason major events (movie filming, the AFL) were given exemptions. Laming said he was not criticising Young, who had been honest, but complained that some decisions like denying Caisip showed decisions are being made to "hold the line" against funerals rather than considering the individual circumstances. Malcolm Turnbull is no longer prime minister of the government and Barnaby Joyce is no longer leader of the Nationals. So that story didn't end particularly well The joint statement from Gladys Berejiklian and John Barilaro is very, very telling: Following a meeting this morning between the Premier and Deputy Premier, the NSW Liberal & Nationals Coalition remains in place. This includes a commitment to supporting Cabinet conventions and processes. The matter will be dealt with at an upcoming Cabinet meeting. It is worth noting that Victoria is being criticised for not having its CHO set up its health response, while Queensland is being criticised for having its CHO set up its health response. Daniel Andrews is asked about not being able to pinpoint who came up with the curfew decision: There are cabinet records of all decisions. I don't agree with the way you have characterised it. Anyone who finds fault with that measure, well, they can... They can find fault with me... Every decision ultimately is something that I'm accountable for as the head of the government. Let me be really clear with you - the curfew position at the moment will not be changing. Because it is working. It is working. And if you don't limit movement, you won't limit the number of cases. And what everyone wants to get up and stay open simply won't happen. This is - always happy to have a debate. But, ultimately, our policy will not change. Q: We heard yesterday that Prof Sutton disagreed with the decision to not have him in charge of the overall pandemic response. Why not put him in charge now? Or at any stage? Andrews: I think it is really important to understand that the state controller is a multiagency coordination function. Dr Sutton has got enough to get on with, providing detailed expert epidemiological and public health advice. That is where his focus is and needs to be. The role of the state controller is a broader role. If you ask someone to provide expert advice in their primary field, as well as coordination of many things that are well away from medicine and science and public health, I don't think that's the best use of the best skills. The arrangements we have in place are working well. There will always be debates and discussions about whether they could be otherwise. I don't have the luxury of having those debates. It makes sense. They are working. Regional Victorians are about to see the first dividend, the first significant reword for the amazing effort we are putting in. On Tim Wilson taking the curfew issue to the Human Rights Commission, Daniel Andrews says: This is not about human rights. It is about human life. That is my answer to Mr Wilson. And what he chooses to do with his team is a matter for him. Police need rules they can enforce. This strategy only works if we limit movement. The traffic data I've given you today makes it very, very clear that the curfew does limit movement. If we want our police to be spending all their time having to move people on from Macca's car parks, where there are pop-up social gatherings that are not lawful - I'm going to have police wasting their time doing that. There are very few legal reasons to leave your home. The curfew doesn't change that. It simply means police have an easier job. Given the year that Victoria police has had, and the sterling work they're doing, we ought to do everything we can to make their job just a little bit easier. What about locking down the areas of Melbourne where there are issues, but easing restrictions in other areas? (which is how Melbourne started this lockdown). Daniel Andrews: I have seen suggestions that, for instance, we should lock up the north and west of Melbourne ,where we have the greatest concentration of cases. As hard as the lockdowns are, they are not a total lockdown there... There are still people who are going to work. Unless we are going to say to entire communities literally no one can leave their home, for any reason, or no one can leave the postcode for any reason whatsoever, you could still see movement. That poses in the view of the scientists, the experts, and I think commonsense tells you, you know, you lock done half-a-dozen postcodes. Well, there are nurses who live there and work elsewhere. There are doctors, teachers, there are ambos, there are supermarket workers, the list goes on and on. So, the judgment is that that that sort of segmentation won't work. The border won't be hard enough. You won't be able to limit movement. Will Victoria be divided into zones? Daniel Andrews: This is an academic exercise. I'm not asking regional Victorians to wait three months or two months. We might be able to take these steps as early as next week. Given that it was such a short timeframe, where we were confident we can reach these triggers, the notion of dividing up regional Victoria for, what, one week, people would barely be familiar with the rules before we took them off and said, "All of regional Victoria can open." That's - I don't think that is a bad thing. The notion of regional Victoria moving together as one is what we want. Not in six weeks' time, but as early as next week. That is why I'm so proud of every single regional Victorian for doing the amazing job they have done. I can understand there is a notion of, "We have had no cases. Why do we have the rules?"... Whether it be Apollo Bay and wastewater testing finding traces or Echuca, finding a case, no cases that we know of - that's the key point here. This thing is silent. Rapid and some people can have it and the symptoms are so mile they don't register. That is the challenge. I'm confident regional Victoria can move and take steps as one as early as next week. That is exactly the strategy working. It is something every regional Victorian should be proud of. If I might finally make the point that we will have more to say next week about some changes and some - even further measures to make sure that that Melbourne regional Victoria border is as hard as it can be. Because one thing - consistent feedback from regional Victorians, whilst they love to have tourism, for instance, and lots of movement, they jealously guard the low virus status across regional Victoria and they want that protected. That's exactly what we will do. Will the mystery case in Echuca change how Daniel Andrews and the government looks at lifting restrictions in regional Victoria as a whole? Andrews: We with look at that at the appropriate time. I don't want something occurring on the one side of the state to impact rules on the other side of the state. And as I've said a few times, if we had - if we'd forecast that it would take eight to 10 weeks, something like that, six to eight weeks, a longer period of time, to see regional Victoria take those steps forward, then we would have divided regional Victoria up. That is not, in fact, the case. We are on track at 4.7. We are on track. Let's deal with that Echuca issue and be in no doubt there is a significant amount of work going on to understand that and whether there is any more virus in that community. And we are poised to be able to take not just one but potentially two steps as early as next week. That's - that is a very different thing than saying to regional Victoria you will have to wait six to eight weeks. That isn't what we're asking. I think the plan is working well. Let's get to the bottom of that Echuca matter. Hopefully next week we can have good new for regional Victoria. That is the best way to thank them, congratulate them for everything they have done. That's to take the safe and steady steps and to find the Covid normal. Marise Payne and Linda Reynolds have released a statement on the transfer of prisoners from US detention to Afganistan. It is a very, very sensitive issue for Australia, given Hekmatullah murdered three Australian soldiers inside their base in 2012: Afghan Army deserter Hekmatullah, who murdered three off-duty Australian soldiers in 2012 in a cold-blooded crime of betrayal, is being transferred to a detention facility in Qatar by the Government of Afghanistan. We understand Hekmatullah will be held in detention in Qatar with five other highly sensitive prisoners. These six prisoners were convicted of killing Coalition soldiers, or civilian humanitarian workers, in a series of insider attacks. The Government of Qatar has undertaken to the Government of Afghanistan and to the United States to keep these detainees confined and isolated. Australia has steadfastly maintained that Hekmatullah must not be released. We have communicated our position repeatedly and consistently and at the highest level to the Government of Afghanistan, which is solely responsible for his custody, and to the United States. In February 2020, the United States and the Taliban agreed to a number of steps, including the release of Afghan Government and Taliban prisoners, as goodwill pre-conditions that oblige the Taliban to enter into intra-Afghan negotiations with the Government of Afghanistan. Australia has worked hard with the United States, the Government of Afghanistan and other nations, including the British and French Governments, since February 2020 to keep Hekmatullah in detention, and to keep these six sensitive prisoners separate from the wider goodwill agreement. That agreement has already seen the release of some 5,000 Taliban-associated prisoners and detainees. Australia is not the only country that objects to the release of this most dangerous group of prisoners. Other countries, including France, have joined calls for dangerous criminals not to be released. Australia is not a party to the intra-Afghan negotiations, nor the US-Taliban discussions. We are not standing in the way of peace talks. We fully support an Afghan-owned and led peace process, and all genuine steps taken towards a just, durable, and resilient peace arrangement. We recognise that there is no military solution to violence in Afghanistan. A negotiated political peace settlement is the only way to find a genuine conclusion to conflict, external militant interference, and terrorism. Australia appreciates that the Afghan Government, in making the decision to move the prisoners to Qatar, is doing its best to recognise and respect the concerns of the countries that want to see justice served. The transfer of these last six sensitive prisoners, including Hekmatullah, from Afghanistan to a detention facility in Qatar, is a measure decided by the Government of Afghanistan and the United States as a means of facilitating the start of the Intra-Afghan Negotiations, scheduled to begin on 12 September, while keeping the prisoners detained. The Australian Government's long-standing position is that Hekmatullah should serve a full custodial sentence for the crimes for which he was convicted by an Afghan court, and that he should not be released as part of a prisoner amnesty. Australia has communicated this position clearly to the Afghan Government and has not provided any authorisation for Hekmatullah's release as part of any arrangement with the Afghan Government. We will continue to advocate our position robustly, wherever he is being held. Justice and peace are not incompatible. Both have a place in peace arrangements. A just outcome for the prisoner Hekmatullah remains a sensitive issue. The Australian Government once more extends its condolences to the families, loved ones and friends of our three fallen Australian soldiers. And from the Labor leader herself: What will Christmas look like in Victoria? Daniel Andrews: I won't be a normal Christmas. We want it to be - we don't want it to be a lockdown Christmas. We want it to be a Christmas that can be as close to normal as possible, a Covid-normal Christmas. That means it will look different in lots of different ways. But the aim is to take these safe and steady steps and find that Covid-normal and have a Christmas that's much closer to last Christmas than otherwise it would be. It's going to look different in lots of different ways. We have got a clear plan, the regional experience shows that it is working, it will continue to work in Melbourne, as these numbers come down. It is five weeks ago, 725 cases. Today we have got in the low 40s. Now, we have to keep that trend going. And the key point there is get tested and get tested as soon as you have any symptoms. And all of us keep following the rule, as challenging as they are. They are working. That will get us a Christmas that is not a normal Christmas, but a Covid-normal Christmas. Many of these recalls will seem a long time ago, because we will have moved to a very different set of rules by then. Deputy CHO Professor Allen Cheng is asked how things are looking in regional Victoria: We have been looking at this closely. As the Premier mentioned, the average over the last 14 days is 4.7. The unknown cases in 14 days is seven. Of the ones that have been diagnosed yesterday, so there was one in Geelong that was a contact of a known case, one in Bendigo, that was part of another - a family cluster, four cases in Colac, which, again, was part of a cluster. So, all those are known cases, and - sorry, known origins and not unknown source. There was one in Echuca yesterday that we're looking into a bit more closely. So, a case was reported from Echuca yesterday. We haven't had any cases from - for quite some time. There's a special team, committee, that's been stood up to look at the details of that more closely. There is ongoing testing. That hasn't been confirmed completely as yet. And there's a going to be some more thinking about that to see if that is an unknown source. What that means for people in Echuca is that if you do have any symptoms, please go down to the Echuca regional health centre - I think it is in Mitchell Street - and please get tested while we're still trying to work this out. I understand we have been - also been talking to our colleagues in Albury, local health district in New South Wales to stand up testing on that side of the border. The vote will be moved on Tuesday. Back in NSW, the Labor leader is addressing the media: On religious rites and celebrations, Daniel Andrews says: In relation to sacraments at the end of a person's life, I know and understand the government - the government knows and understands how critical important that is for people of faith and their families. There was a little bit of confusion about this. Under the care and compassion grounds, it is completely permissible for you to have a minister come - a priest - whomever it might be, rabbi - to come to you and administer the end-of-life sacraments. There will be always some finer details in relation to the way individual hospitals have got their own rules in place. Those rules are there for the best of purposes. They're there to try and protect staff and fellow patients. But in the broadest of terms, last rites and similar sacraments are, in fact, allowed. And we obviously apologise if there's been any confusion about that matter. I have, in a broader sense, I have been in contact with the archbishop this morning. I wanted to make a point and send a message to people of faith - all faiths right across our state. I know 2020 has been a very difficult year. The notion of being able to connect, to share that important part of your life to be part of that network in a very tangible, physical sense, to be in the same pace together, celebrating those things that you hold dear, the things that are core values for you. That not being an option, that not being a feature of 2020 for so many months is a really significant issue. And I want to thank all of those multi-faith leaders who have engaged with us so, so well on so many different issues. We know there are Jewish high holidays coming up. We are working closely with the community to make sure those celebrations - the important occasions - are as close to normal as they can be. The key point here, though, is this virus doesn't discriminate. You have got to be as cautious as you can be. We have to try and put in place sensible rules, compassionate rules, but it can't quite be normal. It's got to be Covid normal, as safe as possible. The Victorian health minister, Jenny Mikakos, is at the press conference urging Victorians to keep going to the doctor and emergency departments when sick: It's important that whilst we remain vigilant against coronavirus, that we don't neglect our other health needs. My health services are reporting that there are declining and concerning attend dances at our emergency departments, and this does suggest that people are putting off seeking urgent and important medical care that could make that critical difference to their life. Our emergency departments, for example, are reporting significant declines in presentations at a time of the year where typically they are at their busiest. The month of August is typically a very, very busy month for our emergency departments. They're usually in the peak of the flu season. Flu numbers are thankfully significantly down this year, compared to the last three years, they're down about 80% compared to the last three years' average. But it's clear that people are deferring important medical care for very serious conditions. For example, presentations to our EDs for heart attacks are down 18%, compared to this time last year. For strokes, they're down 24%, compared to this time last year. And also people are deferring important cancer screening which has meant that we are seeing about a 30% reduction in reports for the five most common cancers - rectal, prostate, breast, melanoma and lung cancer. This is concerning because deferred care can lead to worse health outcomes. It can lead to longer hospitalisation stay, it can lead to tragedy. So, we are urging Victorians today to continue to visit their GP, to take their regular medication, and if they have any lumps or bumps or symptoms that they are concerned about, please do not defer seeking medical care. That may well mean turning up to an emergency department, or calling 000 if you have symptoms of concern. It is important that you continue to seek that medical care. It may, in fact, save your life. On contact tracing, Daniel Andrews says: I just wanted to take you through the latest snapshot in relation to contact tracing. This will be on the website but I thought it was important to read some of these out. For the week to 8 September, the percentage of new positive cases contacted within 24 hours - 100%. The percentage of new positive cases interviewed within 24 hours, 92.3%. As we've always said, there will be a small number of people that we just can't find within that 24 period. That is where doorknock, coming in, repeated phone call, old-fashioned leg work, to make sure we can ultimately get to those people, but the metric - performance is 92.3%. Percentage of known contacts notified within 48 hours, 98.3%. And, again, there will be that very small number of people who you can't find, just because numbers are incorrect, addresses may be incorrect, all of those quite understandable reasons. If you look at data for the week to 1 September, again, positive cases being contacted within 24 hours, 100%. Percentage of new cases being interviewed within 24 hours, 91. 9%. And the personal of known contacts contacted within 48 hours, 98.4%. So, that is a testament to the work that a very large team is doing and in some of those - some of those measures, just - one week to the next, there is even off a very high base, there is still some improvement. We will continue to try and drive those numbers right the way up to 100% in each of those categories. That is challenges, of course, for the reasons I've mentioned. But it is a testament to a very big team that are working very hard to make sure that we have the best public health response and recent outbreak responses Daniel Andrews addresses the curfew, again, ahead of questions: You will receive some latest information in relation to traffic movement as it relates to the hours when the curfew is on. What I can say is there is an immediate - there was an immediate and pronounced and sustained drop in road use in all metropolitan local government areas between the hours of 7 and midnight again, between midnight and 6:00am. Some - not quite as big a reduction in some of the outer suburbs, but our data analytics team pretty well convinced that that relates to key workers moving within those - within those suburbs and not just - I shouldn't say key workers, those who have a permit and are allowed to be at work. What it shows you is quite massive - quite a massive drop in the amount of movement that we have seen right across Melbourne while ever the curfew has been on, and what's clear, if you can limit movement, you will limit the spread of this virus. If you can limit movement, then you will see less people doing the wrong thing. It is a much more easily enforced by Victoria police. What's more, you get the case number reductions with thereafter. That is what we want. That is what we're working towards. That makes opening up possible and it means that it happens much, much sooner. I think Victoria police will be out today to talk about those matters and I will leave it to them. Cleaners who were recruited to do infection cleaning in the Rydes on Swanston quarantine hotel were kept in the dark over the fact the hotel was used for Covid-positive travellers. Speaking at the Victorian hotel quarantine inquiry on Friday, IKON Services Australia general manager Michael Girgis said his company cleaned over 1,000 rooms during the hotel quarantine, including dozens at the Rydges. He said when IKON went to clean the Rydges in May and June, he was aware some of the rooms had been used by people who had been infected with Covid-19 but he said he wasn't aware it could have been an issue in common areas, and this would have been useful information for the safety of staff when putting on personal protective equipment (PPE). "Normally the hotels would give us a room within the vicinity, so we didn't want to walk too far, obviously, once we've put on all the gear. So it was always somewhere within the vicinity," he says. Girgis said his company was brought in to do a deep clean of the hotel in early June, and he was not informed all hotel guests were moved out for the clean. On 13 June, an independent inspection of the hotel recommended the hotel be cleaned again before reopening, but Girgis said he was not asked to return to clean again before the hotel opened up again for returned travellers at the end of June. Girgis said routinely after an infection cleaning done by his company, the organisation that hired IKON would hire another contractor to do a swab test of the room to ensure no infections but he said as far as he was aware no swab testing of the rooms in hotel quarantine were done after they were cleaned. Just dipping across to NSW for a moment - there have been 10 new cases diagnosed in the last 24 hours. Six are in hotel quarantine, four are linked to known clusters. There are 74 active cases in regional Victoria. Colac - four new case Greater Geelong - one new case Greater Bendigo - one new Daniel Andrews: The rolling average 28 August to 10 September Metro is 65. 3. Regional Victoria is 4.7. So, regional Victoria is poised to take at least a step and potentially two steps. We will have more to say about that next week as we get closer to that 14 day marker. Daniel Andrews is giving the daily update. He said there were 13,341 tests in the last 24 hours: I am sad to say there are now 710 Victorian whose have passed away because of this global pandemic. That is an increase of nine since yesterday's report. One female in her 50s, one female in her 70s, three males in their 80s, and four females in their 90s. Seven of those nine deaths are connected to outbreaks in aged care. We of course send our sympathies and condolences to each of those nine families. There are 140 Victorians in hospital, 12 are in intensive care, and eight of those 12 are on a ventilator. The National Native Title Council has released a statement on Rio Tinto It is almost like there is no consistency on any of these issues We are expecting Daniel Andrews to step up in about half an hour for his daily press conference. This is his 71st in a row for those playing at home. Greg Hunt mentioned the Victorian human rights charter in his comments yesterday, while questioning the need for the Melbourne curfew. Tim Wilson has picked it up: Ben Pennings has responded to the Queensland supreme court granting an injunction, sought by miner Adani, restraining him from soliciting leaks from the company and its contractors Adani claims their legal strategy is not about inflicting hardship on me. Despite this successful injunction, Adani is still undertaking court action that could bankrupt my family. I shouldn't have to sell our suburban family home to make a multi-billionaire even richer. So long as Adani threatens my family and the environment we all share I will do everything lawfully in my powers to stop them. The urgent need to stop new thermal coal mines is much bigger than any one individual. The global movement to stop Adani's coal mine will not be deterred by the cold-hearted bullying tactics of a billionaire's mining company targeting one individual. The Australian public will continue to oppose Adani's destructive climate wrecking mine." It's almost like they didn't actually have a plan By the way, John Barilaro couldn't even get Gladys Berejiklian to agree to discus the koala protection legislation at the next cabinet meeting. He got a "sorry, not sorry, it's not on the agenda" response. He got nada. No concessions. Not even input into when the issue that caused the tantrum could be discussed. It's almost like his Oma didn't make him read The Art of War at least once a year. Barnaby Joyce was in the Daily Telegraph this morning where he was lamenting not being able to kill kangaroos, snakes or frogs with impunity. He has a little bit of egg on his face, given the (inevitable) conclusion of the Nats rolling over, but to be honest, he is probably used to that, and now just uses it to make an omelette like that was always his intention. Anyway, his musings this morning have not aged well: The NSW Nationals are making a stand and putting their people ahead of others' views on koalas. Others predominantly from far away with little skin in the game apart from virtuous grandstanding. At the core of Nationals' philosophy is the primacy of the individual over the state. For an individual to have rights they must have the ownership of property unfettered by imposed arbitrary caveats of the state. You can't shoot roos without a permit as they hop across your crops in their hundreds. You can't shoot a snake in your yard, you have to get it "removed". You can't build a dam or fix a road if a certain frog is present. All these "you can'ts" means I am not the free person that I once was in my country. It means I have the state looking over my shoulder and breathing down my neck. We are sick of picking up the tab of another person's latest guilt trip or hobby horse. If koalas are so important that you believe taking the listed tree species from 10 to 123 then offer a price and buy them. Then pay the rates, public indemnity insurance, weed control and keep out the rabbits, pigs, goats, deer, wild dogs and other ferals. Good on the state Nats for saying enough is enough. So in the last hour: NSW leader Nationals leader John Barilaro has completely backed down from his threat to withdraw Nationals support for government policy Rio Tinto executives have stepped down in the wake of the Juukan Gorge destruction scandal and shareholder anger Melbourne Covid case numbers have dropped below 50 (although nine deaths are tragic). The Queensland premier has stood by not intervening in decisions made by her chief health officer. Nationals leader John Barilaro has backed off his threat to pull the Nationals out of the Coalition, and instead agreed to a compromise offered by the the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, agreeing to further talks over the state's new koala protections at cabinet on 6 October. The Nationals had earlier agree to push for early talks in September, and compromises on the policy but Brejiklian has insisted on the normal processes. No compromises have been offered on the policy at this stage, but are possible during the talks. Sources said Barilaro's leadership was now untenable. "He has broken the marriage and there is no ability to repair the relationship" a government source said. "The premier is the hardest working in the country and he's done this." And for those wondering on exemptions that are not AFL or Tom Hanks related in regards to Queensland: The Queensland supreme court has granted an injunction, sought by miner Adani, restraining an environmental activist from soliciting leaks from the company and its contractors. Ben Pennings, a spokesman for the group Galilee Blockade, has been ordered to remove material posted online, including a "Dob in Adani" page that sought details about work on the Carmichael coalmine. The court has also ordered Pennings to remove social media posts by 22 September. Last week, it emerged Adani had twice unsuccessfully sought to conduct announced searches at Pennings's family home. Goodness, it is all happening. As Ben Butler reports: Rio Tinto boss Jean-Sébastien Jacques has bowed to investor pressure over the Juukan Gorge debacle and is leaving the company. Also going are head of iron ore, Chris Salisbury, and head of corporate affairs Simone Niven. Rio Tinto chairman Simon Thompson: "What happened at Juukan was wrong and we are determined to ensure that the destruction of a heritage site of such exceptional archaeological and cultural significance never occurs again at a Rio Tinto operation. "We are also determined to regain the trust of the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura people and other traditional owners. "We have listened to our stakeholders' concerns that a lack of individual accountability undermines the group's ability to rebuild that trust and to move forward to implement the changes identified in the board review." We'll have a full news story soon. A joint statement is coming out, but Gladys Berejiklian has not blinked and John Barilaro has backed down. He lost. And now has to fight for his own leadership. The Nationals will stay where they are until the next election, and support government policies. Annastacia Palaszczuk gets emotional as she addresses the last question, which was on Mathias Cormann's comments this morning that he did not understand how someone could be "so cold, so cold hearted" to not allow an exemption: I say to Mathias, I say, these are difficult decisions and they're heartbreaking. I'm human just like everyone else. These issues hurt me deeply. They hurt me deeply because during this pandemic I have lost loved ones as well. I know exactly what people are going through. Yesterday, Scott Morrison got emotional talking about the loss of her father on Sydney radio 2GB This has just come out as the Queensland press conference was going on Asked about the exemptions again, Annastacia Palaszczuk says: I feel these issues very personally. Just like everyone else does. That's why we've put in place this specialist care unit. We have more than - we have 80 people in this exemptions unit looking at these issues. And these people are human beings as well. They're having to go through all the details, and make really difficult and tough decisions. But this is happening in other states as well. It's happening around the world. It's not nice. Who wouldn't be touched? Honestly, who wouldn't? Who wouldn't be touched by these cases? They are heartbreaking. We're in a global pandemic and my job is to keep Queenslanders safe. That's my job. My job is to keep 5 million Queenslanders safe. I just have to do my job to the best of my ability. What is Queensland doing with the hotspot definition the federal government wants? Annastacia Palaszczuk: What I said very clearly is that I support a national cabinet doing some further work. But I reserve the state's right to see how it goes and see some detail. We haven't seen any details. There may be two states that give it a trial and see how it goes. But if you have a look federal court case, the federal court case said that hot spots don't necessarily work. There's been a federal court case on this as well. Why is the ACT still a hotspot, given there have been no cases in the territory for more than two months? That's the advice of the chief health officer. What I said, I made it many times at these press conferences and I'll say it again. As a nation, if we can focus on getting Victoria and New South Wales under control, then you can set a date for the whole country to open up. I have been absolutely consistent here on this. Absolutely consistent. But the parameter is two incubation periods, 28 days... That's the chief health officer's advice. Pushed on why, given there are no cases, she says: From memory, someone came through Canberra into Queensland with the virus. That's my memory. Annastacia Palaszczuk says she does not believe the national cabinet has fractured: I think national cabinet has a role to play. I do think that national cabinet works in the best interests of the nation. She is asked if she stands by her comments that she was "bullied" by Scott Morrison: Yes. I said that very clearly yesterday. I'm not commenting any more today. These are - these are very, very heartbreaking issues. And as I said to the prime minister, I don't make these decisions. I was very clear. I do not make these decisions. The chief health officer does. Annastacia Palaszczuk says she referred the decision to the CHO, as is required under the act, but she understands the heartbreak: It is absolutely heartbreaking. Everyone, anyone who would've seen those images is heart broken. Everyone is human. You know. We're in a global pandemic at the moment. It is tough on everyone. And let me make it very clear, I don't make those decisions. I said to the Prime Minister... I said... No. I said to the Prime Minister, I would refer it to the chief health officer and I did that. It's her decision. Under the act, it's her decision. You've got to have someone - you've got to take the clinical advice here. We're dealing with a health pandemic. It is absolutely tragic. It is heartbreaking. Families are not together at the moment. There are people at Heathrow waiting to come back home. There's people all around the world waiting to come back home. There's people who can't see babies and loved ones in Victoria. There's people who can't go and see people in Western Australia. It's absolutely heartbreaking and gut-wrenching. Dr Sonya Bennett is asked about the case of Mark Keans, a terminally ill father, whose family is attempting to visit, but will need to pay more than $15,000 in quarantine costs: So my understanding is that there's very active discussion with both the family and Mark and that's ongoing, trying to find, you know, a solution that is, will support both Mark and his family in moving forward. I think - I mean, I just like to say, I think we all recognise these are difficult situations. Every one of us. And there are reasons the restrictions are in place. And I think we've all seen the good outcome of that. But in every situation with Mark Keans and others, the department works closely with applying for exemptions and the patient to find a solution to support what they would like. But at the same time recognising we need to continue to mitigate any risk of transmission. Dr Sonya Bennett, the deputy chief health officer, is taking the health questions today instead. Queensland's chief health officer, Dr Jeanette Young, is not at the press conference - she is on, what the deputy premier calls "a well earned weekend off" - no word whether that was pre-arranged or not. Queensland has had two new cases of Covid in the last 24 hours. Both people are in quarantine. John Barilaro has entered his meeting with Gladys Berejiklian And yet There has been no official announcement as yet Peter Dutton was on the Nine network again this morning, continuing his attack on Queensland's border closures (he was one of the first federal MPs to criticise the policy, and has not relented) but his comment here has raised some eyebrows, given his role as home affairs minister and the blanket policy there: We all want to make sure that everybody's health is taken care of but at the moment this indiscriminate application of the border restrictions is really having a very negative impact on people's mental health and it is really devastating families, as we have seen in the interviews this morning and there is no consistency. If you are Tom Hanks from California*, you are OK. If you are Tom Hanks from Chermside or Castle Hill, sorry, you are not coming in, even to your brother's funeral or your dying daughter. It is just unacceptable. And, I think the consequences are very far reaching and the premier needs to fix the problem. It is a problem of her making and it needs to be fixed sooner than later. In 2018, Peter Dutton warned against compassion for refugees and asylum seekers who had attempted to reach Australia by boat: It's essential that people realise that the hard-won success of the last few years could be undone overnight by a single act of compassion in bringing 20 people from Manus to Australia. *Again, Tom Hanks is in quarantine. And anyone who meets the exemptions can apply for entry to Queensland. They have to quarantine as well. There are reports a compromise has emerged that could stave off a damaging split within the NSW coalition with the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, agreeing to further talks over the state's new koala protections. The premier has offered to put the new koala state environment protection policy at the top of the agenda at the next cabinet meeting in two weeks' time, in a bid to try and address the Nationals' concerns about the policy. The move could stave off for now the dissolution of the Coalition, which the National party leader, John Barilaro, had threatened to end by moving his 13 Nationals to the crossbenches and abstaining from voting. Berejiklian said if he insisted on this position she would go to the governor and swear-in a new ministry this morning. Earlier this morning senior Liberals indicated they were open to further talks and changes to the koala policy. "You don't always get policies right, there might be some challenges with this one," NSW treasurer Dominic Perrottet said. Planning minister Rob Stokes also left the door open to compromise but said the Nationals had misrepresented the policy. "My colleague in the NSW government said farmers can't build a feed shed or a driveway on their property without a koala study. This is not the case," he wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald. "You can erect farm sheds, pour driveways, clear fence lines and engage in any routine agricultural practice that has occurred for generations without the need for development consent or a koala study." Stokes said koala protection "should not be about dividing our community between the city and the bush, between urban dwellers and country folk". "Protecting the koala is protecting our shared identity as Australians," he wrote. But the damaging split could have further implications for both the Nationals and the Liberals. Barilaro's leadership now seems untenable. But there could also be ramifications for Berejiklian who has ambitious members of her own cabinet. The Nationals want to keep their ministries, apparently, but negotiate a compromise over the changes which have sparked all of this. The 9 o'clock deadline has come and passed. Gladys Berejiklian was in NO MOOD to negotiate yesterday, following John Barilaro's announcement he was effectively withdrawing the Nationals (all but one, who has not agreed) from the Coalition and basically told him the party was in or out, but wasn't getting a slice of each way. No one really knows how this will end. It's 9am. No word as yet. The budget lockup details are out: The Morrison Government will hand down the 2020-21 Budget on Tuesday 6 October 2020. As with the recent sittings of Parliament, this year's lock-up arrangements will need to be adapted to ensure they are compliant with health restrictions imposed as a result of COVID-19. Arrangements for giving embargoed access to the Budget material have been arrived at in consultation with the Presiding Officers, the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, the ACT Chief Health Officer, the Department of Parliamentary Services and the Press Gallery Committee. To ensure the security and integrity of the Budget, and the health and safety of participants, the usual arrangements for the lock-up have been significantly modified by Treasury. Numbers of organisations and individuals that will be able to attend the lockup has been necessarily reduced, meaning not all organisations and individuals who have had embargoed access to the Budget in the past will have access this year. The media will be given embargoed access to Budget material in the Press Gallery at Parliament House, and will be limited to those Press Gallery pass holders for whom the Press Gallery is a place of work. There will also be limited arrangements in the capital cities of Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney. In light of significant complexities posed by the pandemic, including location of attendees and maintaining COVID-safe room capacities, Treasury will make arrangements with media organisations directly. Due to the heightened health risks and restrictions, smaller than usual stakeholder lock-ups will be held in Sydney and Canberra. With all COVID-19 mitigations and controls in place, these secure events will be strictly limited. Treasury will make arrangements with stakeholders directly. The Treasury will implement the strictest physical and digital security protocols to ensure information security and the health and safety of attendees. Strict security and embargo conditions will apply in every location to ensure that Budget information is not to broadcast, published or made publicly available prior to its official release at 7.30 pm. All attendees will be required to execute a Deed of Confidentiality. In the event of a Breach of the deed, all legal options available to the Commonwealth will be pursued and the organisation and/or individual involved risks not being able to participate in any future Treasury lockup. As in previous years, Budget documents will be available via www.budget.gov.au from 7.30 pm on Tuesday 6 October. Unsurprisingly, the federal Labor party president, and former federal Queensland MP, Wayne Swan, defended the Queensland Labor government while talking to the Nine Network this morning about the same issue: We're in the midst of a one in-100-year event and tough decisions are taken but if the prime minister was really serious, he wouldn't have turned it into a media event. He would have simply got the head of his department to talk directly to the health officer who takes the decisions because consider the alternative. Do they really want the premier to be making the health decisions? I don't think so." The Queensland opposition leader, Deb Frecklington, was on the Seven Network this morning, talking about the woman who was unable to go to her father's funeral yesterday (she was given an exemption to attend a private viewing instead). Frecklington: What would I done is I would let Sarah go to her father's funeral, I would have let her hug her mum, I would have let her hug her mum, I would have let her hug her little sister, Isabel. When I spoke to Sarah, because Sarah was reaching out to anyone that would listen, Sarah hadn't even heard back from the premier's office. This is so unacceptable. What we need is, yes, we need strong border controls but we need strong border controls but we need compassion in this decision-making. It is not good enough for the premier to say it's an authority's decision. The NSW premier appears quite unbothered this morning. So it's going well then We will get additional details, like test numbers, very soon. It is just one week short of a year since this photo was taken - which was the last time Gladys Berejiklian's colleagues tested her leadership over legislation. When the Ched debate happened, Tanya Davies, Matthew Mason-Cox and Lou Amato had announced they were calling a spill motion over the state's abortion laws. Berejiklian stared them down as well. There was no spill motion. But what there was, was a debate over whether she was carrying Saladas (as reported in the Tele) or Cheds for breakfast. I was on the winning side of history - they were confirmed as Cheds. But as Angus Livingston, the journalist who kicked off Chedgate just tweeted - it is once again Chedtempter and we should have known something like this was coming. Still don't see how you can have members in cabinet shaping and agreeing to government policy, which members, en masse, don't support in the vote. And this is the crux of it We all await the outcome of the NSW's Coalition's Koala Crisis. The deadline is in less than an hour. John Barilaro continued in his chat with Ben Fordham, who says it sounds like Gladys Berejiklian has called his bluff and he has blinked: Really, is that how you read it, Ben? How about we do it on media, just on social media, what people are saying about the Nats standing tall," Barilaro replies. We obviously have very different feeds. John Barilaro on 2GB: They say a week is a long time. Guess what? An hour is a long time in politics and I will trust my party room to come to a decision, and I as the leader will take back to the premier. What that looks like at this stage, I don't know what it looks like. And I am prepared to continue to accept that what we are doing is the right thing on behalf of regional and rural communities. The support, the outcry that we have received overnight - unbelievable. And I am not here to bring down the government, I'm not here to destroy the Coalition. We have been a bloody good government and it is not the Liberals have been a good government, we've been a good government, including the Nationals and I [don't] think we really get the respect, or the acknowledgement of our role in this government, since 2011. It was National party seats that were won which got us government in 2011. It was National party seats that were won in the last election, including my own seat, holding it at 2% at the start, today I hold it with almost 12%." John Barilaro: This isn't about a koala protection bill, what we are fighting for is the protection of farmers, the protection of community, the protection of the regions and if that is not fighting for, I don't know what is. Will he back away from his threat: This isn't John Barilaro steering his party to a position, this was driven from my own members... and that is why the partyroom had made those decisions yesterday. I am the leader, I take responsibility, I lead the team, the party room. The premier has given us her view, we'll have to respond in due course. I won't be saying much about that until I have the party room meeting at 8 o'clock. I respect my party room too much. John Barilaro says he doesn't believe the Nationals get the respect they deserve in NSW. I don't think really we get the, we get the respect, or the acknowledgement of our role in this government. Since 2011. It was national seats that were won, that got us government in 2011." John Barilaro was on Sydney radio 2GB this morning, defending his position. The Nationals leader did not sleep well - but because he cares. Barilaro says he will take whatever his party room meeting decides to Gladys Berejiklian at 9am, but believes he is right. And we get a question on sports rorts! (but not an answer) That's after this story from Paul Karp brought the issue back on the agenda. Scott Morrison has avoided the questions from Paul in two press conferences Q: The Auditor-General's office told a Senate committee an advisor in your office drafted talking points to make the pitch for more money to target more seats. Did you ever see that document and doesn't that document's existence prove it was politically motivated? Bridget McKenzie: I have made a 6,000 word submission to that Senate inquiry. I stand by every word in that submission. There's 640 odd community clubs getting people active in our communities as a result. But given we are in the middle of a pandemic, and NSW, under Gladys Berejiklian (Ruby Princess aside - and yes, I know it is a pretty big aside) has handled it pretty well, how does NSW trust the Nationals when they are trying to blow up the government, in the middle of a health crisis? Bridget McKenzie: Well, I don't see it like that, at all. I see it as a level of frustration by the deputy premier and his parliamentary colleagues having tried to reach an appropriate outcome inside the tent. They obviously feel this is their only course of action. I hope the premier and the deputy premier can actually work this out. Australia is best served when the Liberal and the National party are presenting a stable and successful coalition government. But at the end of the day, these are two very separate independent parties with separate constituencies and values and sometimes that requires having to have very tough conversations. So I hope they can find a compromise that doesn't mean regional New South Wales and rural farmers who have also had a very tough period, I might add, with drought and bushfires, aren't paying the cost to satisfy Green votes in Sydney. (The only course of action is, apparently, keeping all their own positions and power and titles, but doing whatever they want outside of the government.) Bridget McKenzie on why John Barilaro is right: My understanding of this policy decision is that in November, a piece of legislation and changes were put to the government, that were going to actually severely restrict farmers' right to develop their properties and indeed, have severe impacts on the values of their properties and what they could do on that going forward. My understanding be is the New South Wales Nationals have been working within the government to address those challenges, which is their job, and it's been rebuffed. (The restrictions is not being able to cut down trees which koalas use for habitat.) But McKenzie stands behind Barilaro. I think it's important to get a positive outcome for the constituents in rural and regional New South Wales. I'm confident, having not spoken to the deputy premier, I'm confident that that is what his whole team is trying to achieve. The fact they haven't been able to arrive at a negotiated outcome says more about Liberal ministers's inability to see the needs and interests of regional New South Wales as important to something their government can do. I think you can protect the habitat of koalas and ensure that iconic species who has had a tough summer in New South Wales after the bushfire can have habitat protection without destroying the productive capacity and value. You can walk and chew gum at the same time, but not if you're going to have a city-centric operation towards policy development. That's what it looks like. Bridget McKenzie, the former deputy leader of the federal Nationals and a Victorian senator, is on ABC News Breakfast explaining John Barilaro's move yesterday, as "the New South Wales Nationals are doing exactly what they were sent to Macquarie Street to do." And that's to stand up for their constituents. I mean, I don't think it's surprising that city-centric policy decisions being made in the main by the Liberal and the Labor party are being challenged by the Nationals, whether it's in Macquarie Street, in Canberra, or in Spring Street... It's not about koalas. (Narrator: It is about koalas.) I am sure we will hear a lot more about that today though, so stay tuned. And for the record, because this line has taken hold as well, Tom Hanks is also in quarantine. He was allowed entry into the state, but is in quarantine for two weeks. Same with the AFL executives. They are in quarantine and paying for the hotel. You can get an exemption to go to Queensland if you meet any of the exemptions. That includes personal and work reasons. But everyone has to quarantine. I'm not saying it's right, I'm not saying I agree with it either way - I'm just saying the blanket rule applies and this idea that Hanks and Hollywood and sporting elites are laughing it up on Gold Coast beaches while "normal" people have to quarantine is not right. Here is what Dr Jeannette Young said on that yesterday: I will always give an exemption to someone who needs to come into the state because of a family reason and I have done that regularly and that will continue to happen under that new team. So I have had many, many exemptions from people who are wanting to come up to support their grandchildren who are having children and they haven't got parents here and they need to support them because they have got to go into hospital and look after other children. So there are lots and lots and lots of exemption requests to support family, to support close friends, and they are always granted, but they are granted with a need for quarantine. No different to all of these other exemptions. There is a lot on social media featuring one quote from Queensland's chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, yesterday, as she spoke about exemptions. It was in response to a question on why movie stars and sports stars were allowed entry into Queensland: She did say it - but it was part of a much longer statement, where she also spoke about people entering the state for personal reasons, including funerals: Anyone can come into Queensland who has got a reason to come in that meets one of our requirements. So, anyone can come to Queensland if they wish to see a dying relative or, indeed, a dying close friend. Then the next part of that exemption is what they need to do when they come - and that is the same. I have given exemptions to people in the sporting industry for a whole range of codes because it is important that we start that work, but they all go into quarantine. I have given exemptions for people in entertainment and film because that is bringing a lot of money into this state and, can I say, we need every single dollar in our state. We need to make sure that our economy is going ahead as much as it can, as long as it is safe. So my first - the first thing the - thing I do before I make a decision about anything is: it safe to the Queensland population? If it is safe, I look at how it can be done and whether that is the AFL, the NRL, whether it is swimming, tennis - all of the sports - cricket recently because we are coming know that season. Whether it is any of those, whether it is entertainment industry, film industry, whether it is agricultural, whether it is are sources and mining, construction. Anything that will benefit our community because I actually believe that the economy has an enormous role in determining health and the health outcomes for Queenslanders, but before I agree to anything it is whether it is safe. Have your opinions by all means - everyone does - but have the context as well. In just a few short hours we will find which way John Barilaro will go after Gladys Berejiklian issued her Coalition partner an ultimatum - in, or out? Barilaro effectively pulled the Nationals out of the coalition in NSW yesterday, over environmental laws designed to protect koalas. Apparently the ability to kill koalas is one of the hills Barilaro is prepared to die on. He declared the Nationals would sit on the crossbench, abstain from government bills, except for those related to regional NSW, and break away from joint-party room and leadership meetings. Which is cool, but he also wants to retain all the Nationals cabinet positions. Berejiklian has said yeah-nah. The NSW premier has given the Nationals until 9am to either get back in the tent, or accept they'll be on the crossbench with all that entails - including giving up their ministries. That would plunge Berejiklian into a hung parliament, but she's not blinking. Barilaro was on Sky last night talking compromise. This won't be about backing down. I can hit a pause button for a second. At some point in the next two or three weeks, we have to confront the issue about the koala habitats. We have tried our hardest, what gives me confidence, but I'm not going to blow up the government. I'm not going to walk away from our ministerial responsibilities. When we're at the table, the regions win. We'll keep you up to date on that. We'll also keep you up to date on all the Covid news, which includes the border wars. The Queensland border closure has been an ongoing flashpoint, but the closure to the ACT, which has not had a case for two months, has been a particular sore point. That all came to ahead when Sarah Caisip, a Queensland woman, who moved to the ACT for work, was unable to attend her father's funeral, because of quarantine restrictions. Scott Morrison made an emotional plea to allow the woman to attend the funeral. In the end, Sarah was allowed a private viewing of her father, which she was escorted to, by police, and attended wearing full PPE gear. The state's chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, said she was sorry, but she was trying to stay two weeks ahead and funerals often included vulnerable people, so there was a blanket rule. In the Queensland parliament, Annastacia Palaszczuk said the decision was not for her to make, but for her CHO, and accused the prime minister of attempting to "bully" her. Morrison said it was time for premiers to start showing compassion. He had a chat to Sky last night too: I've seen the images of when she went to see her dad and there've been some shocking days during the course of this pandemic. And today was, today just hurt. And it wasn't. It's not just about Sarah's case as, because there are others. You've just been talking about one on your program now. You know, we've got to find, if if these things have got to be up, if that's the view, they gotta find a better way. Those who have decided these measures are necessary, that they've got to find a better way to deal with with the heart here. I mean, I've dealt with many premiers on many, many different issues all the time. I've dealt with the Queensland premier on other issues. Sadly, today, I didn't have the influence that I would hope to have. But Sarah doesn't get today back. The incident has inflamed tensions over the border closure. The Queensland election is in about 50 days, so it is not going to get any easier. We'll bring you all the day's events, as they play out. You have Amy Remeikis with you for most of the day. And all of the coffee. Ready? 94095 false false  Graham Readfearn

and Amy Remeikis      The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, holding his coronavirus press update.        Premier Gladys Berejiklian leaves the NSW parliamentary offices in Sydney on Friday.        Victoria police assistant commissioner Luke Cornelius says anti-lockdown protesters in Melbourne make him feel like a 'dog returning to eat its own vomit'.        Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton will appear as a witness before the state's hotel quarantine inquiry next week.        Rugby Australia interim Chief Executive Rob Clarke and Rugby Australia chairman Hamish McLennan at Mrs Macquarie's point on 11 September 2020.        Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert.        People wearing face masks exercise in Williamstown in Melbourne.        A window of a closed pub in Melbourne.        Street art in Melbourne.        Environmental activist Ben Pennings seen outside Brisbane supreme court in Brisbane, 11 September 2020.        Committee chairman Warren Entsch.        John Barilaro outside the NSW Parliamentary offices in Sydney, 11 September 2020.        Colourful steps seen in Darwin.        Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner.        A nurse from Warangoi clinic in East New Britain province of Papua New Guinea.        Staff inside the Stamford Hotel in Melbourne.        The MCG in Melbourne.        Passengers prepare to board a Virgin Australia flight bound for Darwin at Brisbane Airport.        Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeanette Young.        A general view of the Arts centre spire and the deserted arts centre precinct during curfew on September 10, 2020 in Melbourne, Australia.