Australia's major electricity and gas companies, including the owners of all coal-fired power plants in the national grid, have called on the Morrison government to set a target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 in line with the Paris agreement.

In a statement on Thursday, the Australian Energy Council said it supported the 2015 Paris deal, and recognised it meant developed countries needed to reach net zero emissions by mid-century.

It will increase pressure on the federal government to support the target, which has been backed by business groups,            banks,            major           miners, the ACTU,            institutional investors, all state governments and the federal opposition.

The energy council's chief executive, Sarah McNamara, said its members accepted the science of climate change and the need to decarbonise the economy. She said they had consistently argued for "well-designed, market-based, and stable national policy settings" that would guide investment decisions.

"The first step to reducing carbon emissions is agreement on a long-term target which can act as the starting point for constructive consensus," she said. "Settling on an economy-wide target will let us then decide the best ways to get there and what policy and mechanisms could be applied."

The statement follows the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, on Wednesday using a speech to the National Press Club to set out principles for a bipartisan agreement to end more than a decade of political fighting over climate and energy policy.

Albanese also released a letter to the prime minister, Scott Morrison, in which he said Labor was open-minded on a policy mechanism as long as it was not the existing emissions reduction fund and climate targets could be changed by whichever party was in government.

McNamara said the energy council welcomed the government's commitment to support "transformational technologies" through            low-emissions technology statements, believing it could help lead to a consensus on a long-term target. She said a net zero target did not imply that electricity emissions would necessarily fall to zero by 2050.

"Depending on technological developments, it may prove cost-effective to have a small level of emissions offset by carbon sinks elsewhere," she said. "But our efforts need to be broader, and a net zero emissions target across the economy, we believe, is the best way forward to deliver the Paris temperature goals at the lowest economic and social cost."

The government has resisted setting a goal of net zero emissions by 2050, saying it would not adopt a mid-century target without a plan to achieve it. It has promised a long-term climate strategy before the next major UN climate conference, which has been delayed until November 2021 due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

The energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, has previously said signatories to the Paris agreement, including Australia, agreed to hit net zero "in the second half of the century". But the deal reached in the French capital also included commissioning the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to examine what would be necessary to pursue efforts to limit global heating above pre-industrial levels to 1.5C, a headline goal of the agreement. In 2018, the panel advised it would require            global net zero emissions by about 2050.

On Thursday, a spokesperson for Taylor said the government was taking action now to reduce global emissions, had a clear 2030 emissions reduction target of a 26-28% cut below 2005 levels, and was committed to the net zero emissions goal for the second-half of the century as stated in the Paris agreement.

"Our commitment is clear - lower prices, keep the lights on, while doing our bit to reduce global emissions without wrecking the economy. And we are seeing results," the spokesperson said.

The most recent official data suggests national emissions had dipped just 1.5% since the Coalition was elected in 2013            after falling about 14% while Labor was in power for the previous six years.

Labor's climate and energy spokesman, Mark Butler, said the energy council statement showed Morrison was out of step with both scientists and Australian businesses. He said the government needed to listen to climate scientists as it listened to scientists in its response to coronavirus.

"In adopting net zero emissions by 2050, the [council] joins 73 nations, every state and territory in Australia, the Australian Industry Group, the Business Council of Australia, our biggest airline, our biggest mining company, our biggest bank, our biggest telecommunications provider, and countless experts and scientists," Butler said.

The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said 2050 was too late to reach net zero emissions, and accused the energy companies of fighting any immediate action to "replace their polluting plants with renewables". He said backing the Paris agreement would mean the closure of 12 of Australia's coal power plants in the next decade.

"If the energy council isn't prepared to close a serious number of coal-fired power stations within the next 10 years then this announcement is a cruel hoax that our kids will pay for with severe bushfires, drought and rising sea levels," Bandt said.

The energy council represents 24 businesses that generate the overwhelming majority of Australia's electricity, including AGL, Origin and EnergyAustralia. It is part of a group known as the Australian Climate Roundtable that has            previously called for Australia to adopt policies that can put it on a stable path to net zero emissions, but that statement did not include a timeframe.

The IPCC found limiting global heating to 1.5C was likely to require coal power being cut by between 59% and 78% below 2010 levels by 2030, and by between 73% and 97% by 2050.