block-time published-time 3.05am GMT

The virtual celebration ends, with fireworks

Here’s what the Bidens would have seen, the finale of a historic day:

enltrThe Inauguration Day firework finale from the South Lawn. The Bidens and family had a similar view. pic.twitter.com/kSa34VUbjd

— Jennifer Epstein (@jeneps) January 21, 2021

block-time published-time 3.02am GMT

Here’s more from the Guardian’s arts writer Adrian Horton:

Hello again from the couch in front of Celebrating America, which has played so far as a technically competent, mostly seamless Zoom compilation of good, if bland and sometimes cringeworthy, intentions.

The special is organized around a celebration of American people – those who feed us (food pantry workers, farmers), care for us (nurses and medical professionals), teach us (teachers), supply us (delivery workers) – represented by private citizens from around the country.

But the main TV draw is, of course, the musical performances by an array of stars, noted more for their broad fanbases than any particular genre or tie to American democracy – Bruce Springsteen, the Foo Fighters, Justin Timberlake. Some of the performances have drawn praise amid the quick-shifting parade of this special’s desktop aesthetics: John Legend’s stirring rendition of I’m Feeling Good made the special’s trademark optimism momentarily arresting, while Yolanda Adams’s Hallelujah soundtracked a moving recap of nationwide tributes to the 400,000 Americans lost to the pandemic.

Other performances, such as Bon Jovi’s treacly Here Comes the Sun were, uh, less well-received. “This Tim McGraw and FGL colorblind song is the absolute worst of country,” tweeted  sociologist Tressie McMillan Cottom of the duet between country artists McGraw and Florida Georgia Line’s Tyler Hubbard.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.06am GMT

block-time published-time 3.00am GMT

The former presidents hammered on the message of “unity” Biden chose as a theme for the day.

“It was a reminder that we can have fierce disagreements and recognize each other’s common humanity and that as Americans we have more in common than what separates us,” Obama said.

It’s a dissonant message, so soon after a deadly attack on the US Capitol, amid a growing threat of rightwing extremism.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.06am GMT

block-time published-time 2.55am GMT

Barack Obama, George W Bush, and Bill Clinton deliver a message

“Obviously there was a personal element to see my former vice-president become the 46th president. To see Kamala Harris as our first woman vice president,” Obama said. “But more broadly, I think inaugurations signal a tradition of a peaceful transfer of power that is more than two centuries old.”

“I think if Americans would love their neighbor like they like to be loved themselves, a lot of the division in our society would end,” Bush said.

“Everybody needs to get off their high horse and reach out to their friends and neighbors,” Clinton added.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.07am GMT

block-time published-time 2.47am GMT

After a tribute to healthcare workers, Sandra Lindsay, an ICU nurse in new York who was the first person in the US to get the FDA-approved Covid-19 vaccine.

“Our nurses care for thousands of Covid patients daily. We are often the last people to hold their hands,” she said. “It has taken a toll.”

Nurse Sandra Lindsay receives the second dose of a Pfizer coronavirus disease vaccine, at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in the Queens borough of New York City. Photograph: Getty Images

“Some days, I don’t know how I got through it,” she had told the New York Times in December. “Some days I didn’t know how I got home, but I knew I had to rest and get ready to come back and do it again. Because I did not want to leave my team to do it alone.”

Here’s a video from when she received her vaccination:

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.07am GMT

block-time published-time 2.40am GMT

Kamala Harris: 'Believe in what we can do together'

“This is what President Joe Biden has called upon us to summon now: the courage to see beyond crisis,” she said. “To do what is hard, to do what is good, to unite, to believe in ourselves, believe in our country, believe in what we can do together.”

Harris, having been sworn in as the first Black and South Asian American vice president, said: “Even in dark times, we not only dream, we do.”

block-time published-time 2.35am GMT

The program turned to memorializing those who have died of Covid-19.

Reminders that hundreds of thousands of Americans have died were present throughout the day, as we saw Biden, Harris and other leaders in face masks, maintaining physical distance, as Biden signed executive actions mandating masks on federal property, as we watch a virtual celebration in lieu of an Inaugural Ball.

But in the middle of the program, the Celebration of America took a moment to mourn and remember, with a performance of Hallelujah by Yolanda Adams.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.08am GMT

block-time published-time 2.25am GMT

And we’re getting a compilation of Broadway performers singing Seasons of Love from Rent...

Marking the milestone of putting 2,102,400 minutes of the Trump administration behind.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.09am GMT

block-time published-time 2.11am GMT

We’re now into the capstone of a secure (thanks to nearly 25,000 national guardsmen), surprisingly smooth inauguration day in Washington: the 90-minute celebrity extravaganza known as Celebrating America, a collection of music performances, tributes to America’s essential workers, and nods to better days ahead.

enltrWe are excited to kick off our Celebrating America program tonight, hosted by @TomHanks  ! pic.twitter.com/lYWfAkDUtB

— Biden Inaugural Committee (@BidenInaugural) January 21, 2021

And there’s no more perfect star to host such an event than Tom Hanks, the beloved everyman actor and one of the few cultural figures on whom most Americans can agree (for a full feel-good summary of Hanks’s legendary, evergreen niceness,  please see Taffy Brodesser-Akner’s profile  in the NY Times from 2019).

From Forrest Gump to the heroic pilot Chesley “Sully” Sullenberger, Saving Private to Mr Rogers in A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood, Hanks has built a career on playing ordinary Americans rising to extraordinary occasions, men whose unremarkable decency, resilience and kindness evince extraordinary heroism. (Hanks was also the celebrity whose coronavirus diagnosis on 11 March, 2020 was for many the moment the direness of the pandemic really sank in.)

On screen and off, Hanks tends to immediately impart a sense of security — the future in good hands — through the basic principle of caring for those around you under higher ideals. In a year during which much-lauded but deeply under-supported essential workers have kept the country functioning, for a program designed to impart the Biden administration’s intent to work for all Americans (Trump voters included), there are few cultural figures who could hold the center like Hanks.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.10am GMT

block-time published-time 2.08am GMT

“I’ve never been more optimistic about America than I am this very day,” Biden said.

“Because of you, democracy has prevailed. That’s why Jill and I, Kamala and Doug, wanted to make sure that our inauguration was not about us, but about you, the American people,” he said.

Looking forward, he added, “America’s story depends not on any one of us, not on some of us, but on all of us – on we, the people. That’s the task before us, the only way we’ll get through the darkness around us.”

block-time published-time 1.57am GMT

Joe Biden speaks at Lincoln Memorial

“It’s humbling” to stand by the statue of Lincoln, Biden began. Once again, he is emphasizing “unity” tonight.

The president is speaking overlooking the reflecting pool, where yesterday, the inauguration committee lit 400 lamps in remembrance of 400,000 people who have died of Covid-19 in the US.

block-time published-time 1.51am GMT

Bon Jovi did a cover of the Beatles’ “Here comes the sun” - sparking some vexation...

enltrWhy would you go to the trouble to get Bon Jovi just for him to do a cover?

— Jeremy B. White (@JeremyBWhite) January 21, 2021

enltrJesus why why why. This is what JBJ played the night before the election 2016 at Independence Hall with HRC and the Obamas and now I'm plunged into fury and fucking despair. Cool concert guys.

— Rebecca Traister (@rtraister) January 21, 2021

enltrThis Bon JoviBeatles cover could be the first articles of impeachment against Biden.

— Sam Stein (@samstein) January 21, 2021

block-time published-time 1.33am GMT

Inaugural 'Celebrating America' event begins

It starts with a performance with Bruce Springsteen.

Springsteen is performing Land of Hope and Dreams.

enltrThe Inauguration is done and now it's time to celebrate! Tune in now for our "Celebrating America" Primetime Special hosted by Tom Hanks. https://t.co/1raIOdMi6F

— Biden Inaugural Committee (@BidenInaugural) January 21, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.07am GMT

block-time published-time 1.27am GMT

QAnon's 'Great Awakening' failed to materialize. What's next could be worse

Shortly before Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States, Dave Hayes – a longtime QAnon  influencer who goes by the name Praying Medic – posted a photo of dark storm clouds gathering over the US Capitol on the rightwing social media platform Gab. “What a beautiful black sky,” he wrote to his 92,000 followers, appending a thunderclap emoji.

The message was clear to those well-versed in QAnon lore: “the Storm” – the day of reckoning when Donald Trump  and his faithful allies in the military would declare martial law, round up all their many political enemies, and send them to Guantánamo Bay for execution by hanging – was finally here. 20 January 2021 wouldn’t mark the end of Trump’s presidency, but the beginning of “the Great Awakening”

Instead, Trump slunk off to Florida and Biden took the oath of office under a clear blue sky. Now QAnon adherents are left to figure out how to move forward in a world that, time and time again, has proven impervious to their fevered fantasies and fascistic predictions. And while some seem to be waking up to reality, others are doubling down, raising concerns among experts that the movement is ripe for even more extreme radicalization.

“My primary concern about this moment is the Q to JQ move,” said Brian Friedberg, a senior researcher at Harvard’s Shorenstein Center, referring to “the Jewish question”, a phrase that white nationalists and neo-Nazis use to discuss their antisemitic belief that Jews control the world. Friedberg said that he had seen clear signs that white nationalists and alt-right figures, who have long disliked QAnon because it focused the Maga movement’s energies away from the “white identity movement”, were preparing to take advantage.

“They view this as a great opportunity to do a mass red-pilling,” he said.

Read more:

Related:  QAnon's 'Great Awakening' failed to materialize. What's next could be worse

block-time published-time 1.15am GMT

The Department of Homeland Security says it will “cease adding individuals into” the Remain in Mexico program.

The Trump administration policy, called the Migrant Protection Protocols, requires asylum seekers to wait in Mexico while awaiting their day in US immigration court.

Some 60,000 people were sent across the border due to the policy, and many remain there in limbo, facing dangerous, unstable conditions. “Current COVID-19 non-essential travel restrictions, both at the border and in the region, remain in place at this time. All current MPP participants should remain where they are, pending further official information from US government officials,” the DHS said in a statement.

The pandemic has caused immigration courts to pause the processing of migrants caught up in the Remain in Mexico policy, so those who are stuck across the border have faced an extra layer of uncertainty.

Read more on the Biden administration’s immigration plans:

Related:  Joe Biden reverses anti-immigrant Trump policies hours after swearing-in

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08am GMT

block-time published-time 12.51am GMT

Asked what it was like for Biden to head into the White House today, Psaki said Biden felt “an incredible sense of calm, some joy, and he felt like he was coming home”.

Joe Biden hugs First Lady Jill Biden as they arrive at the White House in Washington, DC. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images

block-time published-time 12.35am GMT

On coronavirus relief, Psaki reiterated that Biden’s “preference is to move forward with a bipartisan bill”. But he is “not going to take any tools off the table” to pass measures.

The administration here is in line with what Senate Democrats, including Bernie Sanders – who is at the helm of the Budget Committee – have said. “We should hear what my Republican colleagues have to say, but we are not going to spend months and months and not address the incredible pain millions of families are experiencing,” Sanders said.

In the Senate, 60 votes are required to pass major legislation, but some things – including anything related to budget and taxation – can be passed with 51 votes, via a process called reconciliation.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.56am GMT

block-time published-time 12.24am GMT

Psaki addressed the issue of misinformation: “There are a number of ways to combat misinformation. One of them is accurate information and truth and data and sharing information even when it is hard to hear.”

She told the press she would return to daily briefings, including Covid-19 updates with health officials. “Not Saturday or Sunday; I’m not a monster,” she said.

block-time published-time 12.21am GMT

Joe Biden’s first call with a foreign leader will be with Justin Trudeau, the prime minister of Canada.

Biden will speak with Trudeau on Friday. “I expect they will certainly discuss the important relationship with Canada as well as his decision on the Keystone pipeline,” Psaki said.

Trudeau today congratulated Biden on his inauguration but also issued a statement saying “we are disappointed” in the US president’s decision to cancel the permit for the Keystone XL, the 1,200-mile pipeline meant to transport crude oil from Canada to Nebraska.

Read more:

Related:  Biden to cancel $9bn Keystone XL pipeline's permit, says source

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.57am GMT

block-time published-time 12.15am GMT

“When the president asked me to serve in this role, we talked about the importance of bringing truth and transparency back to the briefing room,” Psaki said. She emphasized that while she may at times find herself at odds with the press pool, she is committed to bringing transparency to her role.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.57am GMT

block-time published-time 12.13am GMT

The Biden administration holds its first press briefing

White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki  is addressing the press pool.

Tomorrow, Dr Anthony Fauci  will participate in the meeting of the World Health Organization, after Joe Biden reversed the US’s withdrawal, she said.

Listing the executive actions that Biden enacted today, Psaki walked through a long list of moves to reverse Donald Trump’s legacy on immigration, the climate crisis, foreign engagement and other issues.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.21am GMT

block-time published-time 11.53pm GMT

Avril Haines confirmed as director of national intelligence

Haines has become the first woman in the role of director of national intelligence. The Senate voted in favor of confirmation 84-10.

Avril Haines bumps elbows with Senator Ben Sasse before the start of her confirmation as the nominee for director of national intelligence. Photograph: Joe Raedle/UPI/REX/Shutterstock

Haines has received support from both Republicans and Democrats. She previously worked for the Obama and George W Bush administrations.

enltrThe #Senate  has confirmed the nomination of Avril Haines to be Director of National Intelligence, 84-10. Voting no: Blackburn, Braun, Cruz, Ernst, Hagerty, Hawley, Lee, Marshall, Paul and Risch.

— Senate Press Gallery (@SenatePress) January 21, 2021

At her confirmation hearing, she told senators that she would ensure that the FBI and homeland security department would look into connections between domestic extremist groups and foreign actors, responding to questions about how the agencies would handle the increasing threat of domestic rightwing extremists.

“The intelligence community is focused on foreign intelligence and on foreign threats,” she said at her hearing. “But there is a critical role that it can play and does play in supporting the work that’s done by others.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.27am GMT

block-time published-time 11.42pm GMT

Almost a thousand staff were on that massive video call.

“I need your help badly,” Biden told them. “I’m going to make mistakes. When I make them, I’ll acknowledge them – and I’ll tell you. And I’ll need your help to help me correct them.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08am GMT

block-time published-time 11.37pm GMT

Joe Biden swears in appointees – virtually

“The only thing I expect with absolute certitude is honesty and decency,” he told his appointees, looking back at him from little squares in a massive video call. “Remember – people don’t work for us. We work for the people... they pay my salary, they pay your salary.

“We have an obligation,” he said.

Joe Biden speaks during a virtual swearing-in ceremony of political appointees, in the state dining room. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP

block-time published-time 11.13pm GMT

Joe Biden moved to reinstate the US to the Paris climate agreement just hours after being sworn in as president, as his administration rolls out a cavalcade of executive orders aimed at tackling the climate crisis.

Biden’s executive action will see the US rejoin the international effort curb the dangerous heating of the planet, following a 30-day notice period. The world’s second largest emitter of greenhouse gases was withdrawn from the Paris deal under Donald Trump.

Biden signs executive orders in the Oval Office. Photograph: Tom Brenner/Reuters

Biden is also set to block the Keystone XL pipeline, a bitterly contested project that would bring huge quantities of oil from Canada to the US to be refined, and halt oil and gas drilling at Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante, two vast national monuments in Utah, and the Arctic national wildlife refuge wilderness. The Trump administration’s decision to shrink the protected areas of Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante will also be reviewed.

The flurry of first-day action  on the climate crisis came after Biden, in his inauguration speech, said America needed to respond to a “climate in crisis”. The change in direction from the Trump era was profound and immediate – on the White House website, where all mentions of climate were scrubbed out in 2017, a new list of priorities now puts the climate crisis second only behind the Covid pandemic.  Biden has previously warned that climate change poses the “greatest threat” to the country, which was battered by record  climate-fueled wildfires, hurricanes and heat last year.

The re-entry to the Paris agreement ends a period where the US became a near-pariah on the international stage with Trump’s refusal to address the unfolding disaster of rising global temperatures. Countries are struggling to meet commitments , made in Paris in 2015, to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5C above the pre-industrial era, with 2020 setting another record for extreme heat.

“It’s just a huge day to get rid of this myopic, benighted administration and welcome in a new president who manifestly is committed to strong, meaningful action,” said Todd Stern, who was the lead US negotiator in Paris. “Rejoining Paris is just the first step, but it’s a big first step.”

Biden is expected to convene an international climate summit in the spring to help accelerate emissions cuts and will probably submit a new US emissions reduction goal to help it reach net zero emissions by 2050. “We can’t be afraid or diffident about exercising leadership again but we need a sense of humility in light of what has occurred over the past four years,” Stern said of America’s return to climate diplomacy. “The message is ‘we are back, let’s move hard.’ It will be deliberate, aggressive and strategic.”

Gina McCarthy, Biden’s top climate adviser, said Biden will in all reverse “more than 100” climate-related policies enacted by Trump.

Read more:

Related:  Biden returns US to Paris climate accord hours after becoming president

block-time published-time 11.09pm GMT

Joe Biden is the first president in recent memory to take office without any of his cabinet confirmed.

The process has been delayed by the ongoing pandemic, riots at the capitol, and Republican’s resistance to accepting the election results. Until now, incoming residents for the past 30 years had at least some of their cabinet confirmed by Inauguration Day.

Today, Republican senator Tom Cotton – who had put a hold on the nomination of Avril Haines, Biden’s pick for director of national intelligence – said he’s ready to move forward with a vote.

“For the information of all Senators who wanted know if we’d have a vote tonight specifically on the nomination of Avril Haines to be DNI,” he said. “I was the last person to object to holding that vote. I no longer object.”

Meanwhile, J osh Hawley, the Republican senator of Missouri who was pictured raising a fist towards Trump supporters at the Capitol riot, had blocked consideration of Alejandro Mayorkas, Biden’s Homeland Security nominee.

block-time published-time 10.59pm GMT

As Biden sat down to sign a stack of executive orders in the Oval Office on Wednesday, it was clear more had changed in the room than the administration.

New decor... Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Trump’s portrait of Andrew Jackson – the censured and fellow populist 19th-century president – was replaced with Benjamin Franklin, meant to signal Biden’s interest in science, according to the Washington Post. Other intentional changes include a portrait of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and paired paintings of Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton – representing two people with vastly differing ideologies who worked together.

Placed on the mantle and other shelving are now busts of Martin Luther King, Rosa Parks, and Robert Kennedy. Also notable are a bust of César Chávez, the American labor leader and Latin American activist, and a sculpture of the Chiricahua Apache Tribe, which belonged to late senator Daniel K Inouye, the first Japanese-American elected to both houses of Congress.

Biden chose the Resolute desk from the six desks traditionally offered, the same one used by Trump and Obama. There have also been some cosmetic changes, including different rugs, curtains and wallpaper. We can’t help wonder if Biden is trying some feng shui to get rid of some of that stale energy.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.09pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.48pm GMT

Bernie Sanders wrote in an op-ed for The Guardian today: “Democrats, who will now control the White House, the Senate, and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety.”

A record-breaking 4,000 Americans are now dying each day from Covid-19, while the federal government fumbles vaccine production and distribution, testing and tracing. In the midst of the worst pandemic in 100 years, more than 90 million Americans are uninsured or underinsured and can’t afford to go to a doctor when they get sick. The isolation and anxiety caused by the pandemic has resulted in a huge increase in mental illness.

Over half of American workers are living paycheck to paycheck, including millions of essential workers who put their lives on the line every day. More than 24 million Americans are unemployed, underemployed or have given up looking for work, while hunger in this country is at the highest level in decades.

Because of lack of income, up to 40 million Americans face the threat of eviction, and many owe thousands in back rent. This is on top of the 500,000 who are already homeless.

Meanwhile, the wealthiest people in this country are becoming much richer, and income and wealth inequality are soaring. Incredibly, during the pandemic, 650 billionaires in America have increased their wealth by more than $1tn.

As a result of the pandemic education in this country, from childcare to graduate school, is in chaos. The majority of young people in this country have seen their education disrupted and it is likely that hundreds of colleges will soon cease to exist.

Climate change is ravaging the planet with an unprecedented number of forest fires and extreme weather disturbances. Scientists tell us that we have only a very few years before irreparable damage takes place to our country and the world.

And, in the midst of all this, the foundations of American democracy are under an unprecedented attack. We have a president who is working feverishly to undermine American democracy and incite violence against the very government and constitution he swore to defend. Against all of the evidence, tens of millions of Americans actually believe Trump’s Big Lie that he won this election by a landslide and that victory was stolen from him and his supporters. Armed rightwing militias in support of Trump are being mobilized throughout the country.

In this moment of unprecedented crises, Congress and the Biden administration must respond through unprecedented action. No more business as usual. No more same old, same old.

Democrats, who will now control the White House, the Senate and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety. As the incoming chairman of the Senate budget committee that is exactly what I intend to do.

Read more:

Related:  Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual. Here's where to start | Bernie Sanders

block-time published-time 10.45pm GMT

As Democrats take control of the Senate, Bernie Sanders has taken on his new role as chair of the powerful Senate Budget Committee.

At the helm of the Budget Committee, Sanders will be in charge of the reconciliation process , which allows Congress to move through legislation without the 60-vote supermajority needed to overcome filibuster. Reconciliation can be used to move through key coronavirus relief measures, including stimulus payments.

Sanders has said that he’d love for a bipartisan effort on coronavirus relief, but he won’t let a desire for bipartisanship delay action.

“We should hear what my Republican colleagues have to say, but we are not going to spend months and months and not address the incredible pain millions of families are experiencing,” Sanders said.

enltrThe bottom line is: We’ve got crises. We should hear what my Republican colleagues have to say, but we are not going to spend months and months and not address the incredible pain millions of families are experiencing. pic.twitter.com/PvEfMEDfHu

— Bernie Sanders (@BernieSanders) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 10.38pm GMT

President Biden: 'There's no time to start like today'

The president’s executive actions aim to reverse a long list of Trump policies.  “There’s no time to start like today,” Biden told reporters in the Oval Office. “I’m going to start by keeping the promises I made to the American people.”

Biden halted the US’s exit from the World Health Organization, installed a coronavirus response coordinator to oversee the distribution of vaccines, and extended a moratorium on evictions amid the coronavirus crisis.

Turning toward immigration policy, he reversed a Trump travel ban aimed at Muslim-majority countries, and stopped funding for the construction of Trump’s border wall.

Biden gets to work on his first day as president. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.09pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.24pm GMT

Joe Biden is signing his first executive orders

Reversing Trump’s legacy, Joe Biden signed orders rejoining the Paris Climate Accords, mandating masks on federal property, among others.

enltrBiden in the Oval signing executive actions pic.twitter.com/125JOp1ZaV

— Zeke Miller (@ZekeJMiller) January 20, 2021

The first order he signed was a mask mandate on federal property, where he has jurisdiction. In all, Biden signaled he would sign 17 executive orders today.

“The president wrote a very generous letter,” Biden said, of Donald Trump. “Because it was private, I won’t talk about it until I talk to him. But it was generous.”

Joe Biden in the Oval Office on his first day as president. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.38pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.13pm GMT

Chuck Schumer of New York spoke on the Senate floor, as majority leader.

“This will be an exceptionally busy and consequential period for the US Senate. There is much to do,” Schumer said. “We are ready to get to work.”

US Senate

With their razor-thin majority, Democrats in the Senate will have to balance the impeachment trial of Donald Trump with an urgent need to push through coronavirus relief.

To pass major legislation, a bipartisan, 60-vote supermajority will be required – but there’s a lot the Democrats can do with 51 votes, through a process called budget reconciliation.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.39pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.01pm GMT

Inauguration day summary

That’s it from me on this historic day. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over for the next few hours.

Here’s where the day stands so far:

•Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump ’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said.•Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court.•Biden arrived at the White House for the first time as president. Biden walked along the last few blocks of the inaugural parade route before stepping onto the White House grounds. The new president will soon sign a series of executive orders to begin undoing Trump’s policies.•Harris swore in three new Democratic senators, officially giving Democrats control of the Senate. The new vice-president swore in Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff of Georgia, who won their runoff races earlier this month, and Alex Padilla of California, who was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term. The Senate is now evenly split, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans, with Harris serving as a tie-breaking 51st vote.•Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.”

Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump ’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said.

Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court.

Biden arrived at the White House for the first time as president. Biden walked along the last few blocks of the inaugural parade route before stepping onto the White House grounds. The new president will soon sign a series of executive orders to begin undoing Trump’s policies.

Harris swore in three new Democratic senators, officially giving Democrats control of the Senate. The new vice-president swore in Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff of Georgia, who won their runoff races earlier this month, and Alex Padilla of California, who was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term. The Senate is now evenly split, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans, with Harris serving as a tie-breaking 51st vote.

Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.”

Maanvi will have more updates and analysis coming up, so stay tuned.

block-time published-time 9.54pm GMT

Harris swears in three new senators, giving Democrats Senate majority

Kamala Harris  has just sworn in three new Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock  and Jon Ossoff  of Georgia and Alex Padilla  of California.

Warnock and Ossoff won their Senate runoff races earlier this month, and Padilla was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term.

enltr. @VP  Harris receives a standing ovation in the Senate. pic.twitter.com/rY1Lv21Ts0

— CSPAN (@cspan) January 20, 2021

The Senate is now officially split evenly, 50-50, between Democrats  and Republicans.  With Harris serving as a tie-breaking 51st vote, Democrats take the Senate majority.

Harris received a standing ovation from her former Senate colleagues as she took her seat to preside over the chamber for the first time as vice-president.

block-time published-time 9.46pm GMT

Kamala Harris  has arrived at the Capitol to swear in three new Democratic senators, giving her party control of the chamber.

enltrMadam Vice President is back at the Capitol to swear in 3 Democratic senators: Jon Ossoff, Raphael Warnock and Alex Padilla pic.twitter.com/SsfbzRunjC

— Ali Zaslav (@alizaslav) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 9.36pm GMT

The Senate is now in session, and Kamala Harris  will soon swear in three new Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock  and Jon Ossoff  of Georgia and Alex Padilla  of California.

Warnock and Ossoff run their Senate runoff races earlier this month, and Padilla was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term.

After the three senators are sworn in, the Senate will be evenly split, 50-50, between Democrats  and Republicans.  With Harris serving as a tie-breaking vote, Democrats will take control of the chamber.

block-time published-time 9.31pm GMT

Amazon has published an open letter to Joe Biden, hours into his presidency, offering to help with efforts to distribute the Covid-19 vaccine.

“We are prepared to leverage our operations, information technology, and communications capabilities and expertise to assist your administration’s vaccination efforts,” wrote Dave Clark, the head of Amazon’s consumer business.

“Our scale allows us to make a meaningful impact immediately in the fight against Covid-19, and we stand ready to assist you in this effort.”

enltrLetter to @POTUS  : “Amazon stands ready to assist you in reaching your goal of vaccinating 100 million Americans in the first 100 days of your administration.” pic.twitter.com/bhly6IZZEW

— Amazon News (@amazonnews) January 20, 2021

In the letter, Clark said that Amazon has an agreement with a “licensed third-party occupational health care provider” to administer vaccines to its employees, including warehouse employees, some who have died  from Covid-19.

It is unclear whether Amazon had extended this offer to the Trump administration or if it has already been in talks with Biden’s team. The company had asked  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to give priority access to the vaccination for its front-line workers.

While the agency has not singled Amazon out for priority, it has deemed  essential workers not in healthcare as priority recipients in “Phase 1c” of vaccine distribution, which follows the vaccination of healthcare workers and people over 75.

block-time published-time 9.21pm GMT

Disillusionment has come upon some believers of QAnon, the baseless conspiracy theory that a cabal of Satan-worshipping Democrats, celebrities and billionaires run the world while overseeing a pedophilic human trafficking scheme, as Joe Biden officially become president of the United States Wednesday afternoon.

QAnon supporters believed  that Wednesday’s inauguration ceremonies would bring a type of doomsday that would ultimately end with top Democrats being arrested and Donald Trump starting a second term.

But things went peacefully. No Democrats were arrested. Trump, now a former president, is in Palm Beach.

Screenshots of confused and disappointed QAnon supporters on online forums were shared on Twitter. One QAnon believer posted a comment titled “Anyone else feeling beyond let down now?” with a description  that said: “It’s like being a kid and seeing the big gift under the tree thinking it is exactly what you want only to open it and realize it was a lump of coal the whole time.”

Others said  they felt sick and “sad and confused” as inauguration continued smoothly.

enltrIncredible. Ron Watkins, who along with his dad Jim has propped up QAnon on 8chan and 8kun for nearly three years and was one of the main promoters of election conspiracies, calls on his 120K subscribers to "go back to our lives as best we are able". pic.twitter.com/eBQrQCcYOs

— Shayan Sardarizadeh (@Shayan86) January 20, 2021

To make things harder for believers, Ron Watkins, who moderated  QAnon base 8kun, posted a message essentially telling supporters to go back to their regular lives.

“We have a new president sworn in and it is our responsibility as citizens to respect the Constitution,” Watkins wrote. “As we enter the new administration please remember all the friends and happy memories we made together over the past few years.”

Some people pointed out that QAnon has created real rifts between families and friends that will not be easily repaired even as their theories are debunked.

enltrI get the instinct to laugh at this, but the deeply emotional trauma this scam has wrought on family, friendships, and relationships for four years...and to land where those of us on this side knew we would: nowhere. It’s not satisfying; It’s infuriating. https://t.co/GbnA83aHvc

— Ali Watkins (@AliWatkins) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 9.12pm GMT

Kamala Harris  walked down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, where her office is.

The new vice-president walked down the street while holding hands with her husband, second gentleman Doug Emhoff.

enltr. @VP  Kamala Harris shouts out she’s just “walking to work!” The first Black, Asian and Woman Vice President is headed to the EEOB. #Inauguration pic.twitter.com/UgtNdfm1iE

— Eugene Daniels (@EugeneDaniels2) January 20, 2021

When a reporter shouted at Harris asking how today feels, the vice-president responded she was just “walking to work”.

Harris will soon swear in three Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock, Jon Ossoff  and Alex Padilla  -- giving her party control of the chamber.

block-time published-time 9.02pm GMT

Joe Biden  made a couple stops as he walked toward the White House along the inaugural parade route.

The president stopped to share a fist-bump with Al Roker.  When the legendary weatherman asked Biden how today feels, the president responded, “Feels great.”

enltr. @alroker  : "It's been 3 hours. How does it feel, Mr. President?" President Biden: "Feels great." pic.twitter.com/npMNhlaxZf

— NBC News (@NBCNews) January 20, 2021

The president also stopped to take a question from NBC News reporter Mike Memoli, who has covered Biden since 2007.

Memoli asked Biden what this moments means for him, as it comes more than three decades after he first ran for president. Biden replied, “It feels like I’m going home.”

enltr. @MikeMemoli  : "Mr. President, you've been aspiring to this office for your whole career. What does this moment feel?" President Biden: "It feels like I'm going home." pic.twitter.com/jvJfoPRRw3

— MSNBC (@MSNBC) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 8.52pm GMT

Biden arrives at the White House for first time as president

Joe Biden  has arrived at the White House for the first time as president. The new commander-in-chief walked onto the White House grounds, after getting out of his limo to walk the last few blocks to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.

enltrWATCH: President Biden walks into the White House for the first time as the 46th president of the United States. pic.twitter.com/BEibCRQO0p

— NBC News (@NBCNews) January 20, 2021

The new president is expected to sign a series of executive orders later this evening as some of his first matters of business after taking the oath of office this afternoon.

A spokesperson for Donald Trump  confirmed earlier today that he left Biden a note in the Oval Office, as outgoing presidents traditionally do for their successors.

Flags wave as Biden and his wife Jill arrive at the White House. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.55pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.49pm GMT

Joe Biden  made some detours as he walked along Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House.

At one point, the new president ran ahead to give Al Roker,  America’s favorite weatherman, a fist bump.

Biden also stopped to say hello to Muriel Bowser,  the mayor of Washington, DC.

block-time published-time 8.46pm GMT

Joe Biden  has exited his limo to walk along some of the inaugural parade route with his wife, Dr Jill Biden,  and their family.

enltr. @POTUS  & @FLOTUS  emerge from the Beast to walk down Pennsylvania Ave. pic.twitter.com/LOC0n8KCMq

— Phil Mattingly (@Phil_Mattingly) January 20, 2021

It was unclear whether the new president would walk along Pennsylvania Avenue, due to concerns about security and coronavirus.

The Bidens are making their way to the White House, which will serve as their home for the next four years.

block-time published-time 8.38pm GMT

Vice-president Kamala Harris  was escorted to the White House by the Howard University marching band.

Harris is an alumna of Howard, making her the first graduate of a historically black university to become vice-president.

enltrThe Howard University marching band escorts alumna, Vice President Kamala Harris, to the White House during the inaugural parade pic.twitter.com/Fe8kUuzSFT

— Brittany Shepherd (@brittanys) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 8.36pm GMT

Inaugural parade escorts Biden to the White House

A small inaugural parade, led by the US Army band and a joint service honor guard, is now escorting Joe Biden  to the White House.

enltrThe Beast rolls slowly up 15th Street toward Pennsylvania Avenue. pic.twitter.com/gJAjBOxe5S

— Jennifer Epstein (@jeneps) January 20, 2021

Presidential inaugurations usually include massive parades and balls to celebrate the incoming administration, but such events were obviously deemed impossible amid the coronavirus pandemic.

The parade unfolded as the presidential motorcade drove Biden from 15th Street to the White House, at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.

block-time published-time 8.27pm GMT

Bernie Sanders  explained to CBS News why he chose to wear a rather understated khaki coat and mittens to Joe Biden’s  inauguration this morning.

“You know, in Vermont, we know something about the cold,” the senator said. “We’re not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm.”

enltrSen. Sanders addresses the mittens: "In Vermont... we're not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm." pic.twitter.com/phtnb5Ha2Z

— The Recount (@therecount) January 20, 2021

Sanders’ outfit delighted many inauguration viewers, and Twitter users jumped to photoshop the former presidential candidate into various absurd locations.

undltr pic.twitter.com/J7JWDEURix

— S.P. Sullivan (@spsullivan) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 8.22pm GMT

Before leaving office, Donald Trump  reportedly issued a directive for thirteen members of his family to receive Secret Service protection for another six months.

The Washington Post reports  :

Under federal law, Trump, his wife  Melania and their 14-year-old son are the only members of his immediate family entitled to Secret Service protection after they leave office.

The couple will receive it for their lifetimes, and Barron  is entitled to protection until he turns 16. Former Vice President Mike Pence and his wife Karen Pence will also receive continued Secret Service security for the next six months under the same law governing protection.

But Trump wanted every family member who had been protected by the Secret Service during his administration to be covered for another six months, according to the people familiar with his directive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe security arrangements.

That means the expensive, taxpayer-funded security will continue for his daughter  Ivanka Trump and her husband Jared Kushner, their three children, his son Donald Trump Jr.  and his four children, his son Eric Trump and his wife  Lara  and his daughter Tiffany Trump.

block-time published-time 8.06pm GMT

As is typical with presidential transitions, there are already new photos up in the West Wing to celebrate Joe Biden ’s inauguration.

A CNN reporter shared these photos from the White House:

enltrIn with the new in the West Wing pic.twitter.com/086WwpyXfI

— Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) January 20, 2021

Earlier today, White House reporters captured photos of bare walls in the West Wing, after photos of Donald Trump  were taken down in preparation for Biden’s inauguration.

block-time published-time 8.02pm GMT

The teams who clean the White House between occupants and change the furniture and décor to the wishes of the incoming president are having an unusual time on this inauguration day.

On the one hand, they have more of a task because the presidential mansion will need to be deep-cleaned to purge it of any traces of the coronavirus that might be lingering, during an ongoing pandemic.

But on the other hand they have more time to get the job done, because instead of hosting his successor for tea and a tour, Donald Trum p departed the White House with his wife Melania shortly after 8am on Wednesday, and Joe and  Jill Biden  are not expected to arrive at the White House until around 4pm ET.

Trump hosted several events at the White House last year that became notorious as super-spreader events for coronavirus, including the former president catching the disease himself. By 4pm today, all that will have been expurgated.

NBC Newsreported  :

‘This year, the most important aspect of the move is cleaning it out, doing the deep clean,’ said Martha Kumar, the director of the White House Transition Project  and author of the book ‘Before the Oath: How George W. Bush and Barack Obama Managed a Transfer of Power.’

‘It’s more than just the residence... you’ve had all the parties where the virus has spread, and you’ve had (the virus) in the West Wing, and you’ve had it in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. They have rooms with ceilings 25 feet high. Cleaning that place is tough.’

Before the Bidens move in, the White House will have received a top-to-bottom cleaning totaling nearly half a million dollars... That’s on top of the normal changeover costs that come when a new administration takes over.

The new tab included a $44,000 charge for carpet cleaning, $29,000 for curtain cleaning in both the White House and the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, and a $115,000 charge for new carpets in the East Wing, West Wing and EEOB, NBC News reported.

Around 95 people work for the White House residence staff — butlers, chefs, ushers, housekeepers and florists, many of whom stay on for decades.

block-time published-time 7.47pm GMT

Biden and Harris lay wreath at Tomb of the Unknown Soldier

Joe Biden  and Kamala Harris  have just laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery.

Barack Obama, Michelle Obama, George W Bush, Laura Bush, Bill Clinton  and Hillary Clinton  were also present for the wreath-laying.

As the former presidents put their hands over their hearts for the playing of “Taps,” Biden, the new commander-in-chief, offered a salute.

enltrPresident Biden & Vice President Harris, along with former presidents and first ladies, at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery - LIVE on C-SPAN https://t.co/xvklJYaA5z #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/aQZjTsnqT1

— CSPAN (@cspan) January 20, 2021

The presence of the former presidents underscored Donald Trump ’s absence, and it raised questions about whether the outgoing president will participate in similar ceremonial events in the future.

Former presidents typically attend major events for their successors, but Trump has never been one for tradition, demonstrated by the fact that he skipped Biden’s inauguration today.

block-time published-time 7.31pm GMT

Joe Biden  and Kamala Harris  have arrived at Arlington National Cemetery to lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

In his campaign speeches, Biden frequently mentioned that his late son, Beau,  who died in 2015, was a veteran.

Recent former presidents, with the exception of Donald Trump  of course, are accompanying Biden and Harris to Arlington.

block-time published-time 7.22pm GMT

Poet Amanda Gorman  was widely praised for her recitation of a poem at Joe Biden ’s inauguration this afternoon.

At 22, Gorman is the youngest inaugural poet in recent history. If you missed Gorman’s stirring performance, watch it here:

block-time published-time 7.15pm GMT

Now that Joe Biden has officially taken over the White House, people are spotting updates on the White House’s new website.

Biden has released a Spanish version  of the website – something that was also maintained by Barack Obama  and George W Bush – after Donald  Trump took down the White House’s Spanish communication website after taking office in 2017.

The threat of climate change is also back on the website and is listed as one of Biden’s top priorities. Once Trump took office, his administration started to delete  any mentions of climate change from federal websites.

enltrThe new White House website is live and look what’s listed as priority number 2 pic.twitter.com/L33VFa1EJ7

— Oliver Milman (@olliemilman) January 20, 2021

Biden’s team has also removed Trump’s 1776 report, which he made as an attack  against the New York Times’ 1619 Project, which casted a spotlight on the year the first slave ship arrived in America.

enltrBiden administration got right to work. Here’s the updated 1776 report. pic.twitter.com/hqJSvAKQvV

— Brian Hart (@BrianHartPR) January 20, 2021

Now that Trump’s presence is no longer on the official White House website and its social media accounts, the National Archives and Records Administration just launched the Donald J. Trump Presidential Library website that includes an archive of the White House’s website and social accounts during Trump’s presidency.

enltrThe National Archives today launched the Donald J. Trump Presidential Library website, which provides information on archived White House websites and social media accounts, as well as information on access to the records of the administration. https://t.co/bYnIkv7Thm

— US National Archives (@USNatArchives) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 7.08pm GMT

Biden reviews the troops

Joe Biden  reviewed the troops for the first time as commander-in-chief, after taking the oath of office earlier today.

The troop formations, which included color guards and members of all branches of the military, marched past the Capitol for the review.

enltrThe Bidens and Harris-Emhoffs at the pass in review, where members of all the branches of the military were represented. pic.twitter.com/mZEeUWcBAC

— Jennifer Epstein (@jeneps) January 20, 2021

Biden stood alongside the vice-president, Kamala Harris,  and his wife, first lady Jill Biden,  as the troops marched past them. Doug Emhoff,  Harris’ husband, was also present.

As he left the event, the new president was seen getting into “the Beast,” the heavily secured car that will transport Biden from place to place.

The new license plate on the car reads “46,” an homage to Biden becoming the 46th president of the United States.

enltrNew plate on the Beast #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/Fx2iLmsM6v

— Maria Spinella (@mariaspinella) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 6.47pm GMT

Joe Biden just completed his first action as president at the US Capitol: Signing the Inauguration Day Proclamation and his nominations for cabinet and sub-cabinet positions.

Joe Biden signs three documents including an inauguration declaration, cabinet nominations and sub-cabinet nominations in the President’s Room at the US Capitol after the inauguration ceremony. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/AP

Biden has spent the last few weeks announcing his cabinet picks, and Congressional hearings  for two of his secretaries began yesterday.

Later this afternoon, Biden is expected to sign 17 executive actions including a package of immigration actions  that will immediately reverse elements of Donald Trump’s immigration policies, including an end to the travel ban and an attempt from Trump to exclude undocumented people from the US Census. Biden is scheduled to sign these orders around 5 pm DC time.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.18pm GMT

block-time published-time 6.30pm GMT

Inauguration day summary

Here’s where this historic day stands so far:

•Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump ’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said.•Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court.•Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.”    Joe Biden arrives with his wife Jill Biden for his inauguration in Washington DC. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/EPA

Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump ’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said.

Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court.

Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.”

The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.19pm GMT

block-time published-time 6.23pm GMT

During his inaugural address, Joe Biden held a moment of silence to honor the more than 400,000 Americans who have died of coronavirus.

enltrWATCH: President Biden leads a moment of silence honoring the more than 400,000 lives lost in Covid-19 pandemic #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/COySBIU5up

— NBC News (@NBCNews) January 20, 2021

Biden and Kamala Harris  held a memorial service for coronavirus victims at the Lincoln Memorial yesterday, the same day that the US death toll surpassed 400,000.

“In my first act as president, I’d like to ask you to join me in a moment of silent prayer to remember all those who we lost in this past year to the pandemic, those 400,000 fellow Americans -- moms, dads, husbands, wives, sons, daughters, friends, neighbors, and co-workers,” Biden said in his inaugural speech.

“We’ll honor them by becoming the people and the nation we know we can and should be."

block-time published-time 6.15pm GMT

In the moments following Joe Biden taking his oath of office, Pope Francis, the head of the Catholic Church, published an open letter to Biden congratulating him on his entry into office.

“I extend cordial good wishes and the assurance of my prayers that Almighty God will grant you wisdom and strength in the exercise of your high office.”

enltrPope Francis sends message to President Biden: “I likewise ask God...to guide your efforts to foster understanding, reconciliation and peace within the United States and among the nations of the world in order to advance the universal common good” #PopeFrancis #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/DgoTNjBCgV

— Christopher Lamb (@ctrlamb) January 20, 2021

Pope Francis alluded to the Covid-19 pandemic, calling it the “grave crises facing our human family” and said response to it calls for “farsighted and united responses”.

“I pray that your decisions will be guided by a concern for building a society marked by authentic justice and freedom,” Pope Francis wrote in his letter.

“I likewise ask God, the source of all wisdom and truth, to guide your efforts to foster understanding, reconciliation and peace within the United Stations and among the nations of the world in order to advance the universal common good.”

Biden is the second Catholic US president, the first being  John F Kennedy, and he attended a pre-Inauguration mass this morning at the Cathedral of St Matthew the Apostle in Washington.

block-time published-time 6.08pm GMT

At least two Republican senators praised Joe Biden ’s inaugural speech, saying it represented a necessary moment of unity for the nation.

Mitt Romney  of Utah said Biden’s speech was “very strong and very much needed”. “We as a nation come together if we are told the truth,” Romney said.

enltrROMNEY praises Biden address “ I thought it was very strong and very much needed. We as a nation come together if we are told the truth. And if we have leaders who stand for enduring American principles”

— Erik Wasson (@elwasson) January 20, 2021

Lisa Murkowski  of Alaska echoed that sentiment, saying Biden’s speech was “very uplifting” and “very well done”.

“All the other speakers really seemed to complement the president’s words,” Murkowski said. “I thought it was very well done. I thought it was what we needed.”

enltr“I thought it was very good. Very uplifting,” Sen. Lisa Murkowski tells us of her reaction to Biden’s speech. “All the other speakers really seemed to complement the president’s words. I thought it was very well done. I thought it was what we needed.”

— Sam Brodey (@sambrodey) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 6.00pm GMT

Richard Luscombe reports from West Palm Beach:

Donald Trump arrived at Mar-a-Lago, his glitzy resort on Florida’s Palm Beach island, just as the final moments of his turbulent presidency ticked away.

Supporters lined the route from Palm Beach international airport to the island bridge to welcome Trump and the former First Lady, his wife, Melania, home.

enltrLast public sighting of D Trump as United States president, as he rolls by Southern Boulevard in West Palm Beach, Florida, on his way to Mar-a-Lago pic.twitter.com/7rwE7NKbGN

— Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) January 20, 2021

A parade of a dozen or more vehicles ferried the ex-president away from the airport as Air Force One refueled and prepared for its empty return trip to Washington.

Trump’s cavalcade drove slowly east along Southern Boulevard with the former president seen grinning broadly, waving and flashing thumbs up at those who turned out to greet him.

He left a scene of deflation in his wake. Supporters rolled up their flags, stowed signs in their cars and departed quietly. Within 15 minutes of his passing, a main thoroughfare of “Trump country” was once again a construction site, and only a handful of law enforcement officers rolling up security tape remained.

block-time published-time 5.55pm GMT

Pence departs the Capitol as a former vice-president

Vice-president Kamala Harris  saw off her predecessor, Mike Pence,  who is now en route to his home state of Indiana.

Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff,  shared a few words and laughs with Pence and his wife, Karen,  before they departed.

enltrHarris and Pence share a moment on the Capitol steps as he departs the scene pic.twitter.com/tThlZXqjIu

— Manu Raju (@mkraju) January 20, 2021

Typically, the incoming president also participates in a departure ceremony for the outgoing president, but that obviously didn’t happen because Donald Trump  left Washington before Joe Biden  was sworn in.

As Pence left, reporters heard Harris saying, “Be well and safe travels.”

block-time published-time 5.51pm GMT

In his last act as president, Donald Trump pardoned Albert Pirro Jr., the ex-husband of Fox News host Jeanine Pirro, in the last hour of his presidency. Pirro was convicted of conspiracy and tax evasion.

enltrWith less than an hour left in office, President Trump granted one more pardon — this time to Albert Pirro Jr, the ex-husband of Judge Jeanine Pirro, who was convicted on conspiracy and tax evasion charges.

— Kaitlan Collins (@kaitlancollins) January 20, 2021

Pirro appears to be the person on Trump’s long list of pardons  that he has granted within the last 24 hours. Pirro joins 73 others, including Steve Bannon and rapper  Lil Wayne, whose loyalty to Trump has paid off in forgiveness for federal crimes.

Just minutes before Joe Biden  became president of the United States, Trump landed in Palm Beach, Florida, after giving a farewell speech at Joint Base Andrews.

block-time published-time 5.43pm GMT

Joe Biden  has taken over the @POTUS Twitter handle, and he used his first tweet to promise “bold action and immediate relief for American families”.

“There is no time to waste when it comes to tackling the crises we face,” the new president said. “That’s why today, I am heading to the Oval Office to get right to work delivering bold action and immediate relief for American families.”

enltrThere is no time to waste when it comes to tackling the crises we face. That's why today, I am heading to the Oval Office to get right to work delivering bold action and immediate relief for American families.

— President Biden (@POTUS) January 20, 2021

Kamala Harris  has also taken over the @VP Twitter account. Shortly after Harris was sworn in, the vice-president’s account shared this message: “Ready to serve.”

enltrReady to serve.

— Vice President Kamala Harris (@VP) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 5.38pm GMT

Kamala Harris was just sworn in as vice president, officially making her the first woman, Black American and Asian American to hold the title.

People around the country celebrated her swearing-in, noting the moment marks many firsts in American history.

enltrI am so feeling this historic moment of Black and Brown excellence.

— Kimberly Atkins (@KimberlyEAtkins) January 20, 2021

enltrHistory: @KamalaHarris  just destroyed like 10 glass ceilings

— Matt Laslo (@MattLaslo) January 20, 2021

That supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina and woman of color to serve on the court, administered Harris’ oath added another layer of poignancy to the occasion.

enltrWhat a moment for our country and for women of color in particular. The first Latina Supreme Court Justice, Sonia Sotomayor, administers the oath of office to the Vice President Kamala Harris, the first black, South Asian, and woman to hold this office.

— Yamiche Alcindor (@Yamiche) January 20, 2021

enltrFor all its flaws, I really, truly, deeply love the possibilities for a country where Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor gives the oath of office to Vice President @KamalaHarris.

— Brad Lander (@bradlander) January 20, 2021

Perhaps the reaction from those celebrating the moment in history can be summed up by Barack Obama exclaiming “Alright!” after Harris finished saying her oath.

enltrKamala Harris is sworn in as VP. History. Obama in the back: "Alright!" pic.twitter.com/olFD1MiJkH

— Jennifer Bendery (@jbendery) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 5.33pm GMT

Inaugural ceremony concludes

The inaugural ceremony concluded with a benediction by Reverend Silvester Beaman.

Echoing the theme of unity in Joe Biden ’s inaugural speech, Beaman said, “We will make friends of our enemies.”

Biden then left the ceremony as “The Stars and Stripes Forever” played. The new president hugged one of his predecessors, Barack Obama,  as he walked out.

block-time published-time 5.26pm GMT

Amanda Gorman  received a standing ovation after she finished delivering her poem for the inauguration.

The 22-year-old artist concluded her poem with these words: “There is always light if we are brave enough to see it. If only we are brave enough to be it.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.04pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.20pm GMT

After Joe Biden  finished his inaugural speech, Garth Brooks  sang “Amazing Grace.” He asked the crowd and everyone watching at home to join him in singing the last verse.

Poet Amanda Gorman  then recited a poem for the event. The 22-year-old artist is the youngest inaugural poet in recent history.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.23pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.15pm GMT

Joe Biden  said America would provide a positive example to the world under his leadership as president.

“We’ll lead not merely by the example of our power, but by the power of our example,” Biden said.

Acknowledging the challenging times ahead for the country as it continues to battle coronavirus, Biden said, “Folks, this is a time of testing.”

The president added, “We will be judged, you and I, by how we resolve these cascading crises of our era. Will we rise to the occasion? Will we master this rare and difficult hour?”

Biden wrapped up his speech after about 21 minutes, marking a rather short inaugural address.

block-time published-time 5.11pm GMT

Joe Biden  also used his inaugural address to make a pledge to the country’s global allies, after four years of Donald Trump’s  “America first” agenda.

“We will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again, not to meet yesterday’s challenges but today’s and tomorrow’s challenges,” the new president said.

block-time published-time 5.09pm GMT

Joe Biden  condemned the Capitol rioters who tried to overturn the will of the people by violently disrupting the congressional certification of his victory in the presidential election.

“It did not happen. It will not happen: not today, not tomorrow, not ever,” the president said.

Biden also pledged to be a “president for all Americans,” including those who did not support him, and he called for the nation to make a fresh start today.

“We must reject the culture in which facts themselves are manipulated and even manufactured,” Biden said.

block-time published-time 5.05pm GMT

Biden says 'unity is the path forward'

Joe Biden  argued that unity was the only successful path forward for the country.

“I know speaking of unity can sound to some like a foolish fantasy these days. I know the forces that divide us are deep and they are real. I also know they are not new,” the president said in his inaugural address. “Unity is the path forward.”

Biden described America’s history as a “constant struggle” between the country’s professed ideals and its lived reality.

The president then pointed to Kamala Harris  being sworn in as vice-president as an indication of how much positive change the nation can achieve.

“Don’t tell me things can’t change,” Biden said.

block-time published-time 5.01pm GMT

Joe Biden  said the nation “must confront” white supremacy, possibly becoming the first president to utter that phrase in an inaugural address.

“The dream of justice for all will be deferred no longer,” the president said.

Biden also called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump ’s divisive presidency.

“This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” the president said.

block-time published-time 4.55pm GMT

Biden delivers inaugural address: 'Democracy has prevailed'

Joe Biden  received a standing ovation as he took the podium to deliver his inaugural address, his first speech as president.

After thanking those present at the inauguration, Biden said, “This is America’s day. This is democracy’s day.”

The president referenced the violent attack on the Capitol two weeks ago, saying it underscored the value of American democracy.

“We’ve learned again that democracy is precious,” the president said. “And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.”

block-time published-time 4.49pm GMT

Biden sworn in as president

Joe Biden  has been sworn in as president, bringing an end to four years of Donald Trump ’s leadership in Washington.

Biden was sworn in by supreme court chief justice John Roberts,  and his wife, Dr Jill Biden,  held the Bible as he took the oath.

The Bible has been is Biden’s family since 1893 and was used during his swearing-in ceremonies as vice-president.

block-time published-time 4.46pm GMT

There is now a musical interlude between the swearing-in of Kamala Harris  and the swearing-in of Joe Biden.

Jennifer Lopez,  dressed in all white, performed a rendition of “This Land Is Your Land” after Harris took the oath of office. The song then transitioned into “America the Beautiful”.

block-time published-time 4.42pm GMT

Harris is sworn in as vice-president

Kamala Harris  has been sworn in as vice-president -- becoming the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve in the role.

Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor,  the first Latina to serve on the supreme court.

Harris’ husband, Doug Emhoff,  held the Bible as she took the oath.

Kamala Harris is sworn in as Vice President of the United States. Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.49pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.38pm GMT

Lady Gaga  is now singing the National Anthem at Joe Biden ’s inauguration, using a gold microphone.

The artist wore a black and red ball gown with a gold dove near her shoulder and a long train.

Lady Gaga arrived in Washington and greeted some of the National Guard members who have been providing security for the inauguration.

Lady Gaga arrives to sing the National Anthem at the U.S. Capitol for the inauguration of Joe Biden. Photograph: Win McNamee/UPI/REX/Shutterstock

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.25pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.31pm GMT

Echoing Amy Klobuchar, Roy Blunt  used his remarks at the inauguration to address the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month.

The Republican senator said the attack “reminds us that a government designed to balance and check itself is both fragile and resilient”.

block-time published-time 4.28pm GMT

Roy Blunt,  the top Republican on the Senate rules committee, spoke after Amy Klobuchar,  and the senator joked about the snow at the Capitol today.

“I should’ve known when Senator Klobuchar got involved there would be a touch of snow involved,” Blunt said.

Klobuchar launched her presidential campaign on a very snowy day in her home state of Minnesota.

block-time published-time 4.24pm GMT

Senator Amy Klobuchar  celebrated today as a new start for the country, two weeks after the Capitol was attacked by a violent mob.

“This is the day when our democracy picks itself up, brushes off the dust and does what America always does — goes forward,” the Democratic senator said.

Klobuchar added that this moment was a chance to “rededicate ourselves to this cause”.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.27pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.22pm GMT

Inaugural ceremony gets underway

Inauguration attendees have taken their seats, and the ceremony is now officially underway.

Amy Klobuchar,  the incoming Democratic chairwoman of the Senate rules committee, kicked off the ceremony by welcoming everyone to this historic event.

Klobuchar, who ran against Joe Biden  in the Democratic primary, said the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month “awakened” the nation to the need to protect American democracy.

block-time published-time 4.19pm GMT

Biden arrives on Capitol platform

Joe Biden,  the president-elect, and his wife, Dr Jill Biden,  have arrived on the Capitol platform for his inauguration.

Biden will be sworn in as president by supreme court chief justice John Roberts  in about 40 minutes.

His inauguration comes more than 30 years after Biden launched his first bid for president.

block-time published-time 4.18pm GMT

Kamala Harris,  the first African American to serve as vice-president, and Barack Obama,  the first African American to serve as president, shared a fist bump as Harris arrived on the Capitol platform.

enltrWATCH: VP-elect Harris and former President Obama bump fists as Harris arrives for the #Inauguration.  pic.twitter.com/3qn1toCBnY

— NBC News (@NBCNews) January 20, 2021

And a meteorological update: as Joe Biden  and Harris prepared to be sworn in, it started snowing at the Capitol.

block-time published-time 4.12pm GMT

Harris arrives on Capitol platform

Kamala Harris  and her husband, Doug Emhoff,  have arrived on the Capitol platform for the inauguration.

Harris will be sworn in as vice-president by supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor,  the first woman of color on the court.

Harris will be the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president.

The vice-president-elect was escorted by Eugene Goodman,  the Capitol Police officer who was hailed as a hero after he led rioters away from the Senate chamber during the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month.

block-time published-time 4.09pm GMT

This is quite the split-screen. As Mike Pence  arrived on the Capitol platform, Donald Trump  and his family were walking out of Air Force One for the last time.

The outgoing president will be at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida as his successor, Joe Biden,  is sworn in.

enltrAt 1105 AM POTUS and FLOTUS walked down steps of Air Force One for last time. Family followed. He waved but did not take questions. Motorcade is slowly inching away. pic.twitter.com/4BtujXqz7Y

— Josh Dawsey (@jdawsey1) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 4.04pm GMT

Pence arrives on Capitol platform

Vice-president Mike Pence  and second lady Karen Pence  have arrived on the Capitol platform for the inauguration of Joe Biden.

enltrBREAKING: Vice President Pence and Second Lady Karen Pence arrive to take their seats at the U.S Capitol for President-elect Joe Biden's inauguration. https://t.co/2pnC6CISOp #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/lUA24pwyQI

— ABC News (@ABC) January 20, 2021

Pence is attending the inauguration but skipped Donald Trump ’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews this morning.

As Pence took his position on the Capitol platform, Trump was arriving in Florida on Air Force One.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.05pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.02pm GMT

As former presidents arrived at the Capitol for Joe Biden ’s inauguration, Air Force One touched down in Florida.

Donald Trump  did not go back to the press cabin to talk to reporters during his trip down to Florida, according to the White House pool.

Trump will be the first president in more than 150 years to not attend the inauguration ceremony of his successor. His vice-president, Mike Pence,  is in attendance.

block-time published-time 3.57pm GMT

The supreme court justices have arrived and are taking their seats for Joe Biden ’s inauguration.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor will first swear in Kamala Harris,  and chief justice John Roberts  will then swear in Biden.

Sotomayor was the first woman of color to be confirmed as a supreme court justice, and she will swear in the first woman of color to become vice president.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.58pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.53pm GMT

The former presidents and former first ladies in attendance today are now being introduced at the inauguration.

Bill  and Hillary Clinton  were introduced first, followed by George W  and Laura Bush. Barack  and Michelle Obama  are now making their entrance.

block-time published-time 3.50pm GMT

Bernie Sanders  arrived at Joe Biden ’s inauguration in his typical understated manner, wearing a khaki coat and mittens.

Bernie Sanders sits in the bleachers on Capitol Hill before Joe Biden is sworn in as the 46th US President. Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images

The outfit sparked some jokes that the former presidential candidate looked like he was on his way to the post office.

enltrShout out to Bernie Sanders showing up to the inauguration as if he’s headed to the UPS store and picking up some coffee in Burlington. pic.twitter.com/ZxupI4jK1f

— Josh Horowitz (@joshuahorowitz) January 20, 2021

A BuzzFeed News reporter noted that Sanders received the mittens from a supporter two years ago. They are made from repurposed wool sweaters and recycled plastic bottles.

enltrBernie’s mittens are made by Jen Ellis, a teacher from Essex Junction, Vt. She gave them to him 2+ years ago and was surprised when he began wearing them on the campaign trail. They are made from repurposed wool sweaters and lined with fleece made from recycled plastic bottles. pic.twitter.com/ErLr29lY2t

— Ruby Cramer (@rubycramer) January 20, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.02pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.43pm GMT

One could almost imagine the credits rolling on a screen as D onald Trump  and his family departed on Air Force One toward Florida, the morning sun gleaming down on the plane as Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” – a popular funeral song – played at Joint Base Andrews, where Trump delivered his farewell speech.

“The soundtrack that we continue to hear throughout these scenes is surreal, perhaps surreally appropriate,” notedCNN anchor Anderson Cooper on live TV as the plane could be seen preparing for takeoff, his co-anchor laughing.

Donald Trump and Melania Trump wave to a crowd as they board Air Force One. Photograph: Luis M Alvarez/AP

While Trump may have been trying to take on a somber tone during his farewell speech, ominously saying at the end “have a good life, we will see you soon”, the song that played immediately after is one that is notable for its presence at celebrations.

“It’s fun to stay at the Y.M.C.A.!” could be heard on full blast as Trump waved to the crowd after climbing the steps of Air Force One, his family following behind him. (They, unfortunately, did not break out into the song’s dance before entering the plane.)

Trump’s music preferences at rallies and events has been a point of interest during his four years in office. “Y.M.C.A.” appears to be a favorite, along with “Gloria” by Laura Branigan and “Don’t Stop Believin’” by Journey, both of which played at Joint Base Andrews before Trump gave his farewell speech Wednesday morning.

Though multiple left-leaning artists have publicly asked Trump to stop playing their music at his events, including Victor Willis of the Village People  and Bruce Springsteen, Trump usually plays whatever his heart desires, which means a lot of Elton John (“Tiny Dancer” was playing as Air Force One was taxiing).

Joe Biden and Kamala Harris released their inauguration playlist earlier this week, ushering out an era of “Y.M.C.A.” and into one with Mary J. Blige, SZA and conflict-free Springsteen.

block-time published-time 3.39pm GMT

An update on the supreme court:  a court spokesperson told CNN that the building did receive a bomb threat, but it was not evacuated. The court and its surrounding grounds were checked for possible threats.

enltrScotus: "The Court received a bomb threat, the building and grounds were checked out, and the building is not being evacuated" per Kathleen Arberg, public information officer.

— Ariane de Vogue (@Arianedevogue) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 3.36pm GMT

The US Capitol feels calm, serene and rather chilly. The lawn where you would normally expect thousands of people is mostly barren except for some physically distanced plastic chairs, a bank of TV cameras and some portable toilets. Every now and then a helicopter buzzes overhead.

undltr pic.twitter.com/NjMDItLvFk

— David Smith (@SmithInAmerica) January 20, 2021

The National Mall has become a sea of flags in lieu of Americans who cannot attend. Pennsylvania Avenue is jarringly deserted: cars, buses and more toilets. But celebratory flags are visible in the distance.

Two giant TV screens have been playing interviews with former presidents and showing footage of old inaugurations - a sharp reminder of the missing crowds this time.

However, guests are beginning to gather at the west front, bedecked in red, white and blue, and the Marine band is playing under the Capitol dome. So as he fulfills a half-century ambition to become US president, Joe Biden will have at least a flavour of pomp and circumstance.

block-time published-time 3.32pm GMT

Capitol Police office Eugene Goodman,  who was applauded for leading rioters away from the Senate chamber during the attack on the Capitol earlier this month, escorted Kamala Harris  into the building.

enltrAnd there is Capitol Police Officer Eugene Goodman, escorting VP-elect @KamalaHarris pic.twitter.com/AHOf3bKCve

— Phil Mattingly (@Phil_Mattingly) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 3.30pm GMT

Biden and Harris arrive at the Capitol

Joe Biden  and Kamala Harris  have arrived at the Capitol for the inauguration. They will be sworn in as president and vice-president in about an hour and a half.

block-time published-time 3.28pm GMT

Pence arrives at the Capitol

Mike Pence,  the outgoing vice-president, has arrived at the Capitol to attend Joe Biden ’s inauguration.

Donald Trump  is not attending the inauguration and is already en route to Florida, but Pence previously announced he would be attending.

Pence skipped Trump’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews.

block-time published-time 3.23pm GMT

The supreme court is reportedly being evacuated because of a bomb threat,  as Washington prepares for the inauguration of Joe Biden.

A CNN reporter noted an increased National Guard presence after the threat was reported:

enltrSupreme Court being evacuated because of a bomb threat. Increased National Guard presence in last few moments. The Court was closed to the public because of Covid. pic.twitter.com/iKxiJGTIZH

— Alexander Marquardt (@MarquardtA) January 20, 2021

There are expected to be 25,000 National Guard troops in DC today to provide security for the inauguration.

Security concerns around the inauguration have intensified since the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month.

block-time published-time 3.15pm GMT

Paul Ryan,  the former Republican speaker of the House, is attending Joe Biden ’s inauguration today.

Asked about the significance of today’s events, Ryan told reporters, “Our institutions were tested this year, and our institutions passed the test. I’m here out of respect for the peaceful transfer of power and for the institutions.”

Ryan, who ran for vice-president in 2012, added, “Joe Biden is the legitimately elected president of the United States, and I’m here to honor this process.”

Donald Trump  and his allies have of course continued to insist (with absolutely no valid evidence) that Biden won the presidential election because of widespread fraud.

Those lies culminated in the violent attack on the Capitol two weeks ago, as Congress certified Biden’s victory in the election.

block-time published-time 3.12pm GMT

Obamas and Clintons arrive at the Capitol for Biden's inauguration

Barack  and Michelle Obama  have arrived at the Capitol to attend the inauguration of Joe Biden  and Kamala Harris.

enltrBarack and Michelle Obama arrive at the U.S. Capitol for Joe Biden's inauguration. pic.twitter.com/8v9JbL3UAr

— The Recount (@therecount) January 20, 2021

Bill  and Hillary Clinton  have also arrived at the Capitol. In a parallel universe where Hillary Clinton won the 2016 election, today might have marked her second inauguration.

enltrSecretary Clinton gives us a wave as she and former President Bill Clinton walk into the Capitol. #InaugurationDay pic.twitter.com/rgAuVqihRv

— Mariam Khan (@MKhan47) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 3.06pm GMT

The Guardian’s Sam Levine reports on one of Joe Biden’s first expected executive orders:

One of Joe Biden ’s first actions as president will be to reverse  Donald Trump ’s effort to exclude undocumented immigrants from the census data used to determine how many seats in congress each state gets.

The US has long allocated seats based on the total population of states, regardless of immigration status. The Trump move was widely seen as a political one that benefitted Republicans.

In 2015, Thomas Hofeller, a widely respected GOP redistricting expert, wrote that drawing Texas districts based only on eligible voters would be “advantageous to Republicans and non-Hispanic whites.”

The move will immediately end a nearly three-year effort from the Trump administration. It began in 2018 with a failed effort to add a citizenship question to the census - a move that was subsequently blocked by the supreme court.

After that decision, Trump issued two executive orders; one instructed the census bureau to exclude undocumented immigrants from the apportionment count, while a second to use existing government data to produce records of non-citizens. Biden’s executive order will undo them both.

The Census Bureau faced enormous challenges in trying to get everyone to respond to the decennial survey this year because of the Covid-19 pandemic as well as deep distrust of the Trump administration, particularly in immigrant communities. The Biden-Harris transition said in a statement that it would ensure the bureau had enough time to produce accurate data.

“President-elect Biden will sign an Executive Order to revoke the prior Administration’s orders setting out an unlawful plan to exclude noncitizens from the census and apportionment of Congressional representatives,” it said in a statement.

“President-elect Biden will ensure that the Census Bureau has time to complete an accurate population count for each state. He will then present to Congress an apportionment that is fair and accurate so federal resources are efficiently and fairly distributed for the next decade.”

Related:  Republicans strategize for next elections: 'Their plan is to make it harder for voters to participate'

block-time published-time 3.02pm GMT

Marco Rubio,  the acting Republican chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, said he will not be attending the inauguration today.

enltrI am in DC but will not be attending todays inauguration because I am working on addressing the remaining objections to an expedited Senate confirmation of President-Elect Biden’s nominee for Director of National Intelligence. It’s important we do this as soon as possible.

— Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) January 20, 2021

“I am in DC but will not be attending todays inauguration because I am working on addressing the remaining objections to an expedited Senate confirmation of President-Elect Biden’s nominee for Director of National Intelligence,” Rubio said in a tweet. “It’s important we do this as soon as possible.”

Avril Haines, Joe Biden ’s nominee to serve as the director of national intelligence, testified before the Senate intelligence committee yesterday and pledged to keep politics out of her decisions if confirmed.

block-time published-time 2.56pm GMT

Barack Obama  congratulated Joe Biden  as the former vice-president prepares to take the oath of office in a couple of hours.

enltrCongratulations to my friend, President @JoeBiden  ! This is your time. pic.twitter.com/LXzxGnBAfz

— Barack Obama (@BarackObama) January 20, 2021

“Congratulations to my friend, President @JoeBiden  ! This is your time,” the former president said in a tweet, which included a photo of the two.

Obama and his wife, former first lady Michelle Obama,  will be in attendance for today’s inauguration.

block-time published-time 2.48pm GMT

George W Bush  and Laura Bush  have arrived at the Capitol to attend Joe Biden’s  inauguration. The former president and former first lady waved at reporters as they walked into the building.

enltrFormer President George W. Bush and former FLOTUS Laura Bush have arrived for Joe Biden’s inauguration. He gave us a quick wave as he walked into the Capitol building. pic.twitter.com/GcFOCNNEhL

— Mariam Khan (@MKhan47) January 20, 2021

A spokesperson for Bush announced earlier this month that he would attend the inauguration. With Donald Trump  on his way to Florida, Bush is the only Republican president in attendance for today’s inauguration.

block-time published-time 2.43pm GMT

And the surgeon general, Dr Jerome Adams,  has confirmed that the incoming administration has asked for his resignation.

enltrI've been asked by the Biden team to step down as Surgeon General. Its been the honor of my life to serve this Nation, and I will do all I can to ensure everyone has an equal opportunity to achieve and maintain health. See my full statement at: https://t.co/pCkbpealt8

— U.S. Surgeon General (@Surgeon_General) January 20, 2021

In a statement, Adams said, “During my tenure I have visited with people from all across America. And despite all that you may read on social media or see on tv, I can assure you that from Alaska to Alabama, from Maine to Montana, and from California to the Carolinas, Americans mostly want the same thing. They want a fair shot at being their best and healthiest self, and to be able to support the health and well being of their families.”

block-time published-time 2.39pm GMT

Joe Biden  is expected to sign a flurry of executive orders after taking the oath of office at noon, and the president-elect is already making immediate staffing decisions as well.

According to the Washington Post, Biden intends to quickly request the resignation of the surgeon general, Dr Jerome Adams.

The Post reports  :

Adams, who was nominated by President Trump, was sworn in as surgeon general on Sept. 5, 2017, to serve the office’s standard four-year term, which expires this September. The anesthesiologist and former Indiana health commissioner — a political independent who crafted a close relationship with then-Indiana Gov. Mike Pence — had emerged as a key spokesman for Trump’s coronavirus response, regularly appearing on national TV and using social media to advocate for public health measures such as social distancing. However, Adams’s visibility also made him a target last spring for Democrats, who accused him of defending Trump’s statements.

Biden has nominated Vivek H. Murthy, surgeon general under President Barack Obama and a close adviser of the president-elect, to be the nation’s new surgeon general, but Murthy first needs to undergo Senate confirmation hearings, which have yet to be scheduled.  The people with knowledge of the decision said the incoming Biden administration would choose an acting surgeon general as soon as Wednesday, bypassing Deputy Surgeon General  Erica Schwartz, a career civil servant.

block-time published-time 2.31pm GMT

Joe Biden  will be sworn in at the Capitol today, but the signs of destruction there are still visible, two weeks after a pro-Trump mob stormed the building.

A CNN reporter spotted Capitol Hill workers removing scaffolding from a newly repaired window that was damaged during the attack.

enltrCapitol Hill workers take down scaffolding from a newly repaired window that was damaged during the January 6 attack just two weeks ago ahead of Biden’s Inauguration today pic.twitter.com/i2SP6SXKHy

— Ali Zaslav (@alizaslav) January 20, 2021

block-time published-time 2.24pm GMT

Moments after Donald Trump  departed Washington, Joe Biden ’s Twitter account shared this message: “It’s a new day in America.”

enltrIt’s a new day in America.

— Joe Biden (@JoeBiden) January 20, 2021

That may foreshadow the themes of Biden’s inaugural speech. The president-elect based his campaign on the promise to restore “the soul of the nation,” and he is likely to voice a similarly hopeful message today.

block-time published-time 2.18pm GMT

Trump leaves note for Biden in Oval Office

The Guardian’s Daniel Strauss reports:

Donald Trump left a note for his successor before he left the Oval Office for the last time, a White House spokesperson for the Trump administration confirmed to the Guardian.

enltrTrump left a note for President-elect Joe Biden in the Oval, per a spokesperson. This is a tradition going back through Reagan.

— Daniel Strauss (@DanielStrauss4) January 20, 2021

The note to incoming president Joe Biden continues a longstanding tradition between successive presidents, even of the opposing parties. The letters are meant to stay private but oftentimes eventually get leaked out to the public. When Barack Obama left office in 2017, he wrote a note for Trump. George W Bush too left a note for Obama in 2009. The tradition of the departing letter, oftentimes both formal and heartfelt, goes back to when Ronald Reagan  left office.

Updated at 2.24pm GMT

2.15pm GMT

In a painfully fitting end to his presidency, Donald Trump  took off on Air Force One as Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” played on the tarmac.

You couldn’t pick a better walk off song: pic.twitter.com/cqRmskEZzd

— Ben Tracy (@benstracy) January 20, 2021

Here’s a sample of the lyrics from the famous song: “Regrets, I’ve had a few / But then again, too few to mention / I did what I had to do / And saw it through without exemption... But more, much more than this / I did it my way”.

Trump is en route to Mar-a-Lago in Florida and will not be in attendance for Joe Biden ’s inauguration.

2.11pm GMT

This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam.

Joe Biden will take the oath of office in less than three hours,  officially kicking off his four-year term as president of the United States.

The president-elect is currently attending a church service at Cathedral of St Matthew the Apostle in Washington, his only event before the inauguration. The incoming vice-president, Kamala Harris,  and first lady, Dr Jill Biden,  are also in attendance.

The church service is another reminder that Biden will be just the second Catholic to serve as US president, after John F Kennedy.

2.00pm GMT

Donald Trump has departed for Florida aboard Air Force One

Air Force One has taken off to head to Florida, accompanied by music blaring Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” as if it was a Trump campaign rally.

The most senior Republican to attend Trump’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews was his chief of staff, Mark Meadows. Trump walked across the tarmac to shake the loyalist’s hand before processing past troops from different branches of the military, who were standing to attention and wearing face masks to prevent the spread of coronavirus, with the pandemic wildly out of control across the US.

US President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump board Air Force One.Photograph: Alex Edelman/AFP/Getty Images

The Trumps did not wear facemasks, a characteristic of the outgoing president throughout the pandemic. Then the Trumps ascended into Air Force One, just as Joe and Jill Biden were seen leaving Blair House, near the White House, to travel to a church service with the rest of the Republican leadership, and incoming vice-president Kamala Harris.

1.53pm GMT

As we wait for Donald Trump to depart for his last flight on Air Force One Senator-elect Rev. Raphael Warnock has just reminded us on social media that as well as a change of president in the White House, there will also be a change in the Senate today.

My dad always told me to, "get up, put your shoes on, get ready." I'm ready to put the Senate back to work for the American people. pic.twitter.com/5wWSmxxYd8

— Senator-Elect Reverend Raphael Warnock (@ReverendWarnock) January 20, 2021

This afternoon Kamala Harris, having been sworn in as vice president, will swear in Warnock along with Jon Ossoff and Alex Padilla to the Senate. That will leave it split 50-50 between Democrats and Republicans, with Harris having the casting vote.

1.45pm GMT

'We've left it all on the field' – Trump addresses supporters and family in departure speech

Donald Trump’s family were at the military airfield for the outgoing president’s arrival. The ceremony has something of a Trump rally feel to it – including starting 35 minutes late to ratchet up the tension. It began with a military band playing Hail to the Chief and the 21 gun salute that Trump had wanted.

Ivanka Trump attends the departure ceremony of US president Donald Trump.Photograph: Carlos Barría/ReutersIvanka Trump (2nd R), husband Jared Kushner (R), their children, Eric (C-R) and Donald Jr. (C-R) and Trump family members stand on the tarmac at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland.Photograph: Alex Edelman/AFP/Getty Images

Trump invited the outgoing first lady Melania Trump to say a few words, and then listed a series of achievements he claimed for his administration, including creating the US Space Force, tax cuts, and his repeated (and repeatedly debunked claim) that he built the greatest economy the US has ever seen.

“Everything is complex, be careful” he said, and then took advance credit for “incredible numbers” that are going to be coming under the Biden administration.

He described the development of a coronavirus vaccine in nine months as “a medical miracle”, although in truth the US is not the only country to have aided the development of vaccines in such short order.

Trump addresses guests at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland.Photograph: Alex Edelman/AFP/Getty Images

Trump said his administration had “left it all on the field”, and will not be saying to themselves they could have worked harder. He began to conclude his address by saying “You are amazing people and this is a great great country it is an honor and privilege to have been your president,” while the crowd chanted “Thank you Trump.”

He promised that he would be watching and listening, that the future of the country was great, and he wished the incoming administration success and luck, and said he thought they would be successful. He said they had the foundations to do something really spectacular, and that his administration had “put it in a position where it’s never been, before despite being hit with the worst plague since 1917.”

Updated at 1.59pm GMT

1.30pm GMT

Marine One arrives at Joint Base Andrews

The presidential helicopter has landed at the military air field now where Donald Trump plans a brief speech and farewell event.

The famous green helicopter is taxiing on the strip now. We see family members, including Ivanka Trump and her husband Jared Kushner and their children, and his adult sons Donald Jr and Eric, waiting in the gusty cold conditions for the outgoing president.

1.26pm GMT

As Donald Trump is in the air in Marine One, Senate Republican majority leader Mitch McConnell and House Republican minority leader Kevin McCarthy are going to church with Joe Biden, Kamala Harris and their families.

Trump’s own event will be devoid of those senior Republicans, and his vice-president, Mike Pence. It leads to the dramatic split screen vision of Trump leaving the White House for the last time, talking to a small cluster of press outside the door, while “the Beast”, the fortified presidential vehicle is outside Blair House ready to take Joe and Jill Biden to the church service.

Normally, the outgoing president and his successor would ride in “the Beast” together to the US Capitol for the inauguration, but as we have heard so much about, Trump is the first president for more than 150 years  not to fulfill his obligation to pass the torch seamlessly and respect the incoming president personally by attending the swearing in.

Marine One has not flown directly towards nearby Joint Base Andrews. The green presidential helicopter is circling over downtown Washington, flying past the Washington Monument after taking a spin around the US Capitol.

This is typically what the outgoing president and first lady do after their successors have been sworn in.

From their low-altitude flight path, the Trumps would have been able to see the US Capitol heavily guarded by up to 25,000 National Guard troops, two weeks after the Congressional seat was sacked by fanatical supporters egged on by the president at a rally prior, as they tried to overturn the result of the election by force.

1.25pm GMT

Here are some more pictures of Donald Trump ’s unprecedented departure from the White House by helicopter after declining to attend the inauguration of his successor later today.

Outgoing US president Donald Trump waves as he boards Marine One.Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty ImagesPresident Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump briefly stopped to talk with the media as they boarded Marine One.Photograph: Alex Brandon/APPresident Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump with the media.Photograph: Alex Brandon/AP

1.17pm GMT

Donald Trump departs the White House for last time as president

Donald Trump has left the White House for the last time as president. He is being flown in Marine One to Joint Base Andrews in Maryland where he will be holding a “sending off” ceremony which was due to start at 8am ET/1pm GMT. He briefly spoke to reporters as he departed, saying he had accomplished a lot in office and that he and his wife Melania loved the American people. After the ceremony at the military base he will then fly to Florida to his Mar-a-Lago resort. He will not be attending Joe Biden’s inauguration.

Donald Trump and Melania Trump depart the White House on Marine One.Photograph: Guardian

1.09pm GMT

Marine One is currently landed on the White House lawn, waiting to take Donald Trump away, although he doesn’t seem in any hurry to go. Aides have been photographed carrying boxes out to it.

Marine One on the White House lawn, waiting for Donald Trump to leave.Photograph: GuardianAides carry boxes to Marine One before outgoing US president Donald Trump departs the White House.Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images

Updated at 1.10pm GMT

12.52pm GMT

Rep. Ilhan Omar ’s initial reaction to today’s events is short and sweet – “praise be to god”.

Alhamdulillah ????

— Ilhan Omar (@IlhanMN) January 20, 2021

12.46pm GMT

Reuters have rounded up some key reactions from world leaders to Joe Biden’s impending arrival in the White House. Here’s a selection:

British prime minister Boris Johnson : I look forward to working with him Biden, and with his new administration, strengthening the partnership between our countries and working on our shared priorities: from tackling climate change, building back better from the pandemic and strengthening our transatlantic security.

European commission president Ursula von der Leyen : The United States is back. And Europe stands ready. To reconnect with an old and trusted partner, to breathe new life into our cherished alliance. I look forward to working together with Joe Biden. German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier : Today is a good day for democracy. In the United States of America, it has faced tremendous challenges and endured. Despite the attempts to tear at America*s institutional fabric, election workers and governors, the judiciary and Congress, have proven strong. I am greatly relieved that, today, Joe Biden is being sworn in as president and will be moving into the White House. I know many people in Germany share this feeling.

Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte : We are looking forward to the Biden presidency, with which we will start working immediately in view of our presidency of the G20. We have a strong common agenda, ranging from the effective multilateralism that we both want to see, to climate change, green and digital transition and social inclusion.

12.35pm GMT

We are expecting Donald Trump to depart the White House and head for Joint Base Andrews within the next half hour for his “sendoff ceremony”.

In the meantime, here are some of the defining images and footage of his time in office, put together by our interactive team and picture desk – updated to include the scenes of the pro-Trump mob ransacking the US Capitol on 6 January.

Related: Scenes from a presidency – in pictures

12.26pm GMT

Biden will issue an executive order to dissolve Trump's '1776 commission'

The Biden team have also announced another intention of the incoming administration – to dismantle Trump’s 1776 commission.  CNN report  :

Joe Biden will issue an executive order to dissolve the 1776 commission, a panel stood up by President Donald Trump as a rebuttal to schools applying a more accurate history curriculum around slavery in the US.

The commission had been formed as an apparent counter to The New York Times’ 1619 Project, a Pulitzer Prize-winning project aimed at teaching American students about slavery that Trump, speaking last fall, had called “toxic propaganda.” The announcement comes just two days after the commission issued an inflammatory report on Martin Luther King Jr. Day and just hours before Biden will take over from Trump, whose time in office was marked by racist statements and actions.

In its report released Monday, the commission asserted that “the Civil Rights Movement was almost immediately turned to programs that ran counter to the lofty ideals of the founders,” specifically criticizing affirmative action policies and arguing that identity politics are “the opposite of King’s hope that his children would ‘live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.’”

Larry Arnn, the president of Hillsdale College, who had drawn criticism for his comments in 2013, when he said state officials had visited the college to see whether enough “dark ones” were enrolled, was chosen to chair the commission. Carol Swain, who once wrote that Islam “poses an absolute danger to us and our children,” was chosen as vice chair.

Read more here: CNN – Biden to rescind 1776 commission via executive order

12.18pm GMT

Trump rescinds his own ethics executive order banning his former aides from lobbying

The current banner on the White House website may be “promises made, promises kept” but that doesn’t appear to be the case when it comes to “draining the swamp’.

Donald Trump campaigned for the presidency in 2016 with that promise and energised a lot of support. One of his final acts in office though has been to undo his one concrete attempt at it.

In the early hours the president rescinded an an executive order he had issued years earlier to bar former White House employees from lobbying the government after they leave their jobs.

Originally issued in 2017, the New York Times reports  that “It expanded on rules adopted during the Obama administration and included a five-year ban for former officials lobbying the agencies they once worked for.”

With the revocation of the order, Trump’s newly unemployed aides – and presumably members of his own family – are now once again free to become lobbyists or to work for foreign governments.

The new order states: “Employees and former employees subject to the commitments in Executive Order 13770 will not be subject to those commitments after noon January 20, 2021.”

It’s really striking, when you think about the context here: after *months* of then-candidate Trump promising to “drain the swamp” again and again, he signed this order four years ago to show he was trying to do just that. But now? A final-hour dead-of-night reversal —> https://t.co/enbko1MQDK

— Hallie Jackson (@HallieJackson) January 20, 2021

Associated Press remind us that president Bill Clinton signed a similar order with weeks left on his final term, allowing former aides to go directly into lobbying after leaving his administration.

Updated at 12.29pm GMT

11.51am GMT

European commission president Ursula von der Leyen speaks of relief at end of Trump administration

European commission president Ursula von der Leyen has spoken of her relief at the end of the Trump administration, and linked the storming of the US capitol by a pro-Trump mob on 6 January with the murder of British MP Jo Cox at the hand of a right wing extremist. She said in a speech to the European parliament that part of the solution is to clamp down on the tech giants who are able to publish “fake news” with immunity.

The relief that many of us are feeling about the change of administration in Washington should not blind us to the fact that, although Donald Trump’s presidency may be history in just a few hours, his movement will not. More than 70 million Americans voted for him in the election. Just a few days ago, several hundred of them stormed the Capitol in Washington, the heart of American democracy.

That is what happens when words incite action. That is what happens when hate speech and fake news spread like wildfire through digital media. They become a danger to democracy.

Last August, several hundred right-wing extremists tried to storm the Reichstag building in Berlin. It is only thanks to the courage and vigilance of a handful of police officers that they were not successful. And we remember Jo Cox, the British Labour Member of Parliament who was murdered by a right-wing extremist in June 2016, during the torrid days leading up to the Brexit referendum. A deed which still makes us shudder today.

We must impose democratic limits on the untrammelled and uncontrolled political power of the internet giants. We want the platforms to be transparent about how their algorithms work. We cannot accept a situation where decisions that have a wide-ranging impact on our democracy are being made by computer programs without any human supervision.

Von der Leyen went on to say that while it may have been right for Twitter to switch off Donald Trump’s account, “such serious interference with freedom of expression should be based on laws and not on company rules.”

Updated at 12.26pm GMT

11.37am GMT

Kevin Liptak at CNN  this morning has an incredibly stark write-up of Trump’s era – and the humbling end of it for a president who has prided himself on his tough guy image and being a “winner”:

The all-consuming, camera-hungry, truth-starved era that fixated the nation and exposed its darkest recesses officially concludes at noon Wednesday. The president, addled and mostly friendless, will end his time in the capital a few hours early to spare himself the humiliation of watching his successor be sworn in.

He departs a city under militarized fortification meant to prevent a repeat of the riot he incited earlier this month. He leaves office with more than 400,000 Americans dead from a virus he chose to downplay or ignore. Even many of Trump’s onetime supporters are sighing with relief that the White House, and the psychology of its occupant, may no longer rest at the center of the national conversation.

At least some of the 74 million Americans who voted for Trump in November are sad to see him go. Scores of them attempted an insurrection at the US Capitol this month to prevent it from happening at all. The less violent view him as a transformative president whose arrival heralded an end to political correctness and whose exit marks a return to special treatment for immigrants, gays and minorities.

One thing Trump’s presidency undoubtedly accomplished: revealing in stark fashion the racist, hate-filled, violent undercurrents of American society that many had chosen previously to ignore. It became impossible to overlook as Trump’s presidency concluded with violent riots of White nationalists and neo-Nazis at the Capitol.

Read more here: CNN – Trump departs Washington a pariah as his era in power ends

11.29am GMT

Bernie Sanders: 'Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual'

Vermont’s Sen. Bernie Sanderswrites for us this morning  :

In this moment of unprecedented crises, Congress and the Biden administration must respond through unprecedented action. No more business as usual. No more same old, same old.

Democrats , who will now control the White House, the Senate and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety. As the incoming chairman of the Senate budget committee that is exactly what I intend to do.

What does all of this mean for the average American?

It means that we aggressively crush the pandemic and enable the American people to return to their jobs and schools. This will require a federally led emergency program to produce the quantity of vaccines that we need and get them into people’s arms as quickly as possible.

It means that during the severe economic downturn we’re experiencing, we must make sure that all Americans have the financial resources they need to live with dignity. We must increase the $600 in direct payments for every working-class adult and child that was recently passed to $2,000, raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, expand unemployment benefits and prevent eviction, homelessness and hunger.

It means that, during this raging pandemic, we must guarantee healthcare to all. We must also end the international embarrassment of the United States being the only major country on Earth not to provide paid family and medical leave to workers.

It means making pre-kindergarten and childcare universal and available to every family in America.

Despite what you may have heard, there is no reason why we cannot do all of these things.

Read more here: Bernie Sanders – Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual. Here’s where to start

Related: Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual. Here's where to start | Bernie Sanders

11.11am GMT

Russia says it remains willing to extend New Start nuclear arms treaty with US

Reuters report that the Kremlin has said this morning it remained committed to extending the New Start nuclear arms control treaty with the United States and would welcome efforts promised by the administration of president-elect Joe Biden to reach agreement.

The New Start (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) accord, which was signed in 2010 and expires in February, limits the numbers of strategic nuclear warheads, missiles and bombers that Russia and the United States can deploy.

“Russia and its president are in favour of preserving this agreement,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters on a conference call. “If our American colleagues will in fact demonstrate a political will to preserve this pact by extending it, this can only be welcomed.”

Biden’s choice for secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said on Tuesday that the incoming US administration would seek to extend the pact and decide how long an extension to pursue. Russian President Vladimir Putin last year called on Washington to extend the last major nuclear arms pact between the two countries for a year without any conditions.

A failure to extend New Start could fuel a potential arms race and tensions between Moscow and Washington – a relationship which is expected to be very different from the cosiness of the Trump-Putin era.

10.58am GMT

Here’s Amanda Holpuch  in New York and Lauren Gambino  in Washington with a bit more detail on that proposed Biden immigration plan for us:

Biden administration  officials briefed reporters on Tuesday on the incoming president’s day one immigration plans. They include executive orders to reverse Trump’s attempt to exclude undocumented people from the census, end the travel ban, roll back a Trump-era policy on deportation priorities and end an emergency declaration Trump used to divert funds to the wall on the US-Mexico border.

Biden will also unveil legislation that creates a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, calls for increased technology at the border and attempts to address the root causes of immigration.

He will also issue a presidential memo to underline the administration’s support for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) program, which allows people who were brought to the US as children without legal documents to temporarily get work visas and be protected from deportation. Trump ended Daca in 2017, but the decision was embroiled in legal challenges and eventually rejected by the supreme court.

In another memo, Biden will extend a program that protected roughly 4,000 Liberians in the US who hold a protected immigration status  known as Deferred Enforced Departure (DED).

An interior enforcement executive order will reverse an order Trump signed five days after he took office that dramatically expanded interior immigration law enforcement  by no longer prioritizing the deportation of criminals.

Biden will also end the travel ban. The order will also instruct the state department to restart visa processing for the affected countries and to develop a proposal to remedy harms caused by the bans, including those who had visas denied. It also allows for increased screening and vetting of travelers through information sharing with foreign governments.

The incoming administration emphasized it plans to address the root causes of migration, including by sending aid to the Central American countries where the climate crisis , violence, corruption and poverty have driven an increase in family immigration.

Read more here: Biden plans day-one immigration moves to reverse ‘inhumane’ Trump policies

Related: Biden plans day-one immigration moves to reverse 'inhumane' Trump policies

10.48am GMT

Biden administration outlines immediate executive order plans on Covid, climate and immigration

Joe Biden is expected to sign 15 executive orders and make further instructions after he is sworn in as US president undoing policies put in place by outgoing president Donald Trump and making his first moves on the pandemic, climate change and racial justic.

Biden will sign the executive orders and memorandums in the Oval Office in the afternoon, and ask agencies to take steps in two additional areas, said incoming Press Secretary Jen Psaki.

Introducing the plans, the Biden-Harris transition team said in a statement  :

The president-elect’s day one executive actions will protect workers from Covid-19, including by ensuring that federal employees and contractors wear masks and follow other CDC guidelines, setting an example for employers around the country.

They will provide relief to American workers who have lost their jobs or had their hours or wages slashed through no fault of their own, by extending the pause on student debt and the eviction and foreclosure moratorium.

They will help spur the growth of American manufacturing and supply chains, competitiveness of our industries, and creation of good union jobs by directing agencies to consider revising vehicle fuel economy and emissions standards, methane emissions standards, and appliance and building efficiency standards.

And, they’ll take steps to prevent workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, and revoke President Trump’s damaging executive order which limited critical diversity and inclusion training in the workplace.

On Covid the president-elect is proposing to:

•Launch a “100 Days Masking Challenge” and a mask mandate on federal property and for federal employees.•Re-join the World Health Organization reversing the Trump policy to withdraw from the body.•Create the position of Covid-19 Response Coordinator reporting directly to the president, and restoring the NSC Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense to focus on domestic and global biological threats.•Extend the federal eviction and foreclosure moratoriums until at least 31 March, 2021.•Extend the student loan pause until at least September 30, 2021.•Seek a $1.9 trillion spending proposal aimed at accelerating the distribution of coronavirus vaccines while providing economic relief to millions of Americans hurt by the pandemic.•Sign an executive order that helps schools and businesses reopen safely, expands coronavirus testing and establishes clearer public health standards.

Launch a “100 Days Masking Challenge” and a mask mandate on federal property and for federal employees.

Re-join the World Health Organization reversing the Trump policy to withdraw from the body.

Create the position of Covid-19 Response Coordinator reporting directly to the president, and restoring the NSC Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense to focus on domestic and global biological threats.

Extend the federal eviction and foreclosure moratoriums until at least 31 March, 2021.

Extend the student loan pause until at least September 30, 2021.

Seek a $1.9 trillion spending proposal aimed at accelerating the distribution of coronavirus vaccines while providing economic relief to millions of Americans hurt by the pandemic.

Sign an executive order that helps schools and businesses reopen safely, expands coronavirus testing and establishes clearer public health standards.

On the environment, including a broad heading of “Roll back president Trump’s environmental actions in order to protect public health and the environment and restore science” Biden intends to:

•Rejoin the Paris Agreement on climate change, which will come into effect in thirty days time.•Issue a sweeping executive order on the climate crisis that will ask all federal agencies to review Trump policies and address those harmful to health or damaging to the environment.•Reimpose methane pollution limits for new and existing oil and gas operations repealed by Trump.•Using the government procurement system – which spends $500 billion every year – to make federal facilities more reliant on clean energy and purchase zero-emissions vehicles.•Ban new oil and gas permitting on public lands and waters, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.•Cancel the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline, which would carry oil from Canada to the United States.

Rejoin the Paris Agreement on climate change, which will come into effect in thirty days time.

Issue a sweeping executive order on the climate crisis that will ask all federal agencies to review Trump policies and address those harmful to health or damaging to the environment.

Reimpose methane pollution limits for new and existing oil and gas operations repealed by Trump.

Using the government procurement system – which spends $500 billion every year – to make federal facilities more reliant on clean energy and purchase zero-emissions vehicles.

Ban new oil and gas permitting on public lands and waters, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.

Cancel the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline, which would carry oil from Canada to the United States.

On immigration, the set of actions are:

•Repeal the ban on almost all travel from some Muslim-majority countries.•Send to Congress a sweeping immigration bill that could legalize millions of immigrants living in the United States without legal permission.•Reinstate the DACA program allowing “Dreamers” – people who were brought to the United States illegally as children – to remain in the country.•Reverse Trump’s policy that separated immigrant parents from their children at the border, including ending the prosecution of parents for minor immigration violations, and prioritize the reunification of any children still separated from their families.•Reverse Trump’s more restrictive asylum policies, such as imposing additional restrictions on anyone traveling through Mexico or Guatemala and attempting to prevent victims of gang and domestic violence from receiving asylum.•End Trump’s National Emergency declaration that allowed him to shift federal funds from the Department of Defense to build a wall along the US southern border.•Order an immediate review of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for vulnerable populations who cannot find safety in their countries severely affected by violence or disaster.

Repeal the ban on almost all travel from some Muslim-majority countries.

Send to Congress a sweeping immigration bill that could legalize millions of immigrants living in the United States without legal permission.

Reinstate the DACA program allowing “Dreamers” – people who were brought to the United States illegally as children – to remain in the country.

Reverse Trump’s policy that separated immigrant parents from their children at the border, including ending the prosecution of parents for minor immigration violations, and prioritize the reunification of any children still separated from their families.

Reverse Trump’s more restrictive asylum policies, such as imposing additional restrictions on anyone traveling through Mexico or Guatemala and attempting to prevent victims of gang and domestic violence from receiving asylum.

End Trump’s National Emergency declaration that allowed him to shift federal funds from the Department of Defense to build a wall along the US southern border.

Order an immediate review of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for vulnerable populations who cannot find safety in their countries severely affected by violence or disaster.

In addition, Biden intends among his first acts:

•Ask all US agencies to create an action plan to address racial inequality.•Order every administration appointee to sign an ethics pledge to ensure that officials act in the interests of the American people and not for personal gain.•Issue an executive order to make sure federal anti-discrimination statutes prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.

Ask all US agencies to create an action plan to address racial inequality.

Order every administration appointee to sign an ethics pledge to ensure that officials act in the interests of the American people and not for personal gain.

Issue an executive order to make sure federal anti-discrimination statutes prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.

Updated at 10.50am GMT

10.26am GMT

Joe Biden inauguration – when does it happen and what to expect?

Today’s inauguration ceremony will be quite unlike any seen in Washington DC before. Kevin Freking at Associated Press has put together a handy guide of what is different this year.

Joe Biden’s oath of office is actually the only essential part of the day. The Constitution sets out a 35-word oath for the new president. Most presidents make it 39 by tacking on “so help me God” – a tradition whose origins are unclear. Chief Justice John Roberts will swear in Biden; Justice Sonya Sotomayor will swear in Kamala Harris as vice president. The ceremony will start at 11am in Washington – 4pm in London – and Biden will be sworn in at noon ET (5pm GMT). Harris is sworn in before that.

Biden then gives a speech, which is usually designed to set the tone and the policies the new administration will pursue. Biden’s theme is “America United” – a stark contrast to Donald Trump ’s 2017 speech which spoke of “American carnage”.

There won’t be crowds as usual because of the Covid pandemic. Trump began his term as president with press secretary Sean Spicer arguing with reality  over the size of the crowd at the 2017 inauguration. At least Trump will this time be justified in saying that he had a bigger crowd than someone else.

About 200,000 small US state and territorial flags have been installed on the National Mall instead of a crowd, representing those who can’t attend.

A worker helping to set up the “Field of flags” earlier this week.Photograph: Eric Baradat/AFP/Getty Images

Vice president Mike Pence and most members of Congress are expected to attend. Pence is notably preferring the inauguration to attending Donald Trump’s sendoff ceremony at Joint Base Andrews earlier in the day (8am ET/1pm GMT).

Former presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton and former first ladies Michelle Obama, Laura Bush and Hillary Clinton are all also expected to attend.

The traditional Pass in Review ceremony where the new commander-in-chief inspects their troops will take place – but participants will socially distance to deter the spread of coronavirus. There will be no traditional congressional lunch.

Biden, Harris and the former presidents and their partners will then participate in a wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery’s Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

After that the traditional inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House has been dramatically scaled back to little more than a photo opportunity, and there will be no crowds in attendance. Biden will be escorted by the military.

In place of inauguration parties and balls, Democratic Parties and advocacy groups will hold virtual balls, and actor Tom Hanks will host a 90-minute prime-time TV special celebration in the evening.

9.58am GMT

Images of a heavily militarized Washington have left local residents disoriented, and prompted condemnation from military veterans in Congress “I expected this in Baghdad. I never imagined this in Washington,” said Seth Moulton, a Massachusetts congressman who fought in Iraq, to the Guardian.

“It’s hard to see the pantheon of our democracy fortified like the war zones I used to know,” tweeted Jason Crow, a Colorado congressman, saying that he had fought in Iraq and Afghanistan “so we could enjoy peace at home”.

Other American veterans said the images from Washington were surreal, but not exactly surprising. Matt Gallagher, a writer and Army veteran who served in Iraq, described “this strange sense of inevitability”, as he looked at the photographs of concertina wire and traffic control points and “young national guardsmen, many of whom were probably born around 9/11”.

There’s been plenty of pushback to attempts to compare the current state of Washington DC to a war zone.

“The troops are not speaking a foreign language, manning checkpoints, traveling in convoys so secure that they would be authorized to shoot cars that drive in between them. They’re not raiding homes. Let’s not trivialize military occupation,” Laila Al-Arian, an American journalist, wrote last week.

Tom Porter, a policy spokesman for the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, told the Guardian that veterans had been making plenty of dark jokes about Washington’s Green Zone, asking whether the city was now disposing of trash and human waste by setting it on fire with jet fuel  in giant “ burn pits  ”, as the military has done in the Middle East.

“Those that have actually been to a war zone know that our city and Capitol does not actually resemble a war zone,” he said, adding that he thought officials should have chosen a different name for the secure area of Washington during inauguration.

Read more of Lois Beckett’s report here: ‘This is not freedom’: a militarized US Capitol is being called a ‘war zone’

Related: 'This is not freedom': a militarized US Capitol is being called a ‘war zone’

9.41am GMT

The most high profile of Donald Trump’s pardons , to his former aide Steve Bannon, may have repercussions within the Republican party, according to Josh Gerstein and Kyle Cheney at Politico.

Bannon was a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. He was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the US-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty. Gerstein and Cheney write:

While Trump did not issue a self-pardon covering his own actions on 6 January, and he turned aside pardon requests from others accused of inciting or participating in the assault on Congress, Bannon was also among those who stoked anger in advance of the riots.

“All hell will break loose tomorrow. It will be quite extraordinarily different. All I can say is strap in,” Bannon said on his War Room podcast on 5 January. “Tomorrow is game day. So many people said, man, if I was in revolution I would be in Washington. Well, this is your time in history.”

Bannon frequently used similar wartime imagery to urge Trump supporters to contest the 2020 election results. He has also been a frequent antagonist of Sen. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, most notably when he helped propel the doomed candidacy of Republican Roy Moore — derailed by sexual assault allegations — over McConnell’s preferred candidate Luther Strange in an Alabama special election.

With Trump’s impeachment trial looming, the Bannon pardon could push some Republican senators toward convicting Trump and potentially banning him from running for president again, but will probably be seen as less provocative than would a self-pardon or pardons for his closest family members.

Read more here: Politico – Trump pardons dozens, including Steve Bannon, as he exits White House

9.24am GMT

Axios this morning have a story labelled a scoop  about the extreme precautions that the Biden team are taking to prevent the president-elect being exposed to Covid. It marks a stark contrast to the laissez-faire attitude of the Trump White House to enforcing anti-Covid guidelines. Hans Nichols writes:

The incoming administration is planning extraordinary steps to protect its most prized commodity, Joe Biden, including requiring daily employee Covid tests and N95 masks at all times, according to new guidance sent to some incoming employees Tuesday.

The president-elect is 78 years old and therefore a high risk for the virus and its worst effects, despite having received the vaccine. While President Trump’s team was nonchalant about Covid protocols — leading to several super-spreader episodes — the new rules will apply to all White House aides in “high proximity to principals.”

Besides protecting Biden, he and his team want to model best practices and are insisting that West Wing officials abide by the highest standards. Biden is asking the nation to “mask up” for the first 100 days of his administration.

The guidance was sent to incoming staffers who will have “proximity” to any White House “principals,” generally defined as heads of departments like the National Security Council and the National Economic Council.

Read more here: Axios – Joe Biden’s Covid-19 bubble

9.20am GMT

Our picture desk has put together some of the most striking images as Washington DC  prepares for the inauguration of Joe Biden while swamped with security after the 6 January assault on the Capitol.

A lone National Guardsman walks down the sidewalk near the US Capitol Building the night before the inauguration of Joe Biden as the 46th president of the United States.Photograph: Andrew H Walker/REX/Shutterstock

You can view the gallery here: Washington on edge before Biden inauguration - in pictures

Related: Washington on edge before Biden inauguration - in pictures

9.10am GMT

Yesterday the US recorded 168,058 new coronavirus cases, and 2,550 further deaths. According to Johns Hopkins university figures  the US has now recorded a total of 24,233,738 cases and 401,443 deaths.

The Covid Tracking Project  records that 123,820 were hospitalized with Covid in the US. CNN reported overnight that the Trump administration has left the incoming Biden administration with ‘confusing’ Covid-19 vaccine numbers and the states in limbo.

States across the country say they’re running low on coronavirus vaccine supply, with many officials insisting the vaccine delivery numbers reported by the Trump administration don’t align with what they are seeing on the ground.

A source close to the Biden transition team said there is enormous concern among the incoming administration about the accuracy of the numbers that have been released by the federal government. It was only within the last few days that the transition team was given access to Tiberius, the system that shows states how many doses are available to them and allows states to determine delivery locations.

Despite frustration, the source said Biden’s team has been hesitant to broadcast just how they were left in the dark out of concern that the Trump administration would stop cooperating altogether.

Related: US coronavirus death toll passes 400,000 amid grim forecast over winter

9.00am GMT

Joe Biden  must overcome a pandemic, rebuild an economy, tackle racist insurrectionists and the ex-president who incited them, and reassert American leadership across a distrustful world. Somehow he must do all that while also confirming his senior officials in a Senate with no working majority.

So far the Biden team shows no sign of limiting its ambition in terms of what it hopes Congress will take up – and what it will push through executive action – in its first days and weeks in power. In addition to signing  a flurry of executive orders, rejoining the Paris climate accords and restarting the Iran nuclear deal, Biden will also propose  sweeping immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship for the undocumented.

Comprehensive reform of the nation’s broken immigration system proved beyond the capabilities of both Bush and Obama. It was Bush’s failure to enact immigration reform in 2007 that effectively marked the end of his second-term agenda, as Republicans turned towards a nativist agenda that Donald Trump  placed at the heart of his campaign and presidency.

The Biden team may be marking a sharp break with the Trump years in prioritizing immigration reform. But what are their realistic prospects for legislative progress in the first year of the Biden presidency?

Obama veterans think there may be one good reason why Biden can feel more optimistic about political progress than their own experience in 2009, when Republicans obstructed their action from the outset, would dictate. That reason is the legacy of one Donald Trump.

“I think the difference between this and 2009 is that I believe there’s going to be a significant number of Republicans in Congress who think that their party needs a course correction here,” said Joel Benenson, who served as strategist and pollster to both Obama and Hillary Clinton’s campaigns. “It doesn’t mean they are suddenly going to be liberal Rockefeller Republicans, but the damage that Trump has done to the party and its image – and it has exacerbated through the events of the last two weeks – is giving them pause.

“I don’t think it’s a major shift ideologically, but they have to recognize they are losing large and important sections of the electorate, and that’s going to be problematic for them. They know for their long-term prospects they can’t just be a base party. The biggest political failure of Donald Trump is that he didn’t fundamentally understand that to win the presidency, you have to win the center.”

Read more of Richard Wolffe’s analysis here: Biden prepares ambitious agenda even as he cleans up Trump’s mess

Related: Biden prepares ambitious agenda even as he cleans up Trump's mess | Analysis

8.41am GMT

Donald Trump will be the first outgoing sitting president not to attend his successor’s inauguration by choice for some considerable time. For most of the existence of the United States, the handover between presidents has been seen as symbolic of the peaceful transfer of power.

Other presidents not to attend their successor’s inauguration have, of course, included the four US presidents who were assassinated while in power: Abraham Lincoln (1865), James Garfield (1881), William McKinley (1901), and John F. Kennedy (1963).

In 1974, president Richard Nixon had resigned in disgrace, and did not attend the swearing in of Gerald Ford in the White House. And in 1921 Woodrow Wilson had intended to be there when Warren Harding was inaugurated, and indeed travelled with him to the Capitol for the ceremony, but was then taken ill.

It was in the 19th century that presidents decided not to show up out of grievance or animosity, as this history lesson from Jacey Fortin in the New York Times  makes plain:

“It’s usually a sign that American society is in the midst of major political feud,” the presidential historian Douglas Brinkley said. “The fact that the incoming and outgoing presidents can’t shake hands and co-participate in an inauguration means that something’s off-kilter in the democracy.”

That was the case for John Adams, his son John Quincy Adams and Andrew Johnson.

When the presidency of John Adams ended in 1801, the United States was in its infancy and had never seen a head of state transfer power to a political opponent — in this case, Thomas Jefferson. On Inauguration Day, Adams left Washington quietly, before dawn, in a stagecoach bound for Baltimore.

John Quincy Adams, the sixth American president, followed in his father’s footsteps when he declined to attend the swearing-in of the man who had unseated him: the populist Andrew Jackson. Like his father, Adams had differences with his successor that were not just political. The men also disliked each other.

The next president to snub his predecessor was Johnson. The animosity between Ulysses S. Grant, who had led the Union to victory in the Civil War and won the election, and Johnson, a Southerner who opposed Reconstruction, was clear. It culminated in Johnson’s refusal to attend the inauguration in 1869 — a decision that was so last minute that contemporary reports claimed a carriage arrived to collect him on the morning of the ceremony and was turned away.

Read more here: New York Times – Trump is not the first president to snub an inauguration

8.26am GMT

Donald Trump sending off ceremony – what to expect

Here’s a reminder of what happened in 2017, and that you won’t be seeing similar scenes today. Former president Barack Obama and his wife Michelle warmly welcomed Donald and Melania Trump to the White House  before Trump’s inauguration. Trump will be staying away from Joe Biden’s inauguration today.

The Obamas greet the Trumps at the White House

Instead we have the prospect of a Donald Trump sending off ceremony, which Adam Gabbatt has previewed for us.

Trump is due to leave the White House just before 8am, headed for Joint Base Andrews, the military base in Maryland used by Air Force One.

The White House has issued invitations for a ceremony at the base, with attendees told to arrive at 7.15am and the event due to start 45 minutes later – that’s at 1pm if you are, like me, in the UK. Few details have been released about the event, but Trump is reportedly keen on a lavish affair, featuring a 21-gun salute, a color guard, a military band and reams of supporters, CNN reported.

In a sign that Trump’s aides may be struggling to gather a large crowd, however, guests have been told  they can bring up to five other people, and invitees even included Anthony Scaramucci , the extremely short-lived former White House communications director who has become a vocal Trump critic.

A further blow to Trump’s designs on an ostentatious farewell came when the Pentagon reportedly  said it would not hold an armed forces farewell tribute for the outgoing president.

After the ceremony Trump will fly to the Mar-a-Lago compound in Florida that is set to become his home. Air Force One will then return to Maryland where it will be at the future disposal of the newly inaugurated president Joe Biden.

8.14am GMT

Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown writes for us today, saying that Joe Biden can’t heal America without help from the rest of the world  :

As the US president-elect finally takes the oath of office in Washington DC, the rest of the world desperately needs him to effect a sea change. If his first task is to reunite a divided America, his second is to end American isolationism: to show Americans that they need the world, and show the world that we still need America.

Given the intertwined triple threats of the pandemic, economic collapse  and climate catastrophe, his presidency will be defined not by the previous benchmarks of 100 days, but rather by its first 10 or 20 days. The Trump impeachment trial notwithstanding, day one will see Biden delivering on his plans to roll out mass vaccination  and to reboot the ailing US economy by forcing the biggest fiscal stimulus in history through Congress. Given that body’s new political makeup and Biden’s own inclinations, his multi-trillion-dollar plan will be greener than anything ever contemplated by US lawmakers.

But Biden must then go global. His presidency will be forged or broken on the anvil of those existential crises, and the internationalist in him knows that not one of these three domestic objectives – a virus-free, an economically resilient and a pollution-free US – can be fully realised without multilateral cooperation. Yet this is something that economic nationalists in both the US’s main political parties have not just rejected but scorned.

Read more here: Gordon Brown – Joe Biden can’t heal America without help from the rest of the world

Related: Joe Biden can't heal America without help from the rest of the world | Gordon Brown

8.00am GMT

Joe Biden shed a tear yesterday as he took to the stage to deliver a farewell address to a Delaware crowd ahead of his inauguration, reports David Smith.  Speaking at the Major Joseph R ‘Beau’ Biden III National Guard/Reserve Center, named after Biden’s late son, who died of brain cancer in 2015, the president elect said things “can change, they can and they do”.

“I know these are dark times but there’s always light,” he said. “I’m truly honoured to be your next president and commander-in-chief and I’ll always be a proud son of the state of Delaware.”

He paraphrased James Joyce and nearly broke down with emotion as he said: “When I die, Delaware will be written on my heart.”

His one regret, he said, was the absence of his son Beau Biden, who died from brain cancer in 2015. “We should be introducing him as president,” he said.

7.55am GMT

'The ball is in US court' over nuclear deal, says Iran's president Hassan Rouhani

A quick snap from Reuters here on what will be one of the most pressing foreign policy issues to confront the new Biden-Harris administration: Iran.

Iranian president Hassan Rouhani has this morning urged president-elect Joe Biden to return to a 2015 nuclear deal and lift the sanctions on his nation. Biden has previously said that the United States will rejoin the pact that includes restrictions on Iran’s nuclear work if Tehran resumes strict compliance.

“The ball is in the US court now. If Washington returns to Iran’s 2015 nuclear deal, we will also fully respect our commitments under the pact,” Rouhani said in a televised cabinet meeting.

“Today, we expect the incoming US administration to return to the rule of law and commit themselves, and if they can, in the next four years, to remove all the black spots of the previous four years,” he said.

“US President Donald Trump’s political career is over today and his ‘maximum pressure’ policy on Iran has completely failed,” Rouhani said. “Trump is dead but the nuclear deal is still alive.”

Tensions have grown between Tehran and Washington since 2018, when U.S. President Donald Trump exited the deal between Iran and six world powers that sought to limit Tehran’s nuclear programme and prevent it developing atomic weapons. Washington reimposed sanctions that have damaged Iran’s economy.

In July 2015, Iran and a six-nation negotiating group reached a landmark agreement known as the  Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action   that  ended a 12-year deadlock   over Tehran’s nuclear programme. The deal, struck in Vienna after nearly two years of intensive talks, limited the Iranian programme, to reassure the rest of the world that it cannot develop nuclear weapons, in return for sanctions relief.

At its core, the JCPOA is a straightforward bargain: Iran’s acceptance of strict limits on its nuclear programme in return for an escape from the sanctions that grew up around its economy over a decade prior to the accord. Under the deal, Iran unplugged two-thirds of its centrifuges, shipped out 98% of its enriched uranium and filled its plutonium production reactor with concrete. Tehran also accepted extensive monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which has verified 10 times since the agreement, and as recently as February, that Tehran has complied with its terms. In return, all nuclear-related sanctions were  lifted in January 2016 , reconnecting Iran to global markets.

The six major powers involved in the nuclear talks with  Iran   were in a group known as the P5+1: the UN security council’s five permanent members – China, France, Russia, the UK and the US – and Germany. The nuclear deal is also enshrined in a UN security council resolution that incorporated it into international law. The 15 members of the council at the time unanimously endorsed the agreement.

On 8 May 2018, US president Donald Trump pulled his country out of the deal. Iran announced its partial withdrawal from the nuclear deal a year later.

Saeed Kamali Dehghan ,  Iran correspondent

Iran, which denies ever seeking nuclear arms, retaliated to Trump’s “maximum pressure” policy by gradually breaching the accord. Tehran has repeatedly said it can quickly reverse those violations if US sanctions are removed.

Even in the last days of the Trump administration, it has continued to attempt to apply more pressure to Iran, including imposing new sanctions in the last week.

Today, I significantly expanded metals-related sanctions targeting Iran’s nuclear, military, and ballistic missile programs. As long as the threats remain, sanctions should too.

— Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) January 16, 2021

Mike Pompeo’s likely replacement, Antony Blinken who is Biden’s choice for secretary of state, said on Tuesday the United States would not take a quick decision on whether to rejoin the pact.

7.42am GMT

Normally quiet streets around US state capitol buildings have looked more like battlegrounds recently, putting those who live and work there on edge and instilling a sense of foreboding, reports Andrew Selsky for Associated Press.

More than most people, these Americans will have front-row seats on whether the change of leadership in the White House will lead to a lessening of tension. They’ll be watching what the next chapter brings from storefronts and the porches and stoops of their own homes.

Some expect Joe Biden to bring a unifying tone when he’s inaugurated as president on Wednesday, but say that alone won’t be enough to bring unity. How the people react will be key.

Jonathan Jones’ front-row seat to what happens next is his restaurant that is decorated with Black Lives Matter signs and art near the Oregon State Capitol. Epilogue Kitchen and Cocktails has been vandalized by a white supremacist. One day, police showed up as Jones and his friends were being accosted by neo-fascist Proud Boys. The police at first confronted Jones’ group as if they were the threat.

“There’s not a person who stood with me that day who didn’t think that they might die,” Jones said. “And the most awful part was not knowing if it was going to come from the police or from the Proud Boys.”

Epilogue Kitchen & Cocktails owner Jonathan Jones speaks with a customer while serving free meals in honor of Martin Luther King Jr. Day on Monday in Salem, Oregon.Photograph: Noah Berger/AP

Jones plans on listening to Biden’s inaugural address. “I hope that he does not call for unity with neo-fascists, because there cannot be unity with people who want to see me dead,” Jones said.

In Washington state, a neighborhood next to the Capitol in Olympia boasts mid-century and 100-year-old homes. “It’s a very charming, calm, nice place to walk a dog and chat with the neighbors on the porch,” one woman told AP.

But in recent weeks, frequent protests involving people in tactical gear and armed with guns have created a climate of fear. People shout into megaphones, loud trucks drive down narrow streets, residents are called names or harassed, media helicopters and police planes fly overhead.

“There’s no retreat, because it’s your house, it’s where you live. It’s been a little jolting, and exhausting,” said the woman, who is so afraid for the safety of herself and her family that she spoke to a reporter only on condition she not be identified.

She said she is optimistic that Biden and vice president-elect Kamala Harris will be able to accomplish many things. “But I’m not sure that will change the real divisions we’ve all seen,” she said.

“People are behaving so differently, openly, that I don’t know moving forward as a country if we’ll be able to find each other again.”

Morris Price Jr., left, moderator at First Baptist Church of Denver, with Minister Brian Henderson in the church across from the State Capitol.Photograph: David Zalubowski/AP

Brian Henderson, minister of First Baptist Church of Denver that sits across an avenue from the shuttered Colorado Capitol, was so close to the upheavals of 2020 that he was struck in the left knee with a pepper ball. Henderson had been handing out water from the front steps of his small brick church as thousands battled police during riots over George Floyd’s killing.

Many neighboring businesses and state government buildings have boarded up their windows and doors in anticipation of possible violence but the church has not, to avoid giving the wrong message.

“We can’t let fear stop us from doing what we have to do,” Henderson said. Henderson said he will watch the inauguration, “take a big deep breath and go, ‘Phew! We made it. A long four years.”’

7.33am GMT

Trump pardons Steve Bannon, Lil Wayne and 68 others

Outgoing president Donald Trump’s last act in office was to issue 143 people with pardons or clemency.  Among the most notable names on the list were:

Steve Bannon, 67, was a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. He was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the US-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty.

Elliott Broidy, a major Republican party fundraiser, pleaded guilty in October to acting as an unregistered foreign agent, admitting to accepting money to secretly lobby the Trump administration for Chinese and Malaysian interests. He has been pardoned. Broidy held finance posts in Trump’s 2016 campaign and on his inaugural committee.

Former Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick was sentenced in 2013 to 28 years in prison following his conviction on two dozen charges including racketeering, bribery and extortion from a conspiracy, which prosecutors said had worsened the city’s financial crisis. Kilpatrick, 50, once seen as a rising star in the Democratic party, received one of the longest corruption sentences ever handed to a major US politician.

Lil Wayne, 38, whose real name is Dwayne Michael Carter, pleaded guilty in federal court in December to illegally possessing a firearm and faced up to 10 years in prison. In October, Wayne tweeted a picture of himself with Trump following what he called a “great meeting” with the president. He has been pardoned.

Sholam Weiss was convicted of bilking $125m from National Heritage Life Insurance and its elderly policyholders. He fled the United States and was sentenced in absentia in 2000 to 845 years in prison, but he was eventually extradited from Austria.

Read more here: Trump pardons and commutations – the full list

Related: Trump pardons and commutations – the full list

7.26am GMT

Trump farewell address fails to name Biden or acknowledge legitimacy of his victory

Last night, outgoing president Donald Trump  has delivered a “mission accomplished” valedictory address that failed to name Joe Biden or acknowledge the legitimacy of his election victory.

“We did what we came here to do – and so much more,” said Trump, wearing a dark suit, white shirt and blue tie, as he reeled off a list of achievements and linked them to his signature phrases, “America first” and “make America great again”.

The president appeared to tacitly acknowledge the divisiveness and anger that marked his four years in office, but offered no hint of regret. “I did not seek the easiest course,” he said. “I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism.

“I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do. Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus. This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: together, we put the American people back in charge of our country.”

Critics have said Trump is more likely to be remembered  as the first American president in history to be twice impeached, first for pressuring Ukraine for political favours, second for inciting a violent mob to sack the US Capitol and stop Biden’s win being certified.

After four years of firestorms, Trump’s presidency has been fading away, especially after his Twitter feed was abruptly terminated.  The video broke a prolonged silence less than 24 hours before he is expected to leave the White House for the last time, early on Wednesday morning.

Read more of David Smith’s report here: ‘We did what we came here to do’: Trump fails to mention Biden in farewell address

7.16am GMT

Joe Biden's inauguration: What happens and when

Biden’s inauguration program begins at some time after 11am ET – which is 4pm in London – with Father Leo J O’Donovan, an American Jesuit Catholic priest who is a longtime friend of the Biden family, set to give an invocation.

Andrea Hall, a Georgia firefighter in the South Fulton fire and rescue department, will then lead the pledge of allegiance. Hall is the first African American woman in the department’s history to be promoted to the rank of fire captain.

Lady Gaga, who campaigned for Biden, will perform the national anthem, and Amanda Gorman, the first ever National youth poet laureate in the US, will read a poem.

The Rev Dr Silvester Beaman, a friend to Biden and the president-elect’s late son Beau, will lead a benediction. Beaman is the pastor of Bethel African methodist episcopal church in Wilmington, Delaware.

Jennifer Lopez will also give a musical performance.

Shortly before noon , Kamala Harris will be sworn in by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, and will become the country’s first female, first Black and first south Asian American vice-president. The vice-president-elect will use two bibles, one of which belonged to Thurgood Marshall, the first Black person to serve on the supreme court.

At midday, Joe Biden will be sworn in by John Roberts, the chief justice of the supreme court. The president-elect plans to use his family’s very large  bible from 1893.

After officially taking office, Biden will give his inaugural speech. Biden has reportedly been working on the speech since November , and according to his inaugural committee  Biden will lay out “his vision to defeat the pandemic, build back better, and unify and heal the nation”.

The theme of the inauguration is “America United”, and Biden’s address is likely to offer a different tone to that of his predecessor. Donald Trump gave a 16-minute  speech, much of it incendiary , at his inauguration in 2017.

Biden will then take part in the traditional “Pass in review” after 2pm. He and Harris – and their spouses – will make the short walk to the east front of the Capitol, where they’ll observe a procession of each branch of the military. The pass in review signals the peaceful transfer of power to the new commander-in-chief.

The next event will take Biden about three miles south-west of the White House, to Arlington national cemetery ,  where about 400,000 military veterans are interred. Biden will lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. Former presidents Barack Obama, George W Bush and Bill Clinton will join Biden at the cemetery, as will the former first ladies Michelle Obama, Laura Bush and Hillary Clinton.

7.09am GMT

Welcome to our live coverage of US politics on a historic – and busy – Wednesday in Washington.

•Joe Biden will be inaugurated as the 46th president of the United States in a ceremony in Washington DC at noon ET – that’s 5pm GMT.•Kamala Harris will join him as the first woman to be vice president, and with Indian and Jamaican heritage, the first woman of color to hold the office.•Before the ceremony Biden will attend church, and then once in office he is expected to visit the tomb of the unknown soldier. He will then get to work, issuing a flurry of executive orders from rejoining the Paris climate accords to cancelling the Keystone XL pipeline.•Harris will return to the Senate where she will preside over the swearing in of her replacement as California Seantor, Alex Padilla, as well as the two new Senators from Georgia – Jon Ossoff and Rev. Raphael Warnock. That will leave the Senate poised 50-50 between Republicans and Democrats, with Harris holding the casting vote.•Chuck Schumer, the Democrats leader in the Senate has said it has “three important things to do at once” – the second impeachment trial of Donald Trump, the confirmation of Joe Biden’s cabinet, and to pass additional Covid relief measures.•Yesterday there were 168,058 new Covid cases recorded, and a further 2,550 deaths. The Joe Biden administration takes over exactly a year since the first confirmed case of Covid in the US, with the total caseload at 24.2m and the death toll exceeding 400,000 Americans.•Before Biden’s inauguration, outgoing president Donald Trump will take part in a sending off ceremony at Joint Base Andrews. That’s expected at 8am ET, which is 1pm GMT. Trump will then take a final flight on Air Force One to Florida. Breaking convention, he will not attend the inauguration.

Joe Biden will be inaugurated as the 46th president of the United States in a ceremony in Washington DC at noon ET – that’s 5pm GMT.

Kamala Harris will join him as the first woman to be vice president, and with Indian and Jamaican heritage, the first woman of color to hold the office.

Before the ceremony Biden will attend church, and then once in office he is expected to visit the tomb of the unknown soldier. He will then get to work, issuing a flurry of executive orders from rejoining the Paris climate accords to cancelling the Keystone XL pipeline.

Harris will return to the Senate where she will preside over the swearing in of her replacement as California Seantor, Alex Padilla, as well as the two new Senators from Georgia – Jon Ossoff and Rev. Raphael Warnock. That will leave the Senate poised 50-50 between Republicans and Democrats, with Harris holding the casting vote.

Chuck Schumer, the Democrats leader in the Senate has said it has “three important things to do at once” – the second impeachment trial of Donald Trump, the confirmation of Joe Biden’s cabinet, and to pass additional Covid relief measures.

Yesterday there were 168,058 new Covid cases recorded, and a further 2,550 deaths. The Joe Biden administration takes over exactly a year since the first confirmed case of Covid in the US, with the total caseload at 24.2m and the death toll exceeding 400,000 Americans.

Before Biden’s inauguration, outgoing president Donald Trump will take part in a sending off ceremony at Joint Base Andrews. That’s expected at 8am ET, which is 1pm GMT. Trump will then take a final flight on Air Force One to Florida. Breaking convention, he will not attend the inauguration.

Related: Joe Biden heads to inauguration in city scarred by last days of Trump

208312021-01-20T07:10:00Zfalsefalse2021-01-21T03:17:43ZtrueUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/g6aj3falsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/d15a858f45a82cc9a06ff6968945b105bb4befcc/0_199_6048_3627/500.jpgfalseentrueHere’s what the Bidens would have seen, the finale of a historic day: Here’s more from the Guardian’s arts writer Adrian Horton: Hello again from the couch in front of Celebrating America, which has played so far as a technically competent, mostly seamless Zoom compilation of good, if bland and sometimes cringeworthy, intentions. The special is organized around a celebration of American people – those who feed us (food pantry workers, farmers), care for us (nurses and medical professionals), teach us (teachers), supply us (delivery workers) – represented by private citizens from around the country. But the main TV draw is, of course, the musical performances by an array of stars, noted more for their broad fanbases than any particular genre or tie to American democracy – Bruce Springsteen, the Foo Fighters, Justin Timberlake. Some of the performances have drawn praise amid the quick-shifting parade of this special’s desktop aesthetics: John Legend’s stirring rendition of I’m Feeling Good made the special’s trademark optimism momentarily arresting, while Yolanda Adams’s Hallelujah soundtracked a moving recap of nationwide tributes to the 400,000 Americans lost to the pandemic. Other performances, such as Bon Jovi’s treacly Here Comes the Sun were, uh, less well-received. “This Tim McGraw and FGL colorblind song is the absolute worst of country,” tweeted sociologist Tressie McMillan Cottom of the duet between country artists McGraw and Florida Georgia Line’s Tyler Hubbard. The former presidents hammered on the message of “unity” Biden chose as a theme for the day. “It was a reminder that we can have fierce disagreements and recognize each other’s common humanity and that as Americans we have more in common than what separates us,” Obama said. It’s a dissonant message, so soon after a deadly attack on the US Capitol, amid a growing threat of rightwing extremism. “Obviously there was a personal element to see my former vice-president become the 46th president. To see Kamala Harris as our first woman vice president,” Obama said. “But more broadly, I think inaugurations signal a tradition of a peaceful transfer of power that is more than two centuries old.” “I think if Americans would love their neighbor like they like to be loved themselves, a lot of the division in our society would end,” Bush said. “Everybody needs to get off their high horse and reach out to their friends and neighbors,” Clinton added. After a tribute to healthcare workers, Sandra Lindsay, an ICU nurse in new York who was the first person in the US to get the FDA-approved Covid-19 vaccine. “Our nurses care for thousands of Covid patients daily. We are often the last people to hold their hands,” she said. “It has taken a toll.” “Some days, I don’t know how I got through it,” she had told the New York Times in December. “Some days I didn’t know how I got home, but I knew I had to rest and get ready to come back and do it again. Because I did not want to leave my team to do it alone.” Here’s a video from when she received her vaccination: “This is what President Joe Biden has called upon us to summon now: the courage to see beyond crisis,” she said. “To do what is hard, to do what is good, to unite, to believe in ourselves, believe in our country, believe in what we can do together.” Harris, having been sworn in as the first Black and South Asian American vice president, said: “Even in dark times, we not only dream, we do.” The program turned to memorializing those who have died of Covid-19. Reminders that hundreds of thousands of Americans have died were present throughout the day, as we saw Biden, Harris and other leaders in face masks, maintaining physical distance, as Biden signed executive actions mandating masks on federal property, as we watch a virtual celebration in lieu of an Inaugural Ball. But in the middle of the program, the Celebration of America took a moment to mourn and remember, with a performance of Hallelujah by Yolanda Adams. And we’re getting a compilation of Broadway performers singing Seasons of Love from Rent... Marking the milestone of putting 2,102,400 minutes of the Trump administration behind. We’re now into the capstone of a secure (thanks to nearly 25,000 national guardsmen), surprisingly smooth inauguration day in Washington: the 90-minute celebrity extravaganza known as Celebrating America, a collection of music performances, tributes to America’s essential workers, and nods to better days ahead. And there’s no more perfect star to host such an event than Tom Hanks, the beloved everyman actor and one of the few cultural figures on whom most Americans can agree (for a full feel-good summary of Hanks’s legendary, evergreen niceness, please see Taffy Brodesser-Akner’s profile in the NY Times from 2019). From Forrest Gump to the heroic pilot Chesley “Sully” Sullenberger, Saving Private to Mr Rogers in A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood, Hanks has built a career on playing ordinary Americans rising to extraordinary occasions, men whose unremarkable decency, resilience and kindness evince extraordinary heroism. (Hanks was also the celebrity whose coronavirus diagnosis on 11 March, 2020 was for many the moment the direness of the pandemic really sank in.) On screen and off, Hanks tends to immediately impart a sense of security — the future in good hands — through the basic principle of caring for those around you under higher ideals. In a year during which much-lauded but deeply under-supported essential workers have kept the country functioning, for a program designed to impart the Biden administration’s intent to work for all Americans (Trump voters included), there are few cultural figures who could hold the center like Hanks. “I’ve never been more optimistic about America than I am this very day,” Biden said. “Because of you, democracy has prevailed. That’s why Jill and I, Kamala and Doug, wanted to make sure that our inauguration was not about us, but about you, the American people,” he said. Looking forward, he added, “America’s story depends not on any one of us, not on some of us, but on all of us – on we, the people. That’s the task before us, the only way we’ll get through the darkness around us.” “It’s humbling” to stand by the statue of Lincoln, Biden began. Once again, he is emphasizing “unity” tonight. The president is speaking overlooking the reflecting pool, where yesterday, the inauguration committee lit 400 lamps in remembrance of 400,000 people who have died of Covid-19 in the US. Bon Jovi did a cover of the Beatles’ “Here comes the sun” - sparking some vexation... It starts with a performance with Bruce Springsteen. Springsteen is performing Land of Hope and Dreams. Shortly before Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States, Dave Hayes – a longtime QAnon influencer who goes by the name Praying Medic – posted a photo of dark storm clouds gathering over the US Capitol on the rightwing social media platform Gab. “What a beautiful black sky,” he wrote to his 92,000 followers, appending a thunderclap emoji. The message was clear to those well-versed in QAnon lore: “the Storm” – the day of reckoning when Donald Trump and his faithful allies in the military would declare martial law, round up all their many political enemies, and send them to Guantánamo Bay for execution by hanging – was finally here. 20 January 2021 wouldn’t mark the end of Trump’s presidency, but the beginning of “the Great Awakening” Instead, Trump slunk off to Florida and Biden took the oath of office under a clear blue sky. Now QAnon adherents are left to figure out how to move forward in a world that, time and time again, has proven impervious to their fevered fantasies and fascistic predictions. And while some seem to be waking up to reality, others are doubling down, raising concerns among experts that the movement is ripe for even more extreme radicalization. “My primary concern about this moment is the Q to JQ move,” said Brian Friedberg, a senior researcher at Harvard’s Shorenstein Center, referring to “the Jewish question”, a phrase that white nationalists and neo-Nazis use to discuss their antisemitic belief that Jews control the world. Friedberg said that he had seen clear signs that white nationalists and alt-right figures, who have long disliked QAnon because it focused the Maga movement’s energies away from the “white identity movement”, were preparing to take advantage. “They view this as a great opportunity to do a mass red-pilling,” he said. Read more: The Department of Homeland Security says it will “cease adding individuals into” the Remain in Mexico program. The Trump administration policy, called the Migrant Protection Protocols, requires asylum seekers to wait in Mexico while awaiting their day in US immigration court. Some 60,000 people were sent across the border due to the policy, and many remain there in limbo, facing dangerous, unstable conditions. “Current COVID-19 non-essential travel restrictions, both at the border and in the region, remain in place at this time. All current MPP participants should remain where they are, pending further official information from US government officials,” the DHS said in a statement. The pandemic has caused immigration courts to pause the processing of migrants caught up in the Remain in Mexico policy, so those who are stuck across the border have faced an extra layer of uncertainty. Read more on the Biden administration’s immigration plans: Asked what it was like for Biden to head into the White House today, Psaki said Biden felt “an incredible sense of calm, some joy, and he felt like he was coming home”. On coronavirus relief, Psaki reiterated that Biden’s “preference is to move forward with a bipartisan bill”. But he is “not going to take any tools off the table” to pass measures. The administration here is in line with what Senate Democrats, including Bernie Sanders – who is at the helm of the Budget Committee – have said. “We should hear what my Republican colleagues have to say, but we are not going to spend months and months and not address the incredible pain millions of families are experiencing,” Sanders said. In the Senate, 60 votes are required to pass major legislation, but some things – including anything related to budget and taxation – can be passed with 51 votes, via a process called reconciliation. Psaki addressed the issue of misinformation: “There are a number of ways to combat misinformation. One of them is accurate information and truth and data and sharing information even when it is hard to hear.” She told the press she would return to daily briefings, including Covid-19 updates with health officials. “Not Saturday or Sunday; I’m not a monster,” she said. Joe Biden’s first call with a foreign leader will be with Justin Trudeau, the prime minister of Canada. Biden will speak with Trudeau on Friday. “I expect they will certainly discuss the important relationship with Canada as well as his decision on the Keystone pipeline,” Psaki said. Trudeau today congratulated Biden on his inauguration but also issued a statement saying “we are disappointed” in the US president’s decision to cancel the permit for the Keystone XL, the 1,200-mile pipeline meant to transport crude oil from Canada to Nebraska. Read more: “When the president asked me to serve in this role, we talked about the importance of bringing truth and transparency back to the briefing room,” Psaki said. She emphasized that while she may at times find herself at odds with the press pool, she is committed to bringing transparency to her role. White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki is addressing the press pool. Tomorrow, Dr Anthony Fauci will participate in the meeting of the World Health Organization, after Joe Biden reversed the US’s withdrawal, she said. Listing the executive actions that Biden enacted today, Psaki walked through a long list of moves to reverse Donald Trump’s legacy on immigration, the climate crisis, foreign engagement and other issues. Haines has become the first woman in the role of director of national intelligence. The Senate voted in favor of confirmation 84-10. Haines has received support from both Republicans and Democrats. She previously worked for the Obama and George W Bush administrations. At her confirmation hearing, she told senators that she would ensure that the FBI and homeland security department would look into connections between domestic extremist groups and foreign actors, responding to questions about how the agencies would handle the increasing threat of domestic rightwing extremists. “The intelligence community is focused on foreign intelligence and on foreign threats,” she said at her hearing. “But there is a critical role that it can play and does play in supporting the work that’s done by others.” Almost a thousand staff were on that massive video call. “I need your help badly,” Biden told them. “I’m going to make mistakes. When I make them, I’ll acknowledge them – and I’ll tell you. And I’ll need your help to help me correct them.” “The only thing I expect with absolute certitude is honesty and decency,” he told his appointees, looking back at him from little squares in a massive video call. “Remember – people don’t work for us. We work for the people... they pay my salary, they pay your salary. “We have an obligation,” he said. Joe Biden moved to reinstate the US to the Paris climate agreement just hours after being sworn in as president, as his administration rolls out a cavalcade of executive orders aimed at tackling the climate crisis. Biden’s executive action will see the US rejoin the international effort curb the dangerous heating of the planet, following a 30-day notice period. The world’s second largest emitter of greenhouse gases was withdrawn from the Paris deal under Donald Trump. Biden is also set to block the Keystone XL pipeline, a bitterly contested project that would bring huge quantities of oil from Canada to the US to be refined, and halt oil and gas drilling at Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante, two vast national monuments in Utah, and the Arctic national wildlife refuge wilderness. The Trump administration’s decision to shrink the protected areas of Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante will also be reviewed. The flurry of first-day action on the climate crisis came after Biden, in his inauguration speech, said America needed to respond to a “climate in crisis”. The change in direction from the Trump era was profound and immediate – on the White House website, where all mentions of climate were scrubbed out in 2017, a new list of priorities now puts the climate crisis second only behind the Covid pandemic. Biden has previously warned that climate change poses the “greatest threat” to the country, which was battered by record climate-fueled wildfires, hurricanes and heat last year. The re-entry to the Paris agreement ends a period where the US became a near-pariah on the international stage with Trump’s refusal to address the unfolding disaster of rising global temperatures. Countries are struggling to meet commitments, made in Paris in 2015, to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5C above the pre-industrial era, with 2020 setting another record for extreme heat. “It’s just a huge day to get rid of this myopic, benighted administration and welcome in a new president who manifestly is committed to strong, meaningful action,” said Todd Stern, who was the lead US negotiator in Paris. “Rejoining Paris is just the first step, but it’s a big first step.” Biden is expected to convene an international climate summit in the spring to help accelerate emissions cuts and will probably submit a new US emissions reduction goal to help it reach net zero emissions by 2050. “We can’t be afraid or diffident about exercising leadership again but we need a sense of humility in light of what has occurred over the past four years,” Stern said of America’s return to climate diplomacy. “The message is ‘we are back, let’s move hard.’ It will be deliberate, aggressive and strategic.” Gina McCarthy, Biden’s top climate adviser, said Biden will in all reverse “more than 100” climate-related policies enacted by Trump. Read more: Joe Biden is the first president in recent memory to take office without any of his cabinet confirmed. The process has been delayed by the ongoing pandemic, riots at the capitol, and Republican’s resistance to accepting the election results. Until now, incoming residents for the past 30 years had at least some of their cabinet confirmed by Inauguration Day. Today, Republican senator Tom Cotton – who had put a hold on the nomination of Avril Haines, Biden’s pick for director of national intelligence – said he’s ready to move forward with a vote. “For the information of all Senators who wanted know if we’d have a vote tonight specifically on the nomination of Avril Haines to be DNI,” he said. “I was the last person to object to holding that vote. I no longer object.” Meanwhile, Josh Hawley, the Republican senator of Missouri who was pictured raising a fist towards Trump supporters at the Capitol riot, had blocked consideration of Alejandro Mayorkas, Biden’s Homeland Security nominee. As Biden sat down to sign a stack of executive orders in the Oval Office on Wednesday, it was clear more had changed in the room than the administration. Trump’s portrait of Andrew Jackson – the censured and fellow populist 19th-century president – was replaced with Benjamin Franklin, meant to signal Biden’s interest in science, according to the Washington Post. Other intentional changes include a portrait of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and paired paintings of Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton – representing two people with vastly differing ideologies who worked together. Placed on the mantle and other shelving are now busts of Martin Luther King, Rosa Parks, and Robert Kennedy. Also notable are a bust of César Chávez, the American labor leader and Latin American activist, and a sculpture of the Chiricahua Apache Tribe, which belonged to late senator Daniel K Inouye, the first Japanese-American elected to both houses of Congress. Biden chose the Resolute desk from the six desks traditionally offered, the same one used by Trump and Obama. There have also been some cosmetic changes, including different rugs, curtains and wallpaper. We can’t help wonder if Biden is trying some feng shui to get rid of some of that stale energy. Bernie Sanders wrote in an op-ed for The Guardian today: “Democrats, who will now control the White House, the Senate, and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety.” A record-breaking 4,000 Americans are now dying each day from Covid-19, while the federal government fumbles vaccine production and distribution, testing and tracing. In the midst of the worst pandemic in 100 years, more than 90 million Americans are uninsured or underinsured and can’t afford to go to a doctor when they get sick. The isolation and anxiety caused by the pandemic has resulted in a huge increase in mental illness. Over half of American workers are living paycheck to paycheck, including millions of essential workers who put their lives on the line every day. More than 24 million Americans are unemployed, underemployed or have given up looking for work, while hunger in this country is at the highest level in decades. Because of lack of income, up to 40 million Americans face the threat of eviction, and many owe thousands in back rent. This is on top of the 500,000 who are already homeless. Meanwhile, the wealthiest people in this country are becoming much richer, and income and wealth inequality are soaring. Incredibly, during the pandemic, 650 billionaires in America have increased their wealth by more than $1tn. As a result of the pandemic education in this country, from childcare to graduate school, is in chaos. The majority of young people in this country have seen their education disrupted and it is likely that hundreds of colleges will soon cease to exist. Climate change is ravaging the planet with an unprecedented number of forest fires and extreme weather disturbances. Scientists tell us that we have only a very few years before irreparable damage takes place to our country and the world. And, in the midst of all this, the foundations of American democracy are under an unprecedented attack. We have a president who is working feverishly to undermine American democracy and incite violence against the very government and constitution he swore to defend. Against all of the evidence, tens of millions of Americans actually believe Trump’s Big Lie that he won this election by a landslide and that victory was stolen from him and his supporters. Armed rightwing militias in support of Trump are being mobilized throughout the country. In this moment of unprecedented crises, Congress and the Biden administration must respond through unprecedented action. No more business as usual. No more same old, same old. Democrats, who will now control the White House, the Senate and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety. As the incoming chairman of the Senate budget committee that is exactly what I intend to do. Read more: As Democrats take control of the Senate, Bernie Sanders has taken on his new role as chair of the powerful Senate Budget Committee. At the helm of the Budget Committee, Sanders will be in charge of the reconciliation process, which allows Congress to move through legislation without the 60-vote supermajority needed to overcome filibuster. Reconciliation can be used to move through key coronavirus relief measures, including stimulus payments. Sanders has said that he’d love for a bipartisan effort on coronavirus relief, but he won’t let a desire for bipartisanship delay action. “We should hear what my Republican colleagues have to say, but we are not going to spend months and months and not address the incredible pain millions of families are experiencing,” Sanders said. The president’s executive actions aim to reverse a long list of Trump policies. “There’s no time to start like today,” Biden told reporters in the Oval Office. “I’m going to start by keeping the promises I made to the American people.” Biden halted the US’s exit from the World Health Organization, installed a coronavirus response coordinator to oversee the distribution of vaccines, and extended a moratorium on evictions amid the coronavirus crisis. Turning toward immigration policy, he reversed a Trump travel ban aimed at Muslim-majority countries, and stopped funding for the construction of Trump’s border wall. Reversing Trump’s legacy, Joe Biden signed orders rejoining the Paris Climate Accords, mandating masks on federal property, among others. The first order he signed was a mask mandate on federal property, where he has jurisdiction. In all, Biden signaled he would sign 17 executive orders today. “The president wrote a very generous letter,” Biden said, of Donald Trump. “Because it was private, I won’t talk about it until I talk to him. But it was generous.” Chuck Schumer of New York spoke on the Senate floor, as majority leader. “This will be an exceptionally busy and consequential period for the US Senate. There is much to do,” Schumer said. “We are ready to get to work.” With their razor-thin majority, Democrats in the Senate will have to balance the impeachment trial of Donald Trump with an urgent need to push through coronavirus relief. To pass major legislation, a bipartisan, 60-vote supermajority will be required – but there’s a lot the Democrats can do with 51 votes, through a process called budget reconciliation. That’s it from me on this historic day. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said. Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court. Biden arrived at the White House for the first time as president. Biden walked along the last few blocks of the inaugural parade route before stepping onto the White House grounds. The new president will soon sign a series of executive orders to begin undoing Trump’s policies. Harris swore in three new Democratic senators, officially giving Democrats control of the Senate. The new vice-president swore in Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff of Georgia, who won their runoff races earlier this month, and Alex Padilla of California, who was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term. The Senate is now evenly split, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans, with Harris serving as a tie-breaking 51st vote. Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.” Maanvi will have more updates and analysis coming up, so stay tuned. Kamala Harris has just sworn in three new Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff of Georgia and Alex Padilla of California. Warnock and Ossoff won their Senate runoff races earlier this month, and Padilla was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term. The Senate is now officially split evenly, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans. With Harris serving as a tie-breaking 51st vote, Democrats take the Senate majority. Harris received a standing ovation from her former Senate colleagues as she took her seat to preside over the chamber for the first time as vice-president. Kamala Harris has arrived at the Capitol to swear in three new Democratic senators, giving her party control of the chamber. The Senate is now in session, and Kamala Harris will soon swear in three new Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff of Georgia and Alex Padilla of California. Warnock and Ossoff run their Senate runoff races earlier this month, and Padilla was appointed to serve out the remainder of Harris’ term. After the three senators are sworn in, the Senate will be evenly split, 50-50, between Democrats and Republicans. With Harris serving as a tie-breaking vote, Democrats will take control of the chamber. Amazon has published an open letter to Joe Biden, hours into his presidency, offering to help with efforts to distribute the Covid-19 vaccine. “We are prepared to leverage our operations, information technology, and communications capabilities and expertise to assist your administration’s vaccination efforts,” wrote Dave Clark, the head of Amazon’s consumer business. “Our scale allows us to make a meaningful impact immediately in the fight against Covid-19, and we stand ready to assist you in this effort.” In the letter, Clark said that Amazon has an agreement with a “licensed third-party occupational health care provider” to administer vaccines to its employees, including warehouse employees, some who have died from Covid-19. It is unclear whether Amazon had extended this offer to the Trump administration or if it has already been in talks with Biden’s team. The company had asked the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to give priority access to the vaccination for its front-line workers. While the agency has not singled Amazon out for priority, it has deemed essential workers not in healthcare as priority recipients in “Phase 1c” of vaccine distribution, which follows the vaccination of healthcare workers and people over 75. Disillusionment has come upon some believers of QAnon, the baseless conspiracy theory that a cabal of Satan-worshipping Democrats, celebrities and billionaires run the world while overseeing a pedophilic human trafficking scheme, as Joe Biden officially become president of the United States Wednesday afternoon. QAnon supporters believed that Wednesday’s inauguration ceremonies would bring a type of doomsday that would ultimately end with top Democrats being arrested and Donald Trump starting a second term. But things went peacefully. No Democrats were arrested. Trump, now a former president, is in Palm Beach. Screenshots of confused and disappointed QAnon supporters on online forums were shared on Twitter. One QAnon believer posted a comment titled “Anyone else feeling beyond let down now?” with a description that said: “It’s like being a kid and seeing the big gift under the tree thinking it is exactly what you want only to open it and realize it was a lump of coal the whole time.” Others said they felt sick and “sad and confused” as inauguration continued smoothly. To make things harder for believers, Ron Watkins, who moderated QAnon base 8kun, posted a message essentially telling supporters to go back to their regular lives. “We have a new president sworn in and it is our responsibility as citizens to respect the Constitution,” Watkins wrote. “As we enter the new administration please remember all the friends and happy memories we made together over the past few years.” Some people pointed out that QAnon has created real rifts between families and friends that will not be easily repaired even as their theories are debunked. Kamala Harris walked down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, where her office is. The new vice-president walked down the street while holding hands with her husband, second gentleman Doug Emhoff. When a reporter shouted at Harris asking how today feels, the vice-president responded she was just “walking to work”. Harris will soon swear in three Democratic senators -- Raphael Warnock, Jon Ossoff and Alex Padilla -- giving her party control of the chamber. Joe Biden made a couple stops as he walked toward the White House along the inaugural parade route. The president stopped to share a fist-bump with Al Roker. When the legendary weatherman asked Biden how today feels, the president responded, “Feels great.” The president also stopped to take a question from NBC News reporter Mike Memoli, who has covered Biden since 2007. Memoli asked Biden what this moments means for him, as it comes more than three decades after he first ran for president. Biden replied, “It feels like I’m going home.” Joe Biden has arrived at the White House for the first time as president. The new commander-in-chief walked onto the White House grounds, after getting out of his limo to walk the last few blocks to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. The new president is expected to sign a series of executive orders later this evening as some of his first matters of business after taking the oath of office this afternoon. A spokesperson for Donald Trump confirmed earlier today that he left Biden a note in the Oval Office, as outgoing presidents traditionally do for their successors. Joe Biden made some detours as he walked along Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House. At one point, the new president ran ahead to give Al Roker, America’s favorite weatherman, a fist bump. Biden also stopped to say hello to Muriel Bowser, the mayor of Washington, DC. Joe Biden has exited his limo to walk along some of the inaugural parade route with his wife, Dr Jill Biden, and their family. It was unclear whether the new president would walk along Pennsylvania Avenue, due to concerns about security and coronavirus. The Bidens are making their way to the White House, which will serve as their home for the next four years. Vice-president Kamala Harris was escorted to the White House by the Howard University marching band. Harris is an alumna of Howard, making her the first graduate of a historically black university to become vice-president. A small inaugural parade, led by the US Army band and a joint service honor guard, is now escorting Joe Biden to the White House. Presidential inaugurations usually include massive parades and balls to celebrate the incoming administration, but such events were obviously deemed impossible amid the coronavirus pandemic. The parade unfolded as the presidential motorcade drove Biden from 15th Street to the White House, at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Bernie Sanders explained to CBS News why he chose to wear a rather understated khaki coat and mittens to Joe Biden’s inauguration this morning. “You know, in Vermont, we know something about the cold,” the senator said. “We’re not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm.” Sanders’ outfit delighted many inauguration viewers, and Twitter users jumped to photoshop the former presidential candidate into various absurd locations. Before leaving office, Donald Trump reportedly issued a directive for thirteen members of his family to receive Secret Service protection for another six months. The Washington Post reports: Under federal law, Trump, his wife Melania and their 14-year-old son are the only members of his immediate family entitled to Secret Service protection after they leave office. The couple will receive it for their lifetimes, and Barron is entitled to protection until he turns 16. Former Vice President Mike Pence and his wife Karen Pence will also receive continued Secret Service security for the next six months under the same law governing protection. But Trump wanted every family member who had been protected by the Secret Service during his administration to be covered for another six months, according to the people familiar with his directive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe security arrangements. That means the expensive, taxpayer-funded security will continue for his daughter Ivanka Trump and her husband Jared Kushner, their three children, his son Donald Trump Jr. and his four children, his son Eric Trump and his wife Lara and his daughter Tiffany Trump. As is typical with presidential transitions, there are already new photos up in the West Wing to celebrate Joe Biden’s inauguration. A CNN reporter shared these photos from the White House: Earlier today, White House reporters captured photos of bare walls in the West Wing, after photos of Donald Trump were taken down in preparation for Biden’s inauguration. The teams who clean the White House between occupants and change the furniture and décor to the wishes of the incoming president are having an unusual time on this inauguration day. On the one hand, they have more of a task because the presidential mansion will need to be deep-cleaned to purge it of any traces of the coronavirus that might be lingering, during an ongoing pandemic. But on the other hand they have more time to get the job done, because instead of hosting his successor for tea and a tour, Donald Trump departed the White House with his wife Melania shortly after 8am on Wednesday, and Joe and Jill Biden are not expected to arrive at the White House until around 4pm ET. Trump hosted several events at the White House last year that became notorious as super-spreader events for coronavirus, including the former president catching the disease himself. By 4pm today, all that will have been expurgated. NBC News reported: ‘This year, the most important aspect of the move is cleaning it out, doing the deep clean,’ said Martha Kumar, the director of the White House Transition Project and author of the book ‘Before the Oath: How George W. Bush and Barack Obama Managed a Transfer of Power.’ ‘It’s more than just the residence... you’ve had all the parties where the virus has spread, and you’ve had (the virus) in the West Wing, and you’ve had it in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. They have rooms with ceilings 25 feet high. Cleaning that place is tough.’ Before the Bidens move in, the White House will have received a top-to-bottom cleaning totaling nearly half a million dollars... That’s on top of the normal changeover costs that come when a new administration takes over. The new tab included a $44,000 charge for carpet cleaning, $29,000 for curtain cleaning in both the White House and the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, and a $115,000 charge for new carpets in the East Wing, West Wing and EEOB, NBC News reported. Around 95 people work for the White House residence staff — butlers, chefs, ushers, housekeepers and florists, many of whom stay on for decades. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris have just laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery. Barack Obama, Michelle Obama, George W Bush, Laura Bush, Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton were also present for the wreath-laying. As the former presidents put their hands over their hearts for the playing of “Taps,” Biden, the new commander-in-chief, offered a salute. The presence of the former presidents underscored Donald Trump’s absence, and it raised questions about whether the outgoing president will participate in similar ceremonial events in the future. Former presidents typically attend major events for their successors, but Trump has never been one for tradition, demonstrated by the fact that he skipped Biden’s inauguration today. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris have arrived at Arlington National Cemetery to lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. In his campaign speeches, Biden frequently mentioned that his late son, Beau, who died in 2015, was a veteran. Recent former presidents, with the exception of Donald Trump of course, are accompanying Biden and Harris to Arlington. Poet Amanda Gorman was widely praised for her recitation of a poem at Joe Biden’s inauguration this afternoon. At 22, Gorman is the youngest inaugural poet in recent history. If you missed Gorman’s stirring performance, watch it here: Now that Joe Biden has officially taken over the White House, people are spotting updates on the White House’s new website. Biden has released a Spanish version of the website – something that was also maintained by Barack Obama and George W Bush – after Donald Trump took down the White House’s Spanish communication website after taking office in 2017. The threat of climate change is also back on the website and is listed as one of Biden’s top priorities. Once Trump took office, his administration started to delete any mentions of climate change from federal websites. Biden’s team has also removed Trump’s 1776 report, which he made as an attack against the New York Times’ 1619 Project, which casted a spotlight on the year the first slave ship arrived in America. Now that Trump’s presence is no longer on the official White House website and its social media accounts, the National Archives and Records Administration just launched the Donald J. Trump Presidential Library website that includes an archive of the White House’s website and social accounts during Trump’s presidency. Joe Biden reviewed the troops for the first time as commander-in-chief, after taking the oath of office earlier today. The troop formations, which included color guards and members of all branches of the military, marched past the Capitol for the review. Biden stood alongside the vice-president, Kamala Harris, and his wife, first lady Jill Biden, as the troops marched past them. Doug Emhoff, Harris’ husband, was also present. As he left the event, the new president was seen getting into “the Beast,” the heavily secured car that will transport Biden from place to place. The new license plate on the car reads “46,” an homage to Biden becoming the 46th president of the United States. Joe Biden just completed his first action as president at the US Capitol: Signing the Inauguration Day Proclamation and his nominations for cabinet and sub-cabinet positions. Biden has spent the last few weeks announcing his cabinet picks, and Congressional hearings for two of his secretaries began yesterday. Later this afternoon, Biden is expected to sign 17 executive actions including a package of immigration actions that will immediately reverse elements of Donald Trump’s immigration policies, including an end to the travel ban and an attempt from Trump to exclude undocumented people from the US Census. Biden is scheduled to sign these orders around 5 pm DC time. Here’s where this historic day stands so far: Joe Biden was sworn in as the 46th president of the United States. In his inaugural address, the new president called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” Biden said. Kamala Harris became the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court. Trump left for his Florida resort, Mar-a-Lago, before Biden was sworn in. The outgoing president held a farewell event at Joint Base Andrews before taking his final trip on Air Force One. Trump told the gathered crowd, “Have a good life. We’ll see you soon.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. During his inaugural address, Joe Biden held a moment of silence to honor the more than 400,000 Americans who have died of coronavirus. Biden and Kamala Harris held a memorial service for coronavirus victims at the Lincoln Memorial yesterday, the same day that the US death toll surpassed 400,000. “In my first act as president, I’d like to ask you to join me in a moment of silent prayer to remember all those who we lost in this past year to the pandemic, those 400,000 fellow Americans -- moms, dads, husbands, wives, sons, daughters, friends, neighbors, and co-workers,” Biden said in his inaugural speech. “We’ll honor them by becoming the people and the nation we know we can and should be." In the moments following Joe Biden taking his oath of office, Pope Francis, the head of the Catholic Church, published an open letter to Biden congratulating him on his entry into office. “I extend cordial good wishes and the assurance of my prayers that Almighty God will grant you wisdom and strength in the exercise of your high office.” Pope Francis alluded to the Covid-19 pandemic, calling it the “grave crises facing our human family” and said response to it calls for “farsighted and united responses”. “I pray that your decisions will be guided by a concern for building a society marked by authentic justice and freedom,” Pope Francis wrote in his letter. “I likewise ask God, the source of all wisdom and truth, to guide your efforts to foster understanding, reconciliation and peace within the United Stations and among the nations of the world in order to advance the universal common good.” Biden is the second Catholic US president, the first being John F Kennedy, and he attended a pre-Inauguration mass this morning at the Cathedral of St Matthew the Apostle in Washington. At least two Republican senators praised Joe Biden’s inaugural speech, saying it represented a necessary moment of unity for the nation. Mitt Romney of Utah said Biden’s speech was “very strong and very much needed”. “We as a nation come together if we are told the truth,” Romney said. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska echoed that sentiment, saying Biden’s speech was “very uplifting” and “very well done”. “All the other speakers really seemed to complement the president’s words,” Murkowski said. “I thought it was very well done. I thought it was what we needed.” Richard Luscombe reports from West Palm Beach: Donald Trump arrived at Mar-a-Lago, his glitzy resort on Florida’s Palm Beach island, just as the final moments of his turbulent presidency ticked away. Supporters lined the route from Palm Beach international airport to the island bridge to welcome Trump and the former First Lady, his wife, Melania, home. A parade of a dozen or more vehicles ferried the ex-president away from the airport as Air Force One refueled and prepared for its empty return trip to Washington. Trump’s cavalcade drove slowly east along Southern Boulevard with the former president seen grinning broadly, waving and flashing thumbs up at those who turned out to greet him. He left a scene of deflation in his wake. Supporters rolled up their flags, stowed signs in their cars and departed quietly. Within 15 minutes of his passing, a main thoroughfare of “Trump country” was once again a construction site, and only a handful of law enforcement officers rolling up security tape remained. Vice-president Kamala Harris saw off her predecessor, Mike Pence, who is now en route to his home state of Indiana. Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff, shared a few words and laughs with Pence and his wife, Karen, before they departed. Typically, the incoming president also participates in a departure ceremony for the outgoing president, but that obviously didn’t happen because Donald Trump left Washington before Joe Biden was sworn in. As Pence left, reporters heard Harris saying, “Be well and safe travels.” In his last act as president, Donald Trump pardoned Albert Pirro Jr., the ex-husband of Fox News host Jeanine Pirro, in the last hour of his presidency. Pirro was convicted of conspiracy and tax evasion. Pirro appears to be the person on Trump’s long list of pardons that he has granted within the last 24 hours. Pirro joins 73 others, including Steve Bannon and rapper Lil Wayne, whose loyalty to Trump has paid off in forgiveness for federal crimes. Just minutes before Joe Biden became president of the United States, Trump landed in Palm Beach, Florida, after giving a farewell speech at Joint Base Andrews. Joe Biden has taken over the @POTUS Twitter handle, and he used his first tweet to promise “bold action and immediate relief for American families”. “There is no time to waste when it comes to tackling the crises we face,” the new president said. “That’s why today, I am heading to the Oval Office to get right to work delivering bold action and immediate relief for American families.” Kamala Harris has also taken over the @VP Twitter account. Shortly after Harris was sworn in, the vice-president’s account shared this message: “Ready to serve.” Kamala Harris was just sworn in as vice president, officially making her the first woman, Black American and Asian American to hold the title. People around the country celebrated her swearing-in, noting the moment marks many firsts in American history. That supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina and woman of color to serve on the court, administered Harris’ oath added another layer of poignancy to the occasion. Perhaps the reaction from those celebrating the moment in history can be summed up by Barack Obama exclaiming “Alright!” after Harris finished saying her oath. The inaugural ceremony concluded with a benediction by Reverend Silvester Beaman. Echoing the theme of unity in Joe Biden’s inaugural speech, Beaman said, “We will make friends of our enemies.” Biden then left the ceremony as “The Stars and Stripes Forever” played. The new president hugged one of his predecessors, Barack Obama, as he walked out. Amanda Gorman received a standing ovation after she finished delivering her poem for the inauguration. The 22-year-old artist concluded her poem with these words: “There is always light if we are brave enough to see it. If only we are brave enough to be it.” After Joe Biden finished his inaugural speech, Garth Brooks sang “Amazing Grace.” He asked the crowd and everyone watching at home to join him in singing the last verse. Poet Amanda Gorman then recited a poem for the event. The 22-year-old artist is the youngest inaugural poet in recent history. Joe Biden said America would provide a positive example to the world under his leadership as president. “We’ll lead not merely by the example of our power, but by the power of our example,” Biden said. Acknowledging the challenging times ahead for the country as it continues to battle coronavirus, Biden said, “Folks, this is a time of testing.” The president added, “We will be judged, you and I, by how we resolve these cascading crises of our era. Will we rise to the occasion? Will we master this rare and difficult hour?” Biden wrapped up his speech after about 21 minutes, marking a rather short inaugural address. Joe Biden also used his inaugural address to make a pledge to the country’s global allies, after four years of Donald Trump’s “America first” agenda. “We will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again, not to meet yesterday’s challenges but today’s and tomorrow’s challenges,” the new president said. Joe Biden condemned the Capitol rioters who tried to overturn the will of the people by violently disrupting the congressional certification of his victory in the presidential election. “It did not happen. It will not happen: not today, not tomorrow, not ever,” the president said. Biden also pledged to be a “president for all Americans,” including those who did not support him, and he called for the nation to make a fresh start today. “We must reject the culture in which facts themselves are manipulated and even manufactured,” Biden said. Joe Biden argued that unity was the only successful path forward for the country. “I know speaking of unity can sound to some like a foolish fantasy these days. I know the forces that divide us are deep and they are real. I also know they are not new,” the president said in his inaugural address. “Unity is the path forward.” Biden described America’s history as a “constant struggle” between the country’s professed ideals and its lived reality. The president then pointed to Kamala Harris being sworn in as vice-president as an indication of how much positive change the nation can achieve. “Don’t tell me things can’t change,” Biden said. Joe Biden said the nation “must confront” white supremacy, possibly becoming the first president to utter that phrase in an inaugural address. “The dream of justice for all will be deferred no longer,” the president said. Biden also called on the nation to unify after four years of Donald Trump’s divisive presidency. “This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward,” the president said. Joe Biden received a standing ovation as he took the podium to deliver his inaugural address, his first speech as president. After thanking those present at the inauguration, Biden said, “This is America’s day. This is democracy’s day.” The president referenced the violent attack on the Capitol two weeks ago, saying it underscored the value of American democracy. “We’ve learned again that democracy is precious,” the president said. “And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.” Joe Biden has been sworn in as president, bringing an end to four years of Donald Trump’s leadership in Washington. Biden was sworn in by supreme court chief justice John Roberts, and his wife, Dr Jill Biden, held the Bible as he took the oath. The Bible has been is Biden’s family since 1893 and was used during his swearing-in ceremonies as vice-president. There is now a musical interlude between the swearing-in of Kamala Harris and the swearing-in of Joe Biden. Jennifer Lopez, dressed in all white, performed a rendition of “This Land Is Your Land” after Harris took the oath of office. The song then transitioned into “America the Beautiful”. Kamala Harris has been sworn in as vice-president -- becoming the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve in the role. Harris was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina to serve on the supreme court. Harris’ husband, Doug Emhoff, held the Bible as she took the oath. Lady Gaga is now singing the National Anthem at Joe Biden’s inauguration, using a gold microphone. The artist wore a black and red ball gown with a gold dove near her shoulder and a long train. Lady Gaga arrived in Washington and greeted some of the National Guard members who have been providing security for the inauguration. Echoing Amy Klobuchar, Roy Blunt used his remarks at the inauguration to address the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month. The Republican senator said the attack “reminds us that a government designed to balance and check itself is both fragile and resilient”. Roy Blunt, the top Republican on the Senate rules committee, spoke after Amy Klobuchar, and the senator joked about the snow at the Capitol today. “I should’ve known when Senator Klobuchar got involved there would be a touch of snow involved,” Blunt said. Klobuchar launched her presidential campaign on a very snowy day in her home state of Minnesota. Senator Amy Klobuchar celebrated today as a new start for the country, two weeks after the Capitol was attacked by a violent mob. “This is the day when our democracy picks itself up, brushes off the dust and does what America always does — goes forward,” the Democratic senator said. Klobuchar added that this moment was a chance to “rededicate ourselves to this cause”. Inauguration attendees have taken their seats, and the ceremony is now officially underway. Amy Klobuchar, the incoming Democratic chairwoman of the Senate rules committee, kicked off the ceremony by welcoming everyone to this historic event. Klobuchar, who ran against Joe Biden in the Democratic primary, said the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month “awakened” the nation to the need to protect American democracy. Joe Biden, the president-elect, and his wife, Dr Jill Biden, have arrived on the Capitol platform for his inauguration. Biden will be sworn in as president by supreme court chief justice John Roberts in about 40 minutes. His inauguration comes more than 30 years after Biden launched his first bid for president. Kamala Harris, the first African American to serve as vice-president, and Barack Obama, the first African American to serve as president, shared a fist bump as Harris arrived on the Capitol platform. And a meteorological update: as Joe Biden and Harris prepared to be sworn in, it started snowing at the Capitol. Kamala Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff, have arrived on the Capitol platform for the inauguration. Harris will be sworn in as vice-president by supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor, the first woman of color on the court. Harris will be the first woman, the first African American and the first Asian American to serve as vice-president. The vice-president-elect was escorted by Eugene Goodman, the Capitol Police officer who was hailed as a hero after he led rioters away from the Senate chamber during the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month. This is quite the split-screen. As Mike Pence arrived on the Capitol platform, Donald Trump and his family were walking out of Air Force One for the last time. The outgoing president will be at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida as his successor, Joe Biden, is sworn in. Vice-president Mike Pence and second lady Karen Pence have arrived on the Capitol platform for the inauguration of Joe Biden. Pence is attending the inauguration but skipped Donald Trump’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews this morning. As Pence took his position on the Capitol platform, Trump was arriving in Florida on Air Force One. As former presidents arrived at the Capitol for Joe Biden’s inauguration, Air Force One touched down in Florida. Donald Trump did not go back to the press cabin to talk to reporters during his trip down to Florida, according to the White House pool. Trump will be the first president in more than 150 years to not attend the inauguration ceremony of his successor. His vice-president, Mike Pence, is in attendance. The supreme court justices have arrived and are taking their seats for Joe Biden’s inauguration. Justice Sonia Sotomayor will first swear in Kamala Harris, and chief justice John Roberts will then swear in Biden. Sotomayor was the first woman of color to be confirmed as a supreme court justice, and she will swear in the first woman of color to become vice president. The former presidents and former first ladies in attendance today are now being introduced at the inauguration. Bill and Hillary Clinton were introduced first, followed by George W and Laura Bush. Barack and Michelle Obama are now making their entrance. Bernie Sanders arrived at Joe Biden’s inauguration in his typical understated manner, wearing a khaki coat and mittens. The outfit sparked some jokes that the former presidential candidate looked like he was on his way to the post office. A BuzzFeed News reporter noted that Sanders received the mittens from a supporter two years ago. They are made from repurposed wool sweaters and recycled plastic bottles. One could almost imagine the credits rolling on a screen as Donald Trump and his family departed on Air Force One toward Florida, the morning sun gleaming down on the plane as Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” – a popular funeral song – played at Joint Base Andrews, where Trump delivered his farewell speech. “The soundtrack that we continue to hear throughout these scenes is surreal, perhaps surreally appropriate,” noted CNN anchor Anderson Cooper on live TV as the plane could be seen preparing for takeoff, his co-anchor laughing. While Trump may have been trying to take on a somber tone during his farewell speech, ominously saying at the end “have a good life, we will see you soon”, the song that played immediately after is one that is notable for its presence at celebrations. “It’s fun to stay at the Y.M.C.A.!” could be heard on full blast as Trump waved to the crowd after climbing the steps of Air Force One, his family following behind him. (They, unfortunately, did not break out into the song’s dance before entering the plane.) Trump’s music preferences at rallies and events has been a point of interest during his four years in office. “Y.M.C.A.” appears to be a favorite, along with “Gloria” by Laura Branigan and “Don’t Stop Believin’” by Journey, both of which played at Joint Base Andrews before Trump gave his farewell speech Wednesday morning. Though multiple left-leaning artists have publicly asked Trump to stop playing their music at his events, including Victor Willis of the Village People and Bruce Springsteen, Trump usually plays whatever his heart desires, which means a lot of Elton John (“Tiny Dancer” was playing as Air Force One was taxiing). Joe Biden and Kamala Harris released their inauguration playlist earlier this week, ushering out an era of “Y.M.C.A.” and into one with Mary J. Blige, SZA and conflict-free Springsteen. An update on the supreme court: a court spokesperson told CNN that the building did receive a bomb threat, but it was not evacuated. The court and its surrounding grounds were checked for possible threats. The US Capitol feels calm, serene and rather chilly. The lawn where you would normally expect thousands of people is mostly barren except for some physically distanced plastic chairs, a bank of TV cameras and some portable toilets. Every now and then a helicopter buzzes overhead. The National Mall has become a sea of flags in lieu of Americans who cannot attend. Pennsylvania Avenue is jarringly deserted: cars, buses and more toilets. But celebratory flags are visible in the distance. Two giant TV screens have been playing interviews with former presidents and showing footage of old inaugurations - a sharp reminder of the missing crowds this time. However, guests are beginning to gather at the west front, bedecked in red, white and blue, and the Marine band is playing under the Capitol dome. So as he fulfills a half-century ambition to become US president, Joe Biden will have at least a flavour of pomp and circumstance. Capitol Police office Eugene Goodman, who was applauded for leading rioters away from the Senate chamber during the attack on the Capitol earlier this month, escorted Kamala Harris into the building. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris have arrived at the Capitol for the inauguration. They will be sworn in as president and vice-president in about an hour and a half. Mike Pence, the outgoing vice-president, has arrived at the Capitol to attend Joe Biden’s inauguration. Donald Trump is not attending the inauguration and is already en route to Florida, but Pence previously announced he would be attending. Pence skipped Trump’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews. The supreme court is reportedly being evacuated because of a bomb threat, as Washington prepares for the inauguration of Joe Biden. A CNN reporter noted an increased National Guard presence after the threat was reported: There are expected to be 25,000 National Guard troops in DC today to provide security for the inauguration. Security concerns around the inauguration have intensified since the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month. Paul Ryan, the former Republican speaker of the House, is attending Joe Biden’s inauguration today. Asked about the significance of today’s events, Ryan told reporters, “Our institutions were tested this year, and our institutions passed the test. I’m here out of respect for the peaceful transfer of power and for the institutions.” Ryan, who ran for vice-president in 2012, added, “Joe Biden is the legitimately elected president of the United States, and I’m here to honor this process.” Donald Trump and his allies have of course continued to insist (with absolutely no valid evidence) that Biden won the presidential election because of widespread fraud. Those lies culminated in the violent attack on the Capitol two weeks ago, as Congress certified Biden’s victory in the election. Barack and Michelle Obama have arrived at the Capitol to attend the inauguration of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Bill and Hillary Clinton have also arrived at the Capitol. In a parallel universe where Hillary Clinton won the 2016 election, today might have marked her second inauguration. The Guardian’s Sam Levine reports on one of Joe Biden’s first expected executive orders: One of Joe Biden’s first actions as president will be to reverse Donald Trump’s effort to exclude undocumented immigrants from the census data used to determine how many seats in congress each state gets. The US has long allocated seats based on the total population of states, regardless of immigration status. The Trump move was widely seen as a political one that benefitted Republicans. In 2015, Thomas Hofeller, a widely respected GOP redistricting expert, wrote that drawing Texas districts based only on eligible voters would be “advantageous to Republicans and non-Hispanic whites.” The move will immediately end a nearly three-year effort from the Trump administration. It began in 2018 with a failed effort to add a citizenship question to the census - a move that was subsequently blocked by the supreme court. After that decision, Trump issued two executive orders; one instructed the census bureau to exclude undocumented immigrants from the apportionment count, while a second to use existing government data to produce records of non-citizens. Biden’s executive order will undo them both. The Census Bureau faced enormous challenges in trying to get everyone to respond to the decennial survey this year because of the Covid-19 pandemic as well as deep distrust of the Trump administration, particularly in immigrant communities. The Biden-Harris transition said in a statement that it would ensure the bureau had enough time to produce accurate data. “President-elect Biden will sign an Executive Order to revoke the prior Administration’s orders setting out an unlawful plan to exclude noncitizens from the census and apportionment of Congressional representatives,” it said in a statement. “President-elect Biden will ensure that the Census Bureau has time to complete an accurate population count for each state. He will then present to Congress an apportionment that is fair and accurate so federal resources are efficiently and fairly distributed for the next decade.” Marco Rubio, the acting Republican chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, said he will not be attending the inauguration today. “I am in DC but will not be attending todays inauguration because I am working on addressing the remaining objections to an expedited Senate confirmation of President-Elect Biden’s nominee for Director of National Intelligence,” Rubio said in a tweet. “It’s important we do this as soon as possible.” Avril Haines, Joe Biden’s nominee to serve as the director of national intelligence, testified before the Senate intelligence committee yesterday and pledged to keep politics out of her decisions if confirmed. Barack Obama congratulated Joe Biden as the former vice-president prepares to take the oath of office in a couple of hours. “Congratulations to my friend, President @JoeBiden! This is your time,” the former president said in a tweet, which included a photo of the two. Obama and his wife, former first lady Michelle Obama, will be in attendance for today’s inauguration. George W Bush and Laura Bush have arrived at the Capitol to attend Joe Biden’s inauguration. The former president and former first lady waved at reporters as they walked into the building. A spokesperson for Bush announced earlier this month that he would attend the inauguration. With Donald Trump on his way to Florida, Bush is the only Republican president in attendance for today’s inauguration. And the surgeon general, Dr Jerome Adams, has confirmed that the incoming administration has asked for his resignation. In a statement, Adams said, “During my tenure I have visited with people from all across America. And despite all that you may read on social media or see on tv, I can assure you that from Alaska to Alabama, from Maine to Montana, and from California to the Carolinas, Americans mostly want the same thing. They want a fair shot at being their best and healthiest self, and to be able to support the health and well being of their families.” Joe Biden is expected to sign a flurry of executive orders after taking the oath of office at noon, and the president-elect is already making immediate staffing decisions as well. According to the Washington Post, Biden intends to quickly request the resignation of the surgeon general, Dr Jerome Adams. The Post reports: Adams, who was nominated by President Trump, was sworn in as surgeon general on Sept. 5, 2017, to serve the office’s standard four-year term, which expires this September. The anesthesiologist and former Indiana health commissioner — a political independent who crafted a close relationship with then-Indiana Gov. Mike Pence — had emerged as a key spokesman for Trump’s coronavirus response, regularly appearing on national TV and using social media to advocate for public health measures such as social distancing. However, Adams’s visibility also made him a target last spring for Democrats, who accused him of defending Trump’s statements. Biden has nominated Vivek H. Murthy, surgeon general under President Barack Obama and a close adviser of the president-elect, to be the nation’s new surgeon general, but Murthy first needs to undergo Senate confirmation hearings, which have yet to be scheduled. The people with knowledge of the decision said the incoming Biden administration would choose an acting surgeon general as soon as Wednesday, bypassing Deputy Surgeon General Erica Schwartz, a career civil servant. Joe Biden will be sworn in at the Capitol today, but the signs of destruction there are still visible, two weeks after a pro-Trump mob stormed the building. A CNN reporter spotted Capitol Hill workers removing scaffolding from a newly repaired window that was damaged during the attack. Moments after Donald Trump departed Washington, Joe Biden’s Twitter account shared this message: “It’s a new day in America.” That may foreshadow the themes of Biden’s inaugural speech. The president-elect based his campaign on the promise to restore “the soul of the nation,” and he is likely to voice a similarly hopeful message today. The Guardian’s Daniel Strauss reports: Donald Trump left a note for his successor before he left the Oval Office for the last time, a White House spokesperson for the Trump administration confirmed to the Guardian. The note to incoming president Joe Biden continues a longstanding tradition between successive presidents, even of the opposing parties. The letters are meant to stay private but oftentimes eventually get leaked out to the public. When Barack Obama left office in 2017, he wrote a note for Trump. George W Bush too left a note for Obama in 2009. The tradition of the departing letter, oftentimes both formal and heartfelt, goes back to when Ronald Reagan left office. In a painfully fitting end to his presidency, Donald Trump took off on Air Force One as Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” played on the tarmac. Here’s a sample of the lyrics from the famous song: “Regrets, I’ve had a few / But then again, too few to mention / I did what I had to do / And saw it through without exemption... But more, much more than this / I did it my way”. Trump is en route to Mar-a-Lago in Florida and will not be in attendance for Joe Biden’s inauguration. This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam. Joe Biden will take the oath of office in less than three hours, officially kicking off his four-year term as president of the United States. The president-elect is currently attending a church service at Cathedral of St Matthew the Apostle in Washington, his only event before the inauguration. The incoming vice-president, Kamala Harris, and first lady, Dr Jill Biden, are also in attendance. The church service is another reminder that Biden will be just the second Catholic to serve as US president, after John F Kennedy. Air Force One has taken off to head to Florida, accompanied by music blaring Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” as if it was a Trump campaign rally. The most senior Republican to attend Trump’s farewell event at Joint Base Andrews was his chief of staff, Mark Meadows. Trump walked across the tarmac to shake the loyalist’s hand before processing past troops from different branches of the military, who were standing to attention and wearing face masks to prevent the spread of coronavirus, with the pandemic wildly out of control across the US. The Trumps did not wear facemasks, a characteristic of the outgoing president throughout the pandemic. Then the Trumps ascended into Air Force One, just as Joe and Jill Biden were seen leaving Blair House, near the White House, to travel to a church service with the rest of the Republican leadership, and incoming vice-president Kamala Harris. As we wait for Donald Trump to depart for his last flight on Air Force One Senator-elect Rev. Raphael Warnock has just reminded us on social media that as well as a change of president in the White House, there will also be a change in the Senate today. This afternoon Kamala Harris, having been sworn in as vice president, will swear in Warnock along with Jon Ossoff and Alex Padilla to the Senate. That will leave it split 50-50 between Democrats and Republicans, with Harris having the casting vote. Donald Trump’s family were at the military airfield for the outgoing president’s arrival. The ceremony has something of a Trump rally feel to it – including starting 35 minutes late to ratchet up the tension. It began with a military band playing Hail to the Chief and the 21 gun salute that Trump had wanted. Trump invited the outgoing first lady Melania Trump to say a few words, and then listed a series of achievements he claimed for his administration, including creating the US Space Force, tax cuts, and his repeated (and repeatedly debunked claim) that he built the greatest economy the US has ever seen. “Everything is complex, be careful” he said, and then took advance credit for “incredible numbers” that are going to be coming under the Biden administration. He described the development of a coronavirus vaccine in nine months as “a medical miracle”, although in truth the US is not the only country to have aided the development of vaccines in such short order. Trump said his administration had “left it all on the field”, and will not be saying to themselves they could have worked harder. He began to conclude his address by saying “You are amazing people and this is a great great country it is an honor and privilege to have been your president,” while the crowd chanted “Thank you Trump.” He promised that he would be watching and listening, that the future of the country was great, and he wished the incoming administration success and luck, and said he thought they would be successful. He said they had the foundations to do something really spectacular, and that his administration had “put it in a position where it’s never been, before despite being hit with the worst plague since 1917.” The presidential helicopter has landed at the military air field now where Donald Trump plans a brief speech and farewell event. The famous green helicopter is taxiing on the strip now. We see family members, including Ivanka Trump and her husband Jared Kushner and their children, and his adult sons Donald Jr and Eric, waiting in the gusty cold conditions for the outgoing president. As Donald Trump is in the air in Marine One, Senate Republican majority leader Mitch McConnell and House Republican minority leader Kevin McCarthy are going to church with Joe Biden, Kamala Harris and their families. Trump’s own event will be devoid of those senior Republicans, and his vice-president, Mike Pence. It leads to the dramatic split screen vision of Trump leaving the White House for the last time, talking to a small cluster of press outside the door, while “the Beast”, the fortified presidential vehicle is outside Blair House ready to take Joe and Jill Biden to the church service. Normally, the outgoing president and his successor would ride in “the Beast” together to the US Capitol for the inauguration, but as we have heard so much about, Trump is the first president for more than 150 years not to fulfill his obligation to pass the torch seamlessly and respect the incoming president personally by attending the swearing in. Marine One has not flown directly towards nearby Joint Base Andrews. The green presidential helicopter is circling over downtown Washington, flying past the Washington Monument after taking a spin around the US Capitol. This is typically what the outgoing president and first lady do after their successors have been sworn in. From their low-altitude flight path, the Trumps would have been able to see the US Capitol heavily guarded by up to 25,000 National Guard troops, two weeks after the Congressional seat was sacked by fanatical supporters egged on by the president at a rally prior, as they tried to overturn the result of the election by force. Here are some more pictures of Donald Trump’s unprecedented departure from the White House by helicopter after declining to attend the inauguration of his successor later today. Donald Trump has left the White House for the last time as president. He is being flown in Marine One to Joint Base Andrews in Maryland where he will be holding a “sending off” ceremony which was due to start at 8am ET/1pm GMT. He briefly spoke to reporters as he departed, saying he had accomplished a lot in office and that he and his wife Melania loved the American people. After the ceremony at the military base he will then fly to Florida to his Mar-a-Lago resort. He will not be attending Joe Biden’s inauguration. Marine One is currently landed on the White House lawn, waiting to take Donald Trump away, although he doesn’t seem in any hurry to go. Aides have been photographed carrying boxes out to it. Rep. Ilhan Omar’s initial reaction to today’s events is short and sweet – “praise be to god”. Reuters have rounded up some key reactions from world leaders to Joe Biden’s impending arrival in the White House. Here’s a selection: British prime minister Boris Johnson: I look forward to working with him Biden, and with his new administration, strengthening the partnership between our countries and working on our shared priorities: from tackling climate change, building back better from the pandemic and strengthening our transatlantic security. European commission president Ursula von der Leyen: The United States is back. And Europe stands ready. To reconnect with an old and trusted partner, to breathe new life into our cherished alliance. I look forward to working together with Joe Biden. German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier: Today is a good day for democracy. In the United States of America, it has faced tremendous challenges and endured. Despite the attempts to tear at America*s institutional fabric, election workers and governors, the judiciary and Congress, have proven strong. I am greatly relieved that, today, Joe Biden is being sworn in as president and will be moving into the White House. I know many people in Germany share this feeling. Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte: We are looking forward to the Biden presidency, with which we will start working immediately in view of our presidency of the G20. We have a strong common agenda, ranging from the effective multilateralism that we both want to see, to climate change, green and digital transition and social inclusion. We are expecting Donald Trump to depart the White House and head for Joint Base Andrews within the next half hour for his “sendoff ceremony”. In the meantime, here are some of the defining images and footage of his time in office, put together by our interactive team and picture desk – updated to include the scenes of the pro-Trump mob ransacking the US Capitol on 6 January. The Biden team have also announced another intention of the incoming administration – to dismantle Trump’s 1776 commission. CNN report: Joe Biden will issue an executive order to dissolve the 1776 commission, a panel stood up by President Donald Trump as a rebuttal to schools applying a more accurate history curriculum around slavery in the US. The commission had been formed as an apparent counter to The New York Times’ 1619 Project, a Pulitzer Prize-winning project aimed at teaching American students about slavery that Trump, speaking last fall, had called “toxic propaganda.” The announcement comes just two days after the commission issued an inflammatory report on Martin Luther King Jr. Day and just hours before Biden will take over from Trump, whose time in office was marked by racist statements and actions. In its report released Monday, the commission asserted that “the Civil Rights Movement was almost immediately turned to programs that ran counter to the lofty ideals of the founders,” specifically criticizing affirmative action policies and arguing that identity politics are “the opposite of King’s hope that his children would ‘live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.’” Larry Arnn, the president of Hillsdale College, who had drawn criticism for his comments in 2013, when he said state officials had visited the college to see whether enough “dark ones” were enrolled, was chosen to chair the commission. Carol Swain, who once wrote that Islam “poses an absolute danger to us and our children,” was chosen as vice chair. Read more here: CNN – Biden to rescind 1776 commission via executive order The current banner on the White House website may be “promises made, promises kept” but that doesn’t appear to be the case when it comes to “draining the swamp’. Donald Trump campaigned for the presidency in 2016 with that promise and energised a lot of support. One of his final acts in office though has been to undo his one concrete attempt at it. In the early hours the president rescinded an an executive order he had issued years earlier to bar former White House employees from lobbying the government after they leave their jobs. Originally issued in 2017, the New York Times reports that “It expanded on rules adopted during the Obama administration and included a five-year ban for former officials lobbying the agencies they once worked for.” With the revocation of the order, Trump’s newly unemployed aides – and presumably members of his own family – are now once again free to become lobbyists or to work for foreign governments. The new order states: “Employees and former employees subject to the commitments in Executive Order 13770 will not be subject to those commitments after noon January 20, 2021.” Associated Press remind us that president Bill Clinton signed a similar order with weeks left on his final term, allowing former aides to go directly into lobbying after leaving his administration. European commission president Ursula von der Leyen has spoken of her relief at the end of the Trump administration, and linked the storming of the US capitol by a pro-Trump mob on 6 January with the murder of British MP Jo Cox at the hand of a right wing extremist. She said in a speech to the European parliament that part of the solution is to clamp down on the tech giants who are able to publish “fake news” with immunity. The relief that many of us are feeling about the change of administration in Washington should not blind us to the fact that, although Donald Trump’s presidency may be history in just a few hours, his movement will not. More than 70 million Americans voted for him in the election. Just a few days ago, several hundred of them stormed the Capitol in Washington, the heart of American democracy. That is what happens when words incite action. That is what happens when hate speech and fake news spread like wildfire through digital media. They become a danger to democracy. Last August, several hundred right-wing extremists tried to storm the Reichstag building in Berlin. It is only thanks to the courage and vigilance of a handful of police officers that they were not successful. And we remember Jo Cox, the British Labour Member of Parliament who was murdered by a right-wing extremist in June 2016, during the torrid days leading up to the Brexit referendum. A deed which still makes us shudder today. We must impose democratic limits on the untrammelled and uncontrolled political power of the internet giants. We want the platforms to be transparent about how their algorithms work. We cannot accept a situation where decisions that have a wide-ranging impact on our democracy are being made by computer programs without any human supervision. Von der Leyen went on to say that while it may have been right for Twitter to switch off Donald Trump’s account, “such serious interference with freedom of expression should be based on laws and not on company rules.” Kevin Liptak at CNN this morning has an incredibly stark write-up of Trump’s era – and the humbling end of it for a president who has prided himself on his tough guy image and being a “winner”: The all-consuming, camera-hungry, truth-starved era that fixated the nation and exposed its darkest recesses officially concludes at noon Wednesday. The president, addled and mostly friendless, will end his time in the capital a few hours early to spare himself the humiliation of watching his successor be sworn in. He departs a city under militarized fortification meant to prevent a repeat of the riot he incited earlier this month. He leaves office with more than 400,000 Americans dead from a virus he chose to downplay or ignore. Even many of Trump’s onetime supporters are sighing with relief that the White House, and the psychology of its occupant, may no longer rest at the center of the national conversation. At least some of the 74 million Americans who voted for Trump in November are sad to see him go. Scores of them attempted an insurrection at the US Capitol this month to prevent it from happening at all. The less violent view him as a transformative president whose arrival heralded an end to political correctness and whose exit marks a return to special treatment for immigrants, gays and minorities. One thing Trump’s presidency undoubtedly accomplished: revealing in stark fashion the racist, hate-filled, violent undercurrents of American society that many had chosen previously to ignore. It became impossible to overlook as Trump’s presidency concluded with violent riots of White nationalists and neo-Nazis at the Capitol. Read more here: CNN – Trump departs Washington a pariah as his era in power ends Vermont’s Sen. Bernie Sanders writes for us this morning: In this moment of unprecedented crises, Congress and the Biden administration must respond through unprecedented action. No more business as usual. No more same old, same old. Democrats, who will now control the White House, the Senate and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety. As the incoming chairman of the Senate budget committee that is exactly what I intend to do. What does all of this mean for the average American? It means that we aggressively crush the pandemic and enable the American people to return to their jobs and schools. This will require a federally led emergency program to produce the quantity of vaccines that we need and get them into people’s arms as quickly as possible. It means that during the severe economic downturn we’re experiencing, we must make sure that all Americans have the financial resources they need to live with dignity. We must increase the $600 in direct payments for every working-class adult and child that was recently passed to $2,000, raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, expand unemployment benefits and prevent eviction, homelessness and hunger. It means that, during this raging pandemic, we must guarantee healthcare to all. We must also end the international embarrassment of the United States being the only major country on Earth not to provide paid family and medical leave to workers. It means making pre-kindergarten and childcare universal and available to every family in America. Despite what you may have heard, there is no reason why we cannot do all of these things. Read more here: Bernie Sanders – Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual. Here’s where to start Reuters report that the Kremlin has said this morning it remained committed to extending the New Start nuclear arms control treaty with the United States and would welcome efforts promised by the administration of president-elect Joe Biden to reach agreement. The New Start (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) accord, which was signed in 2010 and expires in February, limits the numbers of strategic nuclear warheads, missiles and bombers that Russia and the United States can deploy. “Russia and its president are in favour of preserving this agreement,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters on a conference call. “If our American colleagues will in fact demonstrate a political will to preserve this pact by extending it, this can only be welcomed.” Biden’s choice for secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said on Tuesday that the incoming US administration would seek to extend the pact and decide how long an extension to pursue. Russian President Vladimir Putin last year called on Washington to extend the last major nuclear arms pact between the two countries for a year without any conditions. A failure to extend New Start could fuel a potential arms race and tensions between Moscow and Washington – a relationship which is expected to be very different from the cosiness of the Trump-Putin era. Here’s Amanda Holpuch in New York and Lauren Gambino in Washington with a bit more detail on that proposed Biden immigration plan for us: Biden administration officials briefed reporters on Tuesday on the incoming president’s day one immigration plans. They include executive orders to reverse Trump’s attempt to exclude undocumented people from the census, end the travel ban, roll back a Trump-era policy on deportation priorities and end an emergency declaration Trump used to divert funds to the wall on the US-Mexico border. Biden will also unveil legislation that creates a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, calls for increased technology at the border and attempts to address the root causes of immigration. He will also issue a presidential memo to underline the administration’s support for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) program, which allows people who were brought to the US as children without legal documents to temporarily get work visas and be protected from deportation. Trump ended Daca in 2017, but the decision was embroiled in legal challenges and eventually rejected by the supreme court. In another memo, Biden will extend a program that protected roughly 4,000 Liberians in the US who hold a protected immigration status known as Deferred Enforced Departure (DED). An interior enforcement executive order will reverse an order Trump signed five days after he took office that dramatically expanded interior immigration law enforcement by no longer prioritizing the deportation of criminals. Biden will also end the travel ban. The order will also instruct the state department to restart visa processing for the affected countries and to develop a proposal to remedy harms caused by the bans, including those who had visas denied. It also allows for increased screening and vetting of travelers through information sharing with foreign governments. The incoming administration emphasized it plans to address the root causes of migration, including by sending aid to the Central American countries where the climate crisis, violence, corruption and poverty have driven an increase in family immigration. Read more here: Biden plans day-one immigration moves to reverse ‘inhumane’ Trump policies Joe Biden is expected to sign 15 executive orders and make further instructions after he is sworn in as US president undoing policies put in place by outgoing president Donald Trump and making his first moves on the pandemic, climate change and racial justic. Biden will sign the executive orders and memorandums in the Oval Office in the afternoon, and ask agencies to take steps in two additional areas, said incoming Press Secretary Jen Psaki. Introducing the plans, the Biden-Harris transition team said in a statement: The president-elect’s day one executive actions will protect workers from Covid-19, including by ensuring that federal employees and contractors wear masks and follow other CDC guidelines, setting an example for employers around the country. They will provide relief to American workers who have lost their jobs or had their hours or wages slashed through no fault of their own, by extending the pause on student debt and the eviction and foreclosure moratorium. They will help spur the growth of American manufacturing and supply chains, competitiveness of our industries, and creation of good union jobs by directing agencies to consider revising vehicle fuel economy and emissions standards, methane emissions standards, and appliance and building efficiency standards. And, they’ll take steps to prevent workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, and revoke President Trump’s damaging executive order which limited critical diversity and inclusion training in the workplace. On Covid the president-elect is proposing to: Launch a “100 Days Masking Challenge” and a mask mandate on federal property and for federal employees. Re-join the World Health Organization reversing the Trump policy to withdraw from the body. Create the position of Covid-19 Response Coordinator reporting directly to the president, and restoring the NSC Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense to focus on domestic and global biological threats. Extend the federal eviction and foreclosure moratoriums until at least 31 March, 2021. Extend the student loan pause until at least September 30, 2021. Seek a $1.9 trillion spending proposal aimed at accelerating the distribution of coronavirus vaccines while providing economic relief to millions of Americans hurt by the pandemic. Sign an executive order that helps schools and businesses reopen safely, expands coronavirus testing and establishes clearer public health standards. On the environment, including a broad heading of “Roll back president Trump’s environmental actions in order to protect public health and the environment and restore science” Biden intends to: Rejoin the Paris Agreement on climate change, which will come into effect in thirty days time. Issue a sweeping executive order on the climate crisis that will ask all federal agencies to review Trump policies and address those harmful to health or damaging to the environment. Reimpose methane pollution limits for new and existing oil and gas operations repealed by Trump. Using the government procurement system – which spends $500 billion every year – to make federal facilities more reliant on clean energy and purchase zero-emissions vehicles. Ban new oil and gas permitting on public lands and waters, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Cancel the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline, which would carry oil from Canada to the United States. On immigration, the set of actions are: Repeal the ban on almost all travel from some Muslim-majority countries. Send to Congress a sweeping immigration bill that could legalize millions of immigrants living in the United States without legal permission. Reinstate the DACA program allowing “Dreamers” – people who were brought to the United States illegally as children – to remain in the country. Reverse Trump’s policy that separated immigrant parents from their children at the border, including ending the prosecution of parents for minor immigration violations, and prioritize the reunification of any children still separated from their families. Reverse Trump’s more restrictive asylum policies, such as imposing additional restrictions on anyone traveling through Mexico or Guatemala and attempting to prevent victims of gang and domestic violence from receiving asylum. End Trump’s National Emergency declaration that allowed him to shift federal funds from the Department of Defense to build a wall along the US southern border. Order an immediate review of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for vulnerable populations who cannot find safety in their countries severely affected by violence or disaster. In addition, Biden intends among his first acts: Ask all US agencies to create an action plan to address racial inequality. Order every administration appointee to sign an ethics pledge to ensure that officials act in the interests of the American people and not for personal gain. Issue an executive order to make sure federal anti-discrimination statutes prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. Today’s inauguration ceremony will be quite unlike any seen in Washington DC before. Kevin Freking at Associated Press has put together a handy guide of what is different this year. Joe Biden’s oath of office is actually the only essential part of the day. The Constitution sets out a 35-word oath for the new president. Most presidents make it 39 by tacking on “so help me God” – a tradition whose origins are unclear. Chief Justice John Roberts will swear in Biden; Justice Sonya Sotomayor will swear in Kamala Harris as vice president. The ceremony will start at 11am in Washington – 4pm in London – and Biden will be sworn in at noon ET (5pm GMT). Harris is sworn in before that. Biden then gives a speech, which is usually designed to set the tone and the policies the new administration will pursue. Biden’s theme is “America United” – a stark contrast to Donald Trump’s 2017 speech which spoke of “American carnage”. There won’t be crowds as usual because of the Covid pandemic. Trump began his term as president with press secretary Sean Spicer arguing with reality over the size of the crowd at the 2017 inauguration. At least Trump will this time be justified in saying that he had a bigger crowd than someone else. About 200,000 small US state and territorial flags have been installed on the National Mall instead of a crowd, representing those who can’t attend. Vice president Mike Pence and most members of Congress are expected to attend. Pence is notably preferring the inauguration to attending Donald Trump’s sendoff ceremony at Joint Base Andrews earlier in the day (8am ET/1pm GMT). Former presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton and former first ladies Michelle Obama, Laura Bush and Hillary Clinton are all also expected to attend. The traditional Pass in Review ceremony where the new commander-in-chief inspects their troops will take place – but participants will socially distance to deter the spread of coronavirus. There will be no traditional congressional lunch. Biden, Harris and the former presidents and their partners will then participate in a wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery’s Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. After that the traditional inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House has been dramatically scaled back to little more than a photo opportunity, and there will be no crowds in attendance. Biden will be escorted by the military. In place of inauguration parties and balls, Democratic Parties and advocacy groups will hold virtual balls, and actor Tom Hanks will host a 90-minute prime-time TV special celebration in the evening. Images of a heavily militarized Washington have left local residents disoriented, and prompted condemnation from military veterans in Congress “I expected this in Baghdad. I never imagined this in Washington,” said Seth Moulton, a Massachusetts congressman who fought in Iraq, to the Guardian. “It’s hard to see the pantheon of our democracy fortified like the war zones I used to know,” tweeted Jason Crow, a Colorado congressman, saying that he had fought in Iraq and Afghanistan “so we could enjoy peace at home”. Other American veterans said the images from Washington were surreal, but not exactly surprising. Matt Gallagher, a writer and Army veteran who served in Iraq, described “this strange sense of inevitability”, as he looked at the photographs of concertina wire and traffic control points and “young national guardsmen, many of whom were probably born around 9/11”. There’s been plenty of pushback to attempts to compare the current state of Washington DC to a war zone. “The troops are not speaking a foreign language, manning checkpoints, traveling in convoys so secure that they would be authorized to shoot cars that drive in between them. They’re not raiding homes. Let’s not trivialize military occupation,” Laila Al-Arian, an American journalist, wrote last week. Tom Porter, a policy spokesman for the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, told the Guardian that veterans had been making plenty of dark jokes about Washington’s Green Zone, asking whether the city was now disposing of trash and human waste by setting it on fire with jet fuel in giant “burn pits”, as the military has done in the Middle East. “Those that have actually been to a war zone know that our city and Capitol does not actually resemble a war zone,” he said, adding that he thought officials should have chosen a different name for the secure area of Washington during inauguration. Read more of Lois Beckett’s report here: ‘This is not freedom’: a militarized US Capitol is being called a ‘war zone’ The most high profile of Donald Trump’s pardons, to his former aide Steve Bannon, may have repercussions within the Republican party, according to Josh Gerstein and Kyle Cheney at Politico. Bannon was a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. He was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the US-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty. Gerstein and Cheney write: While Trump did not issue a self-pardon covering his own actions on 6 January, and he turned aside pardon requests from others accused of inciting or participating in the assault on Congress, Bannon was also among those who stoked anger in advance of the riots. “All hell will break loose tomorrow. It will be quite extraordinarily different. All I can say is strap in,” Bannon said on his War Room podcast on 5 January. “Tomorrow is game day. So many people said, man, if I was in revolution I would be in Washington. Well, this is your time in history.” Bannon frequently used similar wartime imagery to urge Trump supporters to contest the 2020 election results. He has also been a frequent antagonist of Sen. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, most notably when he helped propel the doomed candidacy of Republican Roy Moore — derailed by sexual assault allegations — over McConnell’s preferred candidate Luther Strange in an Alabama special election. With Trump’s impeachment trial looming, the Bannon pardon could push some Republican senators toward convicting Trump and potentially banning him from running for president again, but will probably be seen as less provocative than would a self-pardon or pardons for his closest family members. Read more here: Politico – Trump pardons dozens, including Steve Bannon, as he exits White House Axios this morning have a story labelled a scoop about the extreme precautions that the Biden team are taking to prevent the president-elect being exposed to Covid. It marks a stark contrast to the laissez-faire attitude of the Trump White House to enforcing anti-Covid guidelines. Hans Nichols writes: The incoming administration is planning extraordinary steps to protect its most prized commodity, Joe Biden, including requiring daily employee Covid tests and N95 masks at all times, according to new guidance sent to some incoming employees Tuesday. The president-elect is 78 years old and therefore a high risk for the virus and its worst effects, despite having received the vaccine. While President Trump’s team was nonchalant about Covid protocols — leading to several super-spreader episodes — the new rules will apply to all White House aides in “high proximity to principals.” Besides protecting Biden, he and his team want to model best practices and are insisting that West Wing officials abide by the highest standards. Biden is asking the nation to “mask up” for the first 100 days of his administration. The guidance was sent to incoming staffers who will have “proximity” to any White House “principals,” generally defined as heads of departments like the National Security Council and the National Economic Council. Read more here: Axios – Joe Biden’s Covid-19 bubble Our picture desk has put together some of the most striking images as Washington DC prepares for the inauguration of Joe Biden while swamped with security after the 6 January assault on the Capitol. You can view the gallery here: Washington on edge before Biden inauguration - in pictures Yesterday the US recorded 168,058 new coronavirus cases, and 2,550 further deaths. According to Johns Hopkins university figures the US has now recorded a total of 24,233,738 cases and 401,443 deaths. The Covid Tracking Project records that 123,820 were hospitalized with Covid in the US. CNN reported overnight that the Trump administration has left the incoming Biden administration with ‘confusing’ Covid-19 vaccine numbers and the states in limbo. States across the country say they’re running low on coronavirus vaccine supply, with many officials insisting the vaccine delivery numbers reported by the Trump administration don’t align with what they are seeing on the ground. A source close to the Biden transition team said there is enormous concern among the incoming administration about the accuracy of the numbers that have been released by the federal government. It was only within the last few days that the transition team was given access to Tiberius, the system that shows states how many doses are available to them and allows states to determine delivery locations. Despite frustration, the source said Biden’s team has been hesitant to broadcast just how they were left in the dark out of concern that the Trump administration would stop cooperating altogether. Joe Biden must overcome a pandemic, rebuild an economy, tackle racist insurrectionists and the ex-president who incited them, and reassert American leadership across a distrustful world. Somehow he must do all that while also confirming his senior officials in a Senate with no working majority. So far the Biden team shows no sign of limiting its ambition in terms of what it hopes Congress will take up – and what it will push through executive action – in its first days and weeks in power. In addition to signing a flurry of executive orders, rejoining the Paris climate accords and restarting the Iran nuclear deal, Biden will also propose sweeping immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship for the undocumented. Comprehensive reform of the nation’s broken immigration system proved beyond the capabilities of both Bush and Obama. It was Bush’s failure to enact immigration reform in 2007 that effectively marked the end of his second-term agenda, as Republicans turned towards a nativist agenda that Donald Trump placed at the heart of his campaign and presidency. The Biden team may be marking a sharp break with the Trump years in prioritizing immigration reform. But what are their realistic prospects for legislative progress in the first year of the Biden presidency? Obama veterans think there may be one good reason why Biden can feel more optimistic about political progress than their own experience in 2009, when Republicans obstructed their action from the outset, would dictate. That reason is the legacy of one Donald Trump. “I think the difference between this and 2009 is that I believe there’s going to be a significant number of Republicans in Congress who think that their party needs a course correction here,” said Joel Benenson, who served as strategist and pollster to both Obama and Hillary Clinton’s campaigns. “It doesn’t mean they are suddenly going to be liberal Rockefeller Republicans, but the damage that Trump has done to the party and its image – and it has exacerbated through the events of the last two weeks – is giving them pause. “I don’t think it’s a major shift ideologically, but they have to recognize they are losing large and important sections of the electorate, and that’s going to be problematic for them. They know for their long-term prospects they can’t just be a base party. The biggest political failure of Donald Trump is that he didn’t fundamentally understand that to win the presidency, you have to win the center.” Read more of Richard Wolffe’s analysis here: Biden prepares ambitious agenda even as he cleans up Trump’s mess Donald Trump will be the first outgoing sitting president not to attend his successor’s inauguration by choice for some considerable time. For most of the existence of the United States, the handover between presidents has been seen as symbolic of the peaceful transfer of power. Other presidents not to attend their successor’s inauguration have, of course, included the four US presidents who were assassinated while in power: Abraham Lincoln (1865), James Garfield (1881), William McKinley (1901), and John F. Kennedy (1963). In 1974, president Richard Nixon had resigned in disgrace, and did not attend the swearing in of Gerald Ford in the White House. And in 1921 Woodrow Wilson had intended to be there when Warren Harding was inaugurated, and indeed travelled with him to the Capitol for the ceremony, but was then taken ill. It was in the 19th century that presidents decided not to show up out of grievance or animosity, as this history lesson from Jacey Fortin in the New York Times makes plain: “It’s usually a sign that American society is in the midst of major political feud,” the presidential historian Douglas Brinkley said. “The fact that the incoming and outgoing presidents can’t shake hands and co-participate in an inauguration means that something’s off-kilter in the democracy.” That was the case for John Adams, his son John Quincy Adams and Andrew Johnson. When the presidency of John Adams ended in 1801, the United States was in its infancy and had never seen a head of state transfer power to a political opponent — in this case, Thomas Jefferson. On Inauguration Day, Adams left Washington quietly, before dawn, in a stagecoach bound for Baltimore. John Quincy Adams, the sixth American president, followed in his father’s footsteps when he declined to attend the swearing-in of the man who had unseated him: the populist Andrew Jackson. Like his father, Adams had differences with his successor that were not just political. The men also disliked each other. The next president to snub his predecessor was Johnson. The animosity between Ulysses S. Grant, who had led the Union to victory in the Civil War and won the election, and Johnson, a Southerner who opposed Reconstruction, was clear. It culminated in Johnson’s refusal to attend the inauguration in 1869 — a decision that was so last minute that contemporary reports claimed a carriage arrived to collect him on the morning of the ceremony and was turned away. Read more here: New York Times – Trump is not the first president to snub an inauguration Here’s a reminder of what happened in 2017, and that you won’t be seeing similar scenes today. Former president Barack Obama and his wife Michelle warmly welcomed Donald and Melania Trump to the White House before Trump’s inauguration. Trump will be staying away from Joe Biden’s inauguration today. Instead we have the prospect of a Donald Trump sending off ceremony, which Adam Gabbatt has previewed for us. Trump is due to leave the White House just before 8am, headed for Joint Base Andrews, the military base in Maryland used by Air Force One. The White House has issued invitations for a ceremony at the base, with attendees told to arrive at 7.15am and the event due to start 45 minutes later – that’s at 1pm if you are, like me, in the UK. Few details have been released about the event, but Trump is reportedly keen on a lavish affair, featuring a 21-gun salute, a color guard, a military band and reams of supporters, CNN reported. In a sign that Trump’s aides may be struggling to gather a large crowd, however, guests have been told they can bring up to five other people, and invitees even included Anthony Scaramucci, the extremely short-lived former White House communications director who has become a vocal Trump critic. A further blow to Trump’s designs on an ostentatious farewell came when the Pentagon reportedly said it would not hold an armed forces farewell tribute for the outgoing president. After the ceremony Trump will fly to the Mar-a-Lago compound in Florida that is set to become his home. Air Force One will then return to Maryland where it will be at the future disposal of the newly inaugurated president Joe Biden. Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown writes for us today, saying that Joe Biden can’t heal America without help from the rest of the world: As the US president-elect finally takes the oath of office in Washington DC, the rest of the world desperately needs him to effect a sea change. If his first task is to reunite a divided America, his second is to end American isolationism: to show Americans that they need the world, and show the world that we still need America. Given the intertwined triple threats of the pandemic, economic collapse and climate catastrophe, his presidency will be defined not by the previous benchmarks of 100 days, but rather by its first 10 or 20 days. The Trump impeachment trial notwithstanding, day one will see Biden delivering on his plans to roll out mass vaccination and to reboot the ailing US economy by forcing the biggest fiscal stimulus in history through Congress. Given that body’s new political makeup and Biden’s own inclinations, his multi-trillion-dollar plan will be greener than anything ever contemplated by US lawmakers. But Biden must then go global. His presidency will be forged or broken on the anvil of those existential crises, and the internationalist in him knows that not one of these three domestic objectives – a virus-free, an economically resilient and a pollution-free US – can be fully realised without multilateral cooperation. Yet this is something that economic nationalists in both the US’s main political parties have not just rejected but scorned. Read more here: Gordon Brown – Joe Biden can’t heal America without help from the rest of the world Joe Biden shed a tear yesterday as he took to the stage to deliver a farewell address to a Delaware crowd ahead of his inauguration, reports David Smith. Speaking at the Major Joseph R ‘Beau’ Biden III National Guard/Reserve Center, named after Biden’s late son, who died of brain cancer in 2015, the president elect said things “can change, they can and they do”. “I know these are dark times but there’s always light,” he said. “I’m truly honoured to be your next president and commander-in-chief and I’ll always be a proud son of the state of Delaware.” He paraphrased James Joyce and nearly broke down with emotion as he said: “When I die, Delaware will be written on my heart.” His one regret, he said, was the absence of his son Beau Biden, who died from brain cancer in 2015. “We should be introducing him as president,” he said. A quick snap from Reuters here on what will be one of the most pressing foreign policy issues to confront the new Biden-Harris administration: Iran. Iranian president Hassan Rouhani has this morning urged president-elect Joe Biden to return to a 2015 nuclear deal and lift the sanctions on his nation. Biden has previously said that the United States will rejoin the pact that includes restrictions on Iran’s nuclear work if Tehran resumes strict compliance. “The ball is in the US court now. If Washington returns to Iran’s 2015 nuclear deal, we will also fully respect our commitments under the pact,” Rouhani said in a televised cabinet meeting. “Today, we expect the incoming US administration to return to the rule of law and commit themselves, and if they can, in the next four years, to remove all the black spots of the previous four years,” he said. “US President Donald Trump’s political career is over today and his ‘maximum pressure’ policy on Iran has completely failed,” Rouhani said. “Trump is dead but the nuclear deal is still alive.” Tensions have grown between Tehran and Washington since 2018, when U.S. President Donald Trump exited the deal between Iran and six world powers that sought to limit Tehran’s nuclear programme and prevent it developing atomic weapons. Washington reimposed sanctions that have damaged Iran’s economy. Iran, which denies ever seeking nuclear arms, retaliated to Trump’s “maximum pressure” policy by gradually breaching the accord. Tehran has repeatedly said it can quickly reverse those violations if US sanctions are removed. Even in the last days of the Trump administration, it has continued to attempt to apply more pressure to Iran, including imposing new sanctions in the last week. Mike Pompeo’s likely replacement, Antony Blinken who is Biden’s choice for secretary of state, said on Tuesday the United States would not take a quick decision on whether to rejoin the pact. Normally quiet streets around US state capitol buildings have looked more like battlegrounds recently, putting those who live and work there on edge and instilling a sense of foreboding, reports Andrew Selsky for Associated Press. More than most people, these Americans will have front-row seats on whether the change of leadership in the White House will lead to a lessening of tension. They’ll be watching what the next chapter brings from storefronts and the porches and stoops of their own homes. Some expect Joe Biden to bring a unifying tone when he’s inaugurated as president on Wednesday, but say that alone won’t be enough to bring unity. How the people react will be key. Jonathan Jones’ front-row seat to what happens next is his restaurant that is decorated with Black Lives Matter signs and art near the Oregon State Capitol. Epilogue Kitchen and Cocktails has been vandalized by a white supremacist. One day, police showed up as Jones and his friends were being accosted by neo-fascist Proud Boys. The police at first confronted Jones’ group as if they were the threat. “There’s not a person who stood with me that day who didn’t think that they might die,” Jones said. “And the most awful part was not knowing if it was going to come from the police or from the Proud Boys.” Jones plans on listening to Biden’s inaugural address. “I hope that he does not call for unity with neo-fascists, because there cannot be unity with people who want to see me dead,” Jones said. In Washington state, a neighborhood next to the Capitol in Olympia boasts mid-century and 100-year-old homes. “It’s a very charming, calm, nice place to walk a dog and chat with the neighbors on the porch,” one woman told AP. But in recent weeks, frequent protests involving people in tactical gear and armed with guns have created a climate of fear. People shout into megaphones, loud trucks drive down narrow streets, residents are called names or harassed, media helicopters and police planes fly overhead. “There’s no retreat, because it’s your house, it’s where you live. It’s been a little jolting, and exhausting,” said the woman, who is so afraid for the safety of herself and her family that she spoke to a reporter only on condition she not be identified. She said she is optimistic that Biden and vice president-elect Kamala Harris will be able to accomplish many things. “But I’m not sure that will change the real divisions we’ve all seen,” she said. “People are behaving so differently, openly, that I don’t know moving forward as a country if we’ll be able to find each other again.” Brian Henderson, minister of First Baptist Church of Denver that sits across an avenue from the shuttered Colorado Capitol, was so close to the upheavals of 2020 that he was struck in the left knee with a pepper ball. Henderson had been handing out water from the front steps of his small brick church as thousands battled police during riots over George Floyd’s killing. Many neighboring businesses and state government buildings have boarded up their windows and doors in anticipation of possible violence but the church has not, to avoid giving the wrong message. “We can’t let fear stop us from doing what we have to do,” Henderson said. Henderson said he will watch the inauguration, “take a big deep breath and go, ‘Phew! We made it. A long four years.”’ Outgoing president Donald Trump’s last act in office was to issue 143 people with pardons or clemency. Among the most notable names on the list were: Steve Bannon, 67, was a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. He was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the US-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty. Elliott Broidy, a major Republican party fundraiser, pleaded guilty in October to acting as an unregistered foreign agent, admitting to accepting money to secretly lobby the Trump administration for Chinese and Malaysian interests. He has been pardoned. Broidy held finance posts in Trump’s 2016 campaign and on his inaugural committee. Former Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick was sentenced in 2013 to 28 years in prison following his conviction on two dozen charges including racketeering, bribery and extortion from a conspiracy, which prosecutors said had worsened the city’s financial crisis. Kilpatrick, 50, once seen as a rising star in the Democratic party, received one of the longest corruption sentences ever handed to a major US politician. Lil Wayne, 38, whose real name is Dwayne Michael Carter, pleaded guilty in federal court in December to illegally possessing a firearm and faced up to 10 years in prison. In October, Wayne tweeted a picture of himself with Trump following what he called a “great meeting” with the president. He has been pardoned. Sholam Weiss was convicted of bilking $125m from National Heritage Life Insurance and its elderly policyholders. He fled the United States and was sentenced in absentia in 2000 to 845 years in prison, but he was eventually extradited from Austria. Read more here: Trump pardons and commutations – the full list Last night, outgoing president Donald Trump has delivered a “mission accomplished” valedictory address that failed to name Joe Biden or acknowledge the legitimacy of his election victory. “We did what we came here to do – and so much more,” said Trump, wearing a dark suit, white shirt and blue tie, as he reeled off a list of achievements and linked them to his signature phrases, “America first” and “make America great again”. The president appeared to tacitly acknowledge the divisiveness and anger that marked his four years in office, but offered no hint of regret. “I did not seek the easiest course,” he said. “I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism. “I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do. Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus. This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: together, we put the American people back in charge of our country.” Critics have said Trump is more likely to be remembered as the first American president in history to be twice impeached, first for pressuring Ukraine for political favours, second for inciting a violent mob to sack the US Capitol and stop Biden’s win being certified. After four years of firestorms, Trump’s presidency has been fading away, especially after his Twitter feed was abruptly terminated. The video broke a prolonged silence less than 24 hours before he is expected to leave the White House for the last time, early on Wednesday morning. Read more of David Smith’s report here: ‘We did what we came here to do’: Trump fails to mention Biden in farewell address Biden’s inauguration program begins at some time after 11am ET – which is 4pm in London – with Father Leo J O’Donovan, an American Jesuit Catholic priest who is a longtime friend of the Biden family, set to give an invocation. Andrea Hall, a Georgia firefighter in the South Fulton fire and rescue department, will then lead the pledge of allegiance. Hall is the first African American woman in the department’s history to be promoted to the rank of fire captain. Lady Gaga, who campaigned for Biden, will perform the national anthem, and Amanda Gorman, the first ever National youth poet laureate in the US, will read a poem. The Rev Dr Silvester Beaman, a friend to Biden and the president-elect’s late son Beau, will lead a benediction. Beaman is the pastor of Bethel African methodist episcopal church in Wilmington, Delaware. Jennifer Lopez will also give a musical performance. Shortly before noon, Kamala Harris will be sworn in by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, and will become the country’s first female, first Black and first south Asian American vice-president. The vice-president-elect will use two bibles, one of which belonged to Thurgood Marshall, the first Black person to serve on the supreme court. At midday, Joe Biden will be sworn in by John Roberts, the chief justice of the supreme court. The president-elect plans to use his family’s very large bible from 1893. After officially taking office, Biden will give his inaugural speech. Biden has reportedly been working on the speech since November, and according to his inaugural committee Biden will lay out “his vision to defeat the pandemic, build back better, and unify and heal the nation”. The theme of the inauguration is “America United”, and Biden’s address is likely to offer a different tone to that of his predecessor. Donald Trump gave a 16-minute speech, much of it incendiary, at his inauguration in 2017. Biden will then take part in the traditional “Pass in review” after 2pm. He and Harris – and their spouses – will make the short walk to the east front of the Capitol, where they’ll observe a procession of each branch of the military. The pass in review signals the peaceful transfer of power to the new commander-in-chief. The next event will take Biden about three miles south-west of the White House, to Arlington national cemetery, where about 400,000 military veterans are interred. Biden will lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. Former presidents Barack Obama, George W Bush and Bill Clinton will join Biden at the cemetery, as will the former first ladies Michelle Obama, Laura Bush and Hillary Clinton. Welcome to our live coverage of US politics on a historic – and busy – Wednesday in Washington. Joe Biden will be inaugurated as the 46th president of the United States in a ceremony in Washington DC at noon ET – that’s 5pm GMT. Kamala Harris will join him as the first woman to be vice president, and with Indian and Jamaican heritage, the first woman of color to hold the office. Before the ceremony Biden will attend church, and then once in office he is expected to visit the tomb of the unknown soldier. He will then get to work, issuing a flurry of executive orders from rejoining the Paris climate accords to cancelling the Keystone XL pipeline. Harris will return to the Senate where she will preside over the swearing in of her replacement as California Seantor, Alex Padilla, as well as the two new Senators from Georgia – Jon Ossoff and Rev. Raphael Warnock. That will leave the Senate poised 50-50 between Republicans and Democrats, with Harris holding the casting vote. Chuck Schumer, the Democrats leader in the Senate has said it has “three important things to do at once” – the second impeachment trial of Donald Trump, the confirmation of Joe Biden’s cabinet, and to pass additional Covid relief measures. Yesterday there were 168,058 new Covid cases recorded, and a further 2,550 deaths. The Joe Biden administration takes over exactly a year since the first confirmed case of Covid in the US, with the total caseload at 24.2m and the death toll exceeding 400,000 Americans. Before Biden’s inauguration, outgoing president Donald Trump will take part in a sending off ceremony at Joint Base Andrews. That’s expected at 8am ET, which is 1pm GMT. Trump will then take a final flight on Air Force One to Florida. Breaking convention, he will not attend the inauguration.126887falsefalseMaanvi Singh (now), Joan E Greve and Martin Belam (earlier)Joe Biden swears in presidential appointees during a virtual ceremony in the Oval Office.Nurse Sandra Lindsay receives the second dose of a Pfizer coronavirus disease vaccine, at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in the Queens borough of New York City.Joe Biden hugs First Lady Jill Biden as they arrive at the White House in Washington, DC.Avril Haines bumps elbows with Senator Ben Sasse before the start of her confirmation as the nominee for director of national intelligence.Joe Biden speaks during a virtual swearing-in ceremony of political appointees, in the state dining room.Biden signs executive orders in the Oval Office.New decor...Biden gets to work on his first day as president.Joe Biden in the Oval Office on his first day as president.Flags wave as Biden and his wife Jill arrive at the White House.Joe Biden signs three documents including an inauguration declaration, cabinet nominations and sub-cabinet nominations in the President’s Room at the US Capitol after the inauguration ceremony.Joe Biden arrives with his wife Jill Biden for his inauguration in Washington DC.Kamala Harris is sworn in as Vice President of the United States.Lady Gaga arrives to sing the National Anthem at the U.S. Capitol for the inauguration of Joe Biden.Bernie Sanders sits in the bleachers on Capitol Hill before Joe Biden is sworn in as the 46th US President.Donald Trump and Melania Trump wave to a crowd as they board Air Force One.US President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump board Air Force One.Ivanka Trump attends the departure ceremony of US president Donald Trump.Ivanka Trump (2nd R), husband Jared Kushner (R), their children, Eric (C-R) and Donald Jr. (C-R) and Trump family members stand on the tarmac at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland.Trump addresses guests at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland.Outgoing US president Donald Trump waves as he boards Marine One.President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump briefly stopped to talk with the media as they boarded Marine One.President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump with the media.Donald Trump and Melania Trump depart the White House on Marine One.Marine One on the White House lawn, waiting for Donald Trump to leave.Aides carry boxes to Marine One before outgoing US president Donald Trump departs the White House.A worker helping to set up the “Field of flags” earlier this week.A lone National Guardsman walks down the sidewalk near the US Capitol Building the night before the inauguration of Joe Biden as the 46th president of the United States.Epilogue Kitchen & Cocktails owner Jonathan Jones speaks with a customer while serving free meals in honor of Martin Luther King Jr. Day on Monday in Salem, Oregon.Morris Price Jr., left, moderator at First Baptist Church of Denver, with Minister Brian Henderson in the church across from the State Capitol.US President Joe Biden swears in presidential appointees during a virtual ceremony in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, DC, after being sworn in at the US Capitol on January 20, 2021. (Photo by JIM WATSON / AFP) (Photo by JIM WATSON/AFP via Getty Images)" credit="Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images" height="300" media-id="d15a858f45a82cc9a06ff6968945b105bb4befcc" image-type="Photograph" photographer="Jim Watson" source="AFP/Getty Images" secure-file="https://media.guim.co.uk/d15a858f45a82cc9a06ff6968945b105bb4befcc/0_199_6048_3627/500.jpg" display-credit="true" />