block-time published-time 6.10pm GMT

Russia suspends entry of Chinese citizens

Russia will suspend entry of Chinese citizens to its territory starting from 20 February, Russian authorities in charge of coronavirus prevention have said.

The suspension will be for Chinese citizens entering Russia for employment, private, educational and tourist purposes.

The suspension will be temporary, the statement said.

block-time published-time 5.54pm GMT

Summary

If you're just catching up, here is a quick rundown of the latest global coronavirus developments over the past few hours:

•There have been nearly 100 cases of human-to-human spread outside China, but WHO said there is little "sustained local transmission".•A Wuhan hospital director has died from the virus, as authorities launched more forceful measures to round up patients.•A British couple on the quarantined Diamond Princess cruise ship said they had tested positive for the virus, but questioned the results.•Meanwhile, another Briton who had been on the ship announced he is being discharged from hospital tomorrow after testing negative for the coronavirus. A British family in a French ski resort have also left hospital after beating the disease.•Boris Johnson has spoken to China's president about the outbreak, offering his sympathies to those affected.•Prada has postponed a fashion show due to take place in Tokyo in May, while Chanel has delayed a Beijing show.

There have been nearly 100 cases of human-to-human spread outside China, but WHO said there is little "sustained local transmission".

A Wuhan hospital director has died from the virus, as authorities launched more forceful measures to round up patients.

A British couple on the quarantined Diamond Princess cruise ship said they had tested positive for the virus, but questioned the results.

Meanwhile, another Briton who had been on the ship announced he is being discharged from hospital tomorrow after testing negative for the coronavirus. A British family in a French ski resort have also left hospital after beating the disease.

Boris Johnson has spoken to China's president about the outbreak, offering his sympathies to those affected.

Prada has postponed a fashion show due to take place in Tokyo in May, while Chanel has delayed a Beijing show.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.31pm GMT

Officials in Hubei province, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, will adopt more thorough and forceful measures to find patients with fever, state media reported today.

Records of all fever patients who have visited a doctor since 20 January will be checked, as well as the records of those who have bought over-the-counter cough and fever medications in shops and online, Xinhua reported.

People will get health check-ups and, if necessary, be placed in quarantine or taken to hospital, the report added, citing a notice from the province's epidemic control headquarters.

China reported on Tuesday the smallest number of new coronavirus infections since January and its lowest daily death toll for a week, but the World Health Organization said the data should still be viewed with caution.

Patients rest at a temporary hospital converted from Wuhan Sports Centre. Photograph: Xiao Yijiu/AP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.40pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.19pm GMT

Dozens more countries across Africa and the Americas will be able to test citizens for coronavirus by the end of the week, the World Health Organization said today.

Over the coming days, 40 countries in Africa and 29 in the Americas are expected to have the ability to detect the Covid-19 virus.

Previously, many countries sent samples to other nations for testing in a process which can take days. Now they will be able to generate results in 24-48 hours.

A doctor takes a swab from a woman to test for the Covid-19 virus at a clinic in Yinan county in eastern China's Shandong province. Photograph: AP

Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO chief, said personal protective equipment has been sent to 21 countries and more will be sent to another 106 in the coming weeks.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.19pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.02pm GMT

Chinese medical workers who die fighting the coronavirus outbreak will be designated as martyrs, CNN reports.

Over 1,700 healthcare workers have become infected during the battle to contain the virus and several have died, with Chinese authorities coming under criticism for the pressure it is putting on staff.

The deaths have included Li Wenliang, the whistleblower doctor who tried to warn of the virus in December, and            Liu Zhiming, director of Wuchang hospital in Wuhan, the city at the centre of the outbreak.

A portrait of Dr Li Wenliang is left at his workplace in Wuhan. Photograph: Stringer/Getty Images

Kristie Lu Stout, a CNN correspondent in Hong Kong, reported:

China says it will designate all of them - the frontline doctors, nurses and medics who died while fighting the virus - as martyrs of the epicenter of the outbreak.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.51pm GMT

JaguarLand Rover (JLR) has flown Chinese parts in suitcases to Britain to maintain production and could run out after two weeks, as the impact of the coronavirus outbreak hits firms across countries and industries.

Britain's biggest carmaker joined major global companies such as Apple in warning of the impact of the virus on supply chains, Reuters reports.

FiatChrysler said last week it had temporarily halted output at its Serbian plant, the first such suspension by an automaker in Europe in response to the coronavirus crisis.

Components made in China are used in millions of vehicles assembled around the world and Hubei province - the centre of the virus outbreak - is a major hub for vehicle parts production and shipments.

The JLR chief executive, Ralf Speth, said:

We are safe for this week and we are safe for next week and in the third week we have... parts missing.

We have flown parts in suitcases from China to the UK.

Dr Ralf Speth, CEO of JaguarLand Rover, gives a speech at the opening of the National Automotive Innovation Centre today. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP

Production at the firm's Chinese factory would recommence on 24 February and was "safe for the very first week", he added.

The new coronavirus has killed over 1,900 people in China and infected around 72,000, confining millions to their homes, disrupting businesses and delaying reopening of factories after the extended Lunar New Year holiday break.

Speth said sales in China, the world's biggest auto market, had been hit. The knockback comes after JLR had enjoyed a recovery in sales there, helping it to return to profitability in recent quarters.

"That's completely stopped. It's zero," he said. "You don't know whether the economy will catch up or whether this kind of loss is just a loss."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.57pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.36pm GMT

A British man who was diagnosed with coronavirus on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan will be discharged from hospital tomorrow.

Alan Steele, who announced the news on Facebook, said he will wait in the country until he can be reunited with his wife, Wendy, and they can travel home together.

The couple, who were celebrating their honeymoon on the ship, were separated on 7 February when Alan was diagnosed with the virus and taken to a nearby hospital.

Although the ship's quarantine officially ends on Wednesday, new guidelines mean anyone who shared a cabin with a person who has tested negative for the virus will face another two weeks on board.

Alan has now tested negative for the virus, and says he is looking forward to eating at the McDonald's near the cruise terminal.

block-time published-time 4.11pm GMT

Nearly 100 cases of human-to-human spread outside China

The are 92 cases in 12 countries outside China of human-to-human spread of the coronavirus, the World Health Organization chief has said.

"But we don't have data to make a meaningful comparison to China cases," Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus clarified.

Speaking at a press conference, he added:

We have not seen sustained local transmission of coronavirus except in specific circumstances like the Diamond Princess cruise ship.

Dr Mike Ryan, director of the WHO health emergencies programme, said "clearly there has been more transmission than expected" on the cruise ship.

He said Japanese authorities are adjusting to reality and taking necessary public health measures to evacuate people and deal with their follow-up care.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.25pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.00pm GMT

Two Irish citizens have tested positive for coronavirus onboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Independent.ie has reported.

More than 100 people have been tested in Ireland for the disease, but none have tested positive.

There are six Irish nationals on the coronavirus-hit cruise ship. The two who have tested positive share dual citizenship with another EU member state and are not normally resident in Ireland. They are being treated at a hospital in Japan.

The Irish deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, said:

We are also in close contact with those who remain in quarantine on the ship.

We are working with our EU partners and other like-minded countries regarding options for their return.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.30pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.37pm GMT

British family who caught virus at French ski resort discharged from hospital

A British family who contracted coronavirus at a French ski resort have been discharged from hospital, the French health minister, Olivier Véran, has said.

The British nationals, including a nine-year-old child, caught the virus from Steve Walsh, a British man who traveled to the Contamines-Montjoie resort from a conference in Singapore, where he got the coronavirus.

The family were hospitalised in Grenoble, and CNN reports Véran as saying:

All of the patients that were hospitalised in Grenoble were able to leave the hospital. Thus the family that were infected, an English family, the father and his son were able to leave the hospital in Grenoble. They are no longer considered to be sick or carriers of the virus.

The health minister also said a third French national had tested positive for coronavirus onboard the Diamond Princess cruise liner in Japan.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.32pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.27pm GMT

French fashion company Chanel has postponed a show in Beijing, following on from Prada's decision to delay a show due to be held in Japan in May.

Chanel said in a statement that following the guidance of Chinese authorities it had decided to postpone its Beijing replica of a catwalk display held in Paris last December "to a later and more appropriate moment".

The company is monitoring the situation closely, the statement said, adding: "At the foremost are the health and wellbeing of its teams and clients."

No new date was given for the event.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.32pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.18pm GMT

As the UK government makes plans to bring home the British nationals trapped on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan, here's a quick summary of some the other countries which have taken similar measure, compiled by Reuters.

•Australia will evacuate more than 200 of its citizens and an unspecified number of New Zealand citizens onboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. The passengers will depart on Wednesday and will be required to be quarantined for another 14 days.•Taiwan said today it would charter a plane to evacuate its citizens from the Diamond Princess. It evacuated 247 of the estimated 500 Taiwanese stranded in Wuhan on 3 February.•A plane chartered by Canada has left for Japan to evacuate its nationals aboard the virus-hit cruise ship off Yokohama. After arriving in Canada, the passengers will undergo a 14-day period of quarantine. After evacuating 215 people earlier, the country flew back 185 Canadians from Wuhan on 11 February. All evacuees are quarantined on the Trenton, Ontario, base for two weeks.•The United States flew back over 300 Americans who had been stuck on the Diamond Princess. They will face two more weeks of quarantine, after spending the previous 14 days docked in Japan. The US also authorised the voluntary departure of its government employees and their family members from Hong Kong on 11 February. On 6 February, two planes with about 300 passengers, mostly US citizens, took off from Wuhan for the United States.•Hong Kong said it would send an aircraft to Japan to bring back passengers from the Diamond Princess, which has seen the most coronavirus infections outside of China.

Australia will evacuate more than 200 of its citizens and an unspecified number of New Zealand citizens onboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. The passengers will depart on Wednesday and will be required to be quarantined for another 14 days.

Taiwan said today it would charter a plane to evacuate its citizens from the Diamond Princess. It evacuated 247 of the estimated 500 Taiwanese stranded in Wuhan on 3 February.

A plane chartered by Canada has left for Japan to evacuate its nationals aboard the virus-hit cruise ship off Yokohama. After arriving in Canada, the passengers will undergo a 14-day period of quarantine. After evacuating 215 people earlier, the country flew back 185 Canadians from Wuhan on 11 February. All evacuees are quarantined on the Trenton, Ontario, base for two weeks.

The United States flew back over 300 Americans who had been stuck on the Diamond Princess. They will face two more weeks of quarantine, after spending the previous 14 days docked in Japan. The US also authorised the voluntary departure of its government employees and their family members from Hong Kong on 11 February. On 6 February, two planes with about 300 passengers, mostly US citizens, took off from Wuhan for the United States.

Hong Kong said it would send an aircraft to Japan to bring back passengers from the Diamond Princess, which has seen the most coronavirus infections outside of China.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.34pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.58pm GMT

Prada postpones fashion show in Japan

The Italian luxury fashion house Prada has postponed a fashion show due to take place in Japan in May.

In a statement, the company said:

Due to the current uncertainty related to the spread of the novel coronavirus, the Prada Resort fashion show originally scheduled for 21 May in Japan will be postponed.

Prada added the decision was a precautionary measure as well as "an act of responsibility and respect" for all those working on and planning to attend the show.

Prada has postponed a fashion show due to take place in Japan in May. Photograph: Alberto Gro?escu/Rex/Shutterstock

The statement continued: "Japan remains one of Prada's strategic markets and relevant events will be scheduled in the country at a more appropriate moment."

Both Japan and South Korea have reported entering a "new phase" of the coronavirus outbreak, with the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, saying the situation is changing "minute-by-minute" in the country.

The number of cases in Japan now stands at 607, with 542 on the stranded Princess Diamond cruise ship and 65 elsewhere in the country. There has been one reported death.

Most worryingly, there has been an increase in the number of cases where the Japanese health ministry has been unable to figure out the origin of the transmission.

The Mainichi newspaper reports that a spate of new cases is being linked to a New Year's party for taxi drivers held on a river tour boat in the capital.

It reports that as of 16 February, 11 attendees and boat employees were infected with coronavirus.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.08pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.29pm GMT

Repatriating passengers from the coronavirus-stricken cruise ship in Japan is not without risks, a medical expert has said.

Paul Hunter, professor in Medicine at the University of East Anglia, said:

Considerable care needs to be made to ensure that the passengers do not transmit infection between themselves or to cabin crew during the flight home and once back on home soil they do not act as a focus for the spread of the disease into their home countries - any returning passengers may be put in quarantine on their return.

A passenger is seen on a balconies of the Diamond Princess cruise ship. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP via Getty Images

He noted that while the quarantine seems to have been effective at stopping the spread of infection around the world as passengers return home or continue their travels, it hasn't stopped the coronavirus passing between passengers and crew.

It is well known that certain infections such as influenza and norovirus can spread rapidly on board cruise ships. Cruise ships take passengers and crew from all over the world, often passengers are relatively elderly, they spend most of their time on board indoors mixing with others.

The most likely [infection] route is direct person-to-person transmission when people are close to an infected person, but with currently publicly available information it is not possible to rule out other issues at this stage.

Many countries, including the US, Canada and Australia have either evacuated their citizens or are in the process of doing so.

The UK government has said it is in the process of organising a flight to bring back British nationals as soon as possible.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.35pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.22pm GMT

Boris Johnson speaks to Chinese president about coronavirus

Boris Johnson has spoken with the president of China about the coronavirus outbreak.

A Downing Street spokesman said:

The prime minister spoke to President Xi of China this morning.

He offered his sympathies for those affected by the outbreak of coronavirus in China. President Xi thanked the UK for its support and in particular welcomed the donation of vital medical equipment to China.

The prime minister and president agreed on the importance of the UK-China relationship and resolved to work together across a range of issues including strengthening the economic partnership, to benefit the people of both China and the UK.

The spokesman added that ahead of COP26 in Glasgow and the Convention on Biological Diversity Summit in China, the two leaders pledged to would work closely together on the issue of climate change.

They agreed that biodiversity and climate change are two sides of the same coin and must be addressed in tandem if we're to protect the planet for future generations.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.50pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.04pm GMT

A social media campaign in Australia is urging people eat at Chinese restaurants, to combat disinformation and racialised stigma surrounding the coronavirus outbreak.

The #IWillEatWithYou campaign hopes to boost struggling Chinese businesses in the country, with many owners reporting a drop in sales caused by coronavirus fears.

Staff clearing a table at an empty Chinese restaurant in Melbourne's Chinatown. Photograph: William West/AFP via Getty Images

On the campaign page, set up by Australian political activist group GetUp!, a call to action reads:

As misinformation about coronavirus spreads across social media, local Chinese restaurants and stores are paying the price - with some losing up to 50% of their revenue.

While other restaurants and public spaces are still buzzing, it is the Chinatown restaurants and Asian grocers that stand empty. Panic around the virus is unfairly impacting Chinese and Asian communities.

If we don't take action - people will lose their jobs, and their livelihoods.

Can you take the pledge to defeat baseless fears and support these businesses in their time of need?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.08pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.48pm GMT

The Foreign Office has the "utmost concern" for the British people on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan, two of whom may have tested positive for the virus.

In an updated statement, a spokesman for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office said:

We have the utmost concern for the British people currently on the cruise ship.

We are ensuring those who have been diagnosed with coronavirus receive the best possible care in Japan and are organising a flight back to the UK for other British nationals on the Diamond Princess as soon as possible.

David and Sally Abel are worried they have tested positive for the coronavirus virus while stuck on the cruise ship. Photograph: David Abel/PA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.58pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.18pm GMT

The UK accounting watchdog has called on all British businesses to flag up the full extent of the risks posed by the coronavirus outbreak to their companies, PA Media reports.

The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) said companies had a duty to make "up-to-date and meaningful" disclosures to investors on the potential impact of the disease.

PA Media also reported that the FRC is in talks with accountancy firms over the potential effect that coronavirus could have on their ability to sign off accounts, given travel restrictions in China.

UK firms with Chinese subsidiaries can only review audit files within the country, as Chinese data protection laws prevent this being done remotely.

An FRC spokesman said:

Given the potential for rapid spreading of the virus, required disclosures will likely change over time as more information about the epidemic emerges.

Companies will need to monitor developments and ensure they are providing up-to-date and meaningful disclosures to their shareholders when preparing their year-end reports.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.28pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.47am GMT

Thirty doctors in Brighton are currently in isolation after coming into contact with a GP who tested positive for coronavirus, the Argus reported.

A frontline clinician told the local paper: "There are 30 doctors in isolation after coming into contact with a GP who tested positive for coronavirus at the CCG meeting. Public Health England told them to self-isolate. This is a risk.

"There would have been a day or two in between them coming into contact with the GP with coronavirus and being traced and told to self-isolate."

A spokesman for Brighton and Hove CCG said there have been no new cases in the city for more than a week. He added: "All doctors and other primary care health workers in Brighton and Hove who were advised to 'self-isolate' as a precaution are expected to be returning to work this week."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.29pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.36am GMT

The two-week quarantine of the Diamond Princess cruise ship ends on Wednesday, with thousands of passengers and crew set to disembark over the next several days in the port of Yokohama, near Tokyo.

But a number of scientists told the Associated Press that the ship could have served as an incubator for Covid-19 instead of a quarantine facility that was meant to prevent the worsening of the outbreak.

"I suspect people were not as isolated from other people as we would have thought," said Dr Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia, in England.

"Obviously the quarantine hasn't worked, and this ship has now become a source of infection," said Dr Nathalie MacDermott, an outbreak expert at King's College London. She said the exact mechanism of the virus's spread was unknown.

"We need to understand how the quarantine measures onboard were implemented, what the air filtration onboard is like, how the cabins are connected and how waste products are disposed of," MacDermott added.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.47am GMT

block-time published-time 10.59am GMT

A small number of Irish people are onboard two cruise ships where coronavirus has been detected, the Irish government has said, according to a report by PA Media.

Simon Coveney said his foreign affairs department was in contact with citizens on the Diamond Princess in Japan and the Westerdam off Cambodia.

He told RTÉ's Morning Ireland:

It's a small number though, and we're dealing with each individual case.

There is a second cruise ship off Cambodia, we're working with Irish nationals on both of those ships to make sure they're safe.

And if they're in quarantine, to make sure those conditions are safe.

The department said in a statement:

We are closely following the events concerning the Diamond Princess and we are in contact with the Irish citizens concerned.

We are continuing to liaise closely with like-minded countries, EU partners, and the health authorities in Japan and here in Ireland concerning the best course of action.

Hundreds of people have tested positive for the virus onboard the quarantined Diamond Princess.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.48am GMT

block-time published-time 10.07am GMT

The Associated Press has reported the latest breakdown of the number of cases and deaths from the coronavirus outbreak.

The viral outbreak that began in China has infected more than 73,000 people worldwide.

Here are the latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Tuesday morning (UK time):

•Mainland China: 1,868 deaths among 72,436 cases, mostly in the central province of Hubei•Hong Kong: 58 cases, 1 death•Macao: 10•Japan: 607 cases, including 542 from a cruise ship docked in Yokohama, 1 death•Singapore: 77 cases•Thailand: 35•South Korea: 31•Malaysia: 22•Taiwan: 22 cases, 1 death•Vietnam: 16 cases•Germany: 16•United States: 15 cases; separately, 1 US citizen died in China•Australia: 14 cases•France: 12 cases, 1 death•United Kingdom: 9 cases•United Arab Emirates: 9•Canada: 8•Philippines: 3 cases, 1 death•India: 3 cases•Italy: 3•Russia: 2•Spain: 2•Belgium: 1•Nepal: 1•Sri Lanka: 1•Sweden: 1•Cambodia: 1•Finland: 1•Egypt: 1

Mainland China: 1,868 deaths among 72,436 cases, mostly in the central province of Hubei

Hong Kong: 58 cases, 1 death

Macao: 10

Japan: 607 cases, including 542 from a cruise ship docked in Yokohama, 1 death

Singapore: 77 cases

Thailand: 35

South Korea: 31

Malaysia: 22

Taiwan: 22 cases, 1 death

Vietnam: 16 cases

Germany: 16

United States: 15 cases; separately, 1 US citizen died in China

Australia: 14 cases

France: 12 cases, 1 death

United Kingdom: 9 cases

United Arab Emirates: 9

Canada: 8

Philippines: 3 cases, 1 death

India: 3 cases

Italy: 3

Russia: 2

Spain: 2

Belgium: 1

Nepal: 1

Sri Lanka: 1

Sweden: 1

Cambodia: 1

Finland: 1

Egypt: 1

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.34am GMT

block-time published-time 9.35am GMT

Another 88 passengers onboard the Diamond Princess have tested positive for the new coronavirus, ABC News reports.

enltr #BREAKING : Another 88 confirmed new            #coronavirus cases from on board the Diamond Princess            @abcnews           pic.twitter.com/Ixp1XdpY0x

- Jake Sturmer (@JakeSturmer) February 18, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.34am GMT

block-time published-time 9.19am GMT

The son of the British couple who tested positive for the coronavirus while on board the Diamond Princess described the government's response as "appalling".

David and Sally Abel, who published video diaries from a cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Japan, said they have tested positive for the new coronavirus.

Their son, Steve, told BBC Breakfast: "My assessment of the government treatment to them ... appalling.

"They haven't done anything. They probably are behind the scenes, which is great if they are, but no one is communicating with us. The FCO have got my number, my wife's number, my brother's number, my sister's number and they haven't got back to us on anything. We've been calling them every day for about four or five days."

enltrThe son of a British couple recently tested positive for the #Coronavirus on board the            #DiamondPrincess call the government response "Appalling". Steve spoke to            #BBCBreakfast after David and Sally Abel said they've been taken to a hostel after the positive test.            pic.twitter.com/gtYLcad2UG

- BBC Breakfast (@BBCBreakfast) February 18, 2020

David Abel, from Oxfordshire, announced on Facebook that he and Sally had tested positive for the new virus. In a later post, however, he said he doubted his diagnosis.

"Frankly I think this is a setup! We are NOT being taken to a hospital but a hostel. That's where partners are sent waiting out their quarantine," he wrote. "No phone, no wifi and no medical facilities. I really am smelling a very big rat here! Waiting for the transfer now."

Asked in the comments below one of his posts whether he was sure the test was positive, he replied: "I doubt it was positive. If it was, we would be in hospital."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.25am GMT

block-time published-time 9.01am GMT

A pharmacy displays a 'face masks out of stock' sign in Paranaque city, south of Manila, Philippines. Photograph: Francis R Malasig/EPA

Philippines' tourism and travel industry is projected to lose billions of peso with the temporary travel ban imposed on travellers from China, in the aftermath of the novel coronavirus outbreak.

block-time published-time 8.30am GMT

Apple has announced it could miss its revenues target in the first quarter of 2020 because of the coronavirus outbreak.

European shares dropped as a revenue warning from the iPhone maker sent "shockwaves through the tech sector".

Reuters reports:

The pan-European STOXX 600 index fell 0.8% by 0803 GMT, having ended at a record high on Monday after China outlined fresh stimulus measures to mitigate the virus' economic impact.

However, Apple's warning that it would miss its March quarter sales outlook due to the outbreak, along with news of a slower-than-expected recovery in the firm's Chinese factories swiftly culled any optimism.

Apple's Frankfurt-listed shares dropped more than 6%, while those of STMicroelectronics NV and Dialog Semiconductor PLC, which supply components to Apple, fell 4% and 4.9%, respectively.

The technology-heavy German stock index plunged 0.9%, while the European tech subindex fell 1.5%.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.34am GMT

block-time published-time 8.07am GMT

David and Sally Abel, a British couple onboard the Diamond Princess cruise liner in Japan, have tested positive for coronavirus, a day before passengers who tested negative were due to start leaving the ship after spending two weeks in quarantine.

Abel, who has uploaded daily videos from the couple's cabin on social media, said in a Facebook post on Tuesday afternoon (local time): "There is going to be a time of quiet. We have been proved positive and leaving for hospital soon. Blessings all xxx."

The Abels' diagnosis came as the British government said it was preparing to send a plane to Japan to repatriate about 70 British nationals from the ship, which has been moored off Yokohama, near Tokyo, since 3 February. The vessel, originally carrying 3,700 passengers and crew, was quarantined after a previous passenger tested positive for Covid-19 at the end of last month.

Abel has used his video posts to apply pressure on Britain to evacuate its citizens. The US has evacuated more than 300 citizens, while Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea and Canada have said they will follow suit.

The Foreign Office said: "Given the conditions onboard, we are working to organise a flight back to the UK for British nationals on the Diamond Princess as soon as possible. Our staff are contacting British nationals on board to make the necessary arrangements. We urge all those who have not yet responded to get in touch immediately."

Japanese health authorities said on Tuesday they had collected samples from everyone on the ship and that the planned evacuation of passengers who tested negative would begin as scheduled on Wednesday and be completed by the end of the week.

By Monday, 454 people on the ship had tested positive, but the final number of infections onboard has not been announced. Four Britons with confirmed coronavirus are currently in hospital in Japan, according to the latest official figures.

Among the remaining passengers and crew, those whose tests come back negative will be allowed to leave, while those found to be infected will be treated at hospitals in Japan. However, people who had close contact with those who have tested positive will have their quarantine reset to the date of their last contact with an infected person. The large number of cases onboard the Diamond Princess has prompted criticism of Japan's decision to keep everyone on the ship throughout the two-week quarantine. But the government's top spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, told reporters on Tuesday the measure had been "appropriate".

Related:  British couple on Diamond Princess test positive for coronavirus

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.40am GMT

block-time published-time 7.57am GMT

The French health minister, Olivier Veran, said on Tuesday there was a "credible risk" the coronavirus outbreak could turn into a pandemic, Reuters reports.

"This is both a working assumption and a credible risk," Veran told France Info radio, when asked about the possibility of the coronavirus spreading globally.

He said France was ready to deal with all the possibilities and its health system was sufficiently robust and well-equipped.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.41am GMT

block-time published-time 7.48am GMT

I want to hear your news, experiences and questions about the coronavirus outbreak. You can email me at aamna.mohdin@theguardian.com or tweet me at            @aamnamohdin

I'm particularly interested in hearing from travellers who have booked flights to China and are currently in limbo.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.41am GMT

block-time published-time 7.39am GMT

Taiwan has urged the World Health Organization not to be "kidnapped" by China, as the self-ruled island fights its label as an infected area.

Taiwan has reported 22 cases, compared with China's figure of more than 72,400, but the island shares the agency's classification of China as "very high risk" since the WHO considers Taiwan as part of China.

"Taiwan is not ruled by China and certainly should not be labelled as an infected area," the foreign ministry spokeswoman Joanne Ou told a news conference, according to a report by Reuters. "We urge the WHO to be professional and neutral: break away from China's unreasonable claim. Don't be kidnapped by China."

Taipei is already in dispute with Beijing over its exclusion from the WHO because of objections by China, which considers Taiwan its own territory and has blocked the island's membership of many international bodies.

Countries including El Salvador, Mongolia, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu have adopted travel curbs for people who have visited Taiwan, while the island's largest airline is included in an Italian ban on flights from China.

Ou said the WHO should immediately correct its "inappropriate label" for the island, which was continuing to press Italy to resume flights.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.45am GMT

block-time published-time 7.23am GMT

British couple quarantined on ship test positive

Morning, I'm Aamna Mohdin taking over the live blog from Martin Farrer.

Britons David and Sally Abel, who are on the Diamond Princess cruise ship, have tested positive for Covid-19. Abel, who has been posting regular video updates from the quarantined ship, said on Facebook: "There is going to be a time of quiet. We have been proved positive and leaving for hospital soon. Blessings all."

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office has said it is "working to organise" a flight back to the UK for British nationals on the ship who have tested negative.

The department has come under increasing pressure to fly home the 74 Britons on the Diamond Princess after the US repatriated 340 of its citizens.

The department said in a statement:

Given the conditions onboard, we are working to organise a flight back to the UK for British nationals on the Diamond Princess as soon as possible.

Our staff are contacting British nationals on board to make the necessary arrangements. We urge all those who have not yet responded to get in touch immediately.

On Monday, a No 10 spokesman said those onboard the ship docked near Yokohama, Japan, were being contacted about the possibility of a repatriation flight.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.55am GMT

block-time published-time 7.08am GMT

Shanghai's government says the city's schools, which have been closed for three weeks, will remain closed and will begin teaching primary and secondary school students online from 2 March.

Lu Jing, head of the Shanghai education committee, revealed the decision at a briefing on Tuesday, according to reports.

No date has been given for the proper reopening of schools.

block-time published-time 6.58am GMT

Summary

I'm about to hand over to my colleagues in London so here are the main developments of the last eight hours or so:

•China has recorded 98 more deaths from the Covid-19 outbreak, taking the number of victims to 1,868.•Health officials confirmed another 1,886 new confirmed infections , bringing the total on the mainland to 72,436. More than 12,000 have recovered.•A senior hospital doctor in Wuhan has died from the virus.•A "dragnet-style" operation has been launched in Wuhan to roundup all people infected with the virus.•The UK government is evacuating its citizens from the stricken Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. South Korea, Canada and Australia gave more details of similar operations.•Japan, which has 454 cases of the virus, is to trial HIV retroviral drugs on infected people.•Hong Kong is to boost its Covid-19 emergency fund from HK$28bn (US$3.60bn) from HK$25bn.•Singapore Airlines is cutting flights to major cities such as London, Frankfurt and Los Angeles as the virus continues to impact international travel.•Asian stock markets have suffered losses after Apple said the factory shutdowns in China was causing a shortage of iPhones.

China has recorded 98 more deaths from the Covid-19 outbreak, taking the number of victims to 1,868.

Health officials confirmed another 1,886 new confirmed infections , bringing the total on the mainland to 72,436. More than 12,000 have recovered.

A senior hospital doctor in Wuhan has died from the virus.

A "dragnet-style" operation has been launched in Wuhan to roundup all people infected with the virus.

The UK government is evacuating its citizens from the stricken Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. South Korea, Canada and Australia gave more details of similar operations.

Japan, which has 454 cases of the virus, is to trial HIV retroviral drugs on infected people.

Hong Kong is to boost its Covid-19 emergency fund from HK$28bn (US$3.60bn) from HK$25bn.

Singapore Airlines is cutting flights to major cities such as London, Frankfurt and Los Angeles as the virus continues to impact international travel.

Asian stock markets have suffered losses after Apple said the factory shutdowns in China was causing a shortage of iPhones.

block-time published-time 6.56am GMT

Apple's announcement on Monday night that the Covid-19 outbreak was causing a shortage of iPhones has hit tech stocks in Asia.

The Nikkei in Tokyo closed 1.4% for the day on Tuesday and Seoul finished down by a chunky 1.5%. The South Korean president Moon Jae-in said earlier that the economy faced an "emergency" situation because of the virus and the government would be making an all-out effort to boost growth.

They're still trading in China where the Shanghai Composite is off 0.14% while the Hang Seng has fallen 1.35%.

enltrGlobal stocks fall after Apple warns on coronavirus impact. Warning from world's most valuable comp sobered investors mood. Kitchen sink charge of $7.3bn at HSBC adds to gloom. Offshore Yuan weakens beyond 7 per Dollar. Bonds rise w/US 10y drop to 1.55%. Gold 1586, Bitcoin $9.8k. pic.twitter.com/3iDl5HmTyU

- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) February 18, 2020

The FTSE100 is expected to shed 0.6% at the opening this morning and on Wall Street the Dow Jones is looking at a similar fall after having Monday off for President's Day.

"Apple is saying its recovery could be delayed, which could mean the impact of the virus may go beyond the current quarter," Norihiro Fujito, chief investment strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities in Tokyo, told Reuters.

"If Apple shares were traded cheaply, that might not matter much. But when they are trading at a record high, investors will be surely tempted to sell."

block-time published-time 5.58am GMT

HSBC lowers Asian economic forecast due to virus

HSBC, the international bank based in Hong Kong and London, has reported a fall 30% fall in profits for the last financial year.

HSBC said its 2019 pre-tax profits fell by a third on year to $13.3 billion as interim chief Noel Quinn warned that the global banking giant was "not delivering acceptable returns". Most of the loss was a "goodwill impairment" on its business in Europe.

In his comments, chairman Mark Tucker said the "macroeconomic environment" was uncertain and that the bank had lowered its growth forecast for Asia because of the Covid-19 outbreak.

As a result of the impact of the coronavirus outbreak, we have lowered our expectations for growth in the Asian economy in 2020. The main impact will be in the first quarter, but we expect some improvement as the virus becomes contained

block-time published-time 5.40am GMT

Japan to trial HIV drugs on coronavirus patients

From Justin McCurry in Tokyo:

Japan is to trial HIV antiretroviral drugs to treat people with coronavirus, the government said on Tuesday, as the number of infections in the country reached 520, including 454 cases onboard the Diamond Princess cruise liner.

Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, said the government was "currently conducting preparations so that clinical trials using HIV medication on the novel coronavirus can start as soon as possible".

Suga said he couldn't comment on how long it would take for the new drug to be approved.

Doctors in Thailand said they appeared to have had some success in treating severe cases of the coronavirus with a combination of influenza medication and HIV antivirals lopinavir and ritonavir.

Thai doctors used an lopinavir-ritonavir combination along with the flu drug oseltamivir - also known as Tamiflu - to treat a Chinese coronavirus patient in her 70s, the Thai ministry of public health said in a report this month, according to Japan's Nikkei Asian Review.

The woman's condition had not improved 10 days after she was diagnosed, but she recovered within 48 hours of being treated with the combination of HIV and flu drugs, the report said.

block-time published-time 5.26am GMT

Senior Wuhan hospital doctor dies from Covid-19

A senior doctor treating patients in Wuhan has died from the coronavirus outbreak.

"Liu Zhiming, the director of Wuhan Wuchang hospital, died at 10.30am this morning after resuscitation efforts failed," reported the ChinaCentral Television's microblog.

enltrDr. Liu Zhiming, head of Wuchang Hospital, passed away after being infected with the novel #coronavirus.            #COVID19           pic.twitter.com/rqWMMcPMt4

- China Daily (@ChinaDaily) February 18, 2020

A hospital director in Hubei province has also died of the virus, it was confirmed, as the authorities in the city step up their attempts to roundup everyone infected.

My colleague Verna Yu has the full story here:

Related:  Senior Wuhan doctor dies from coronavirus as authorities start to 'round up' patients

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.32am GMT

block-time published-time 5.12am GMT

Singapore Airlines reduces flights

Singapore Airlines is following Cathay Pacific and other airlines by temporarily cutting flights across its global network in the three months until May, it said on Tuesday, blaming the Covid-19 outbreak.

The main affected destinations include Frankfurt, Jakarta, London, Los Angeles, Mumbai, Paris, Seoul, Sydney and Tokyo.

"Singapore Airlines and SilkAir will temporarily reduce services across our network due to weak demand as a result of the Covid-19 outbreak," it said. "We will continue to monitor the situation and make further adjustments as necessary."

block-time published-time 4.58am GMT

Earlier I posted on the development of what appears to be an app-based health checking system in China.

A reader has been in touch to tell me that such a system has been in place in the southern city of Shenzhen for a couple of weeks.

A drone carrying a QR code placard near a toll station in Shenzhen on 8 February to register vehicles returning to the city. Photograph: Chine Nouvelle/SIPA/REX/Shutterstock

It has worked like this.

QR codes were put up on the bulletin boards of residential communities with people advised to scan the codes and then visit a website and enter their phone numbers, after which they would receive a text message confirming their movements. Once they'd done this, residents could then register with the local administration and be allowed a transit pass to get back into their own communities.

Since 1 February, movement has been greatly restricted in Guangdong. On Saturday the province introduced "real name" verification just to ride the metro.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.07am GMT

block-time published-time 4.08am GMT

More from the Australian minister's press call.

He was asked if those passengers on the ship were angry at having to be placed in quarantine despite already having been isolated on the ship for two weeks.

Health minister Greg Hunt says he understands their frustration and a mental health hotline and counselling service has been set up for them. But because of ongoing infections on the ship where 454 people have been infected, "there was no choice".

Hunt says:

The medical advice from theAustralian Health Protection Principals Committee was clear and categorical, that an additional period of 14 days would be required. They have our deep sympathy. It must have been a very, very difficult time. And for many it would be frustrating. But we need to protect and support those Australians who have been on the ship, whilst protecting and supporting the entire containment arrangement in Australia.

Australia's chief medical officer, Prof Brendan Murphy,  is also at the briefing and he's asked if it's possible that the passengers - because of the growing number of cases on the ship - are more contagious than the Wuhan evacuees.

Prof Murphy says it's "possible" but adds that all the evacuees have tested negative and have also had a "proper throat swab sent to the lab and they'll all have a health screen.

We suspect that the risk for most of them is very low. But because some of them may have been exposed, we're doing this quarantine. So, potentially there might be a slightly higher risk, but if that's the case, we're absolutely well-prepared for it.

block-time published-time 3.59am GMT

Australian cruise passengers preapred for evacuation

Australia health minister, Greg Hunt, is giving details about how its citizens are going to be evacuated from the Diamond Princess.

Speaking in Darwin in the Northern territory, Hunt says the government is "talking to all of the Australian passengers on the Diamond Princess today" and it expects to have about 200 people on board an evacuation flight.

"It could be less. It could be a few more. But at this stage foreign affairs is going through the process of contacting everybody. And once we have final numbers, we'll provide them immediately."

Once they arrive back in Australia, Hunt says, they will be quarantined at Howard Springs for 14 days.

The last 36 people quarantined on Christmas Island - people who were evacuated from Wuhan two weeks ago - will be moved tomorrow, Hunt says, after 242 were repatriated on Monday.

Australian evacuees who were quarantined on Christmas Island arrive back in Sydney on Monday night. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters

"It was a really great example of the Australian spirit. Those who were quarantined, those who were taking care of them. And I understand it was a very emotional time at the departure, and they bonded and went very well. The remaining 36 are due to leave tomorrow. Then it takes some time to prepare the facility in case more - there are more people required to fill the spaces."

block-time published-time 3.44am GMT

UK to evacuate citizens from Diamond Princess

The British Foreign and Commonwealth Office said on Tuesday morning that it would evacuate citizens from the Diamond Princess cruise ship, and urged travellers who wish to be flown home to contact officials, writes Rebecca Ratcliffe, our south-east Asia correspondent.

A worker in a protective suit checks the temperatures of US passengers who were on board the Diamond Princess as they are flown to Lackland air force base in San Antonio, Texas. Photograph: Courtesy of Philip and Gay Court/Reuters

More than 450 passengers onboard the ship have now been infected with the virus - the biggest cluster of cases outside of mainland China.

In a statement, the FCO said:

Given the conditions on board, we are working to organise a flight back to the UK for British nationals on the Diamond Princess as soon as possible. Our staff are contacting British nationals on board to make the necessary arrangements. We urge all those who have not yet responded to get in touch immediately.

The British government has come under mounting pressure to fly citizens back from the UK, with several other countries already announcing plans to do so. The US flew more than 300 American citizens out on Sunday, 14 of whom tested positive for the virus before getting on the plane.  Passengers onboard the ship have been mostly confined to their cabins since 3 February.

Affected British nationals should call the British Embassy in Tokyo on +81 3 5211 1100, the FCO said.

block-time published-time 3.32am GMT

China 'rolling out health check app to track spread'

Alibaba, the huge Chinese technology company, appears to be rolling out a health check app which will help authorities keep track of the virus as people return to work.

Beginning in Alibaba's base city of Hangzhou near Shanghai, its subsidiary Alipay - China's Paypal - will "provide development support for a national health code system" which will track people's self-quarantine based on basic health information and travel history, according to the website Technode.

People will be required to self-report their health and travel history over the past few weeks into the app. So as people return to work, companies will be asked to keep track of their employees' health and allow the government to monitor people who they think could be at risk of being infected, perhaps from knowledge of proximity with an infected person.

Once registered - it's not clear if the system is mandatory or not - a resident would receive a coloured code. Residents with a green code means they are allowed to move around the city freely. Yellow means a seven-day quarantine, and r ed requires a 14-day quarantine.

This tweet suggests what it looks like:

enltrChina's national health code rating system, by #alipay and            #wechat, during the Covid-19            #coronavavirus. Green=pass, yewllow = need self-quarantine for 7 days, red=need self-quarantine for 14 days, then turn into green again.??            pic.twitter.com/eRaWysx3tC

- yuwen ZHANG (@yuwen_ZHANG_) February 17, 2020

I'm indebted to a reader,  Drew Gough, for spotting this. Drew lived in Hangzhou for two years while working for Alibaba. He says that a friend in Shanghai has received a text message - along with all other residents of the city - saying that it is mandatory to wear a face mask at all times while outside, and failure to do so was breaking the law and punishable by up to 10 days being detained.

The Alipay health code is also being rolled out in Shanghai, according to Technode.

block-time published-time 2.59am GMT

South Korea is sending the presidential jet to evacuate its citizens from the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan, according to the Yonhap news agency.

enltrS. Korean presidential jet to fly to Japan to evacuate 5 people from quarantined cruise ship https://t.co/X3mPDShfNB

- Yonhap News Agency (@YonhapNews) February 18, 2020

Speaking in Seoul on Tuesday, president Moon Jae-in said the economy faced an "emergency" situation because of the virus and the government would be making an all-out effort to boost growth.

"(The government) shouldn't quibble over whether anything is unprecedented or not, rather, we should take every possible measure we can think of on the table to deploy them," Moon said in a cabinet meeting, Reuters reports.

Last week, the governor of the Bank of Korea said the central bank was working on financial aid packages for those sectors directly affected by the spreading coronavirus. The carmakers Hyundai and Kia were forced to suspend production at their plants because of a lack of components from China although output has been resumed after parts were sourced from elsewhere in Asia and some Chinese factories reopened.

enltr #Nikkei and            #Kospi are losing altitude. Given the            #Chinese support for their mkts, would think this is impacting/confirming our decline. Globex            $SPX futures $$ES_H            pic.twitter.com/x2cn5uW6HK

- Kate's Dad (@KASDad) February 18, 2020

The local Kospi stock market index has taken a decent hit today. It is down 1.35%.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.03am GMT

block-time published-time 2.49am GMT

In Japan, our correspondent Justin McCurry reports on how the outbreak has disrupted the planned celebrations of the emperor's 60th birthday.

Japan's emperor Naruhito and empress Masako wave to well-wishers during a public appearance for new year in Tokyo. Photograph: Kim Kyung Hoon/Reuters

Justin writes:

Birthday celebrations for Japan's new emperor have become the latest victim of the coronavirus outbreak. The imperial household agency said Emperor Naruhito and Empress Masako would not appear in public to mark his 60th birthday on Sunday due to concerns over the possible spread of the virus among large groups of people. The event regularly attracts tens of thousands of people to the inner grounds of the imperial palace in Tokyo.

Naruhito's birthday address would have been his first since he ascended the Chrysanthemum throne on 1 May after his father, Akihito, became the first Japanese emperor to abdicate in more than 200 years.

The emperor's birthday is a rare opportunity for the public to see senior members of the imperial family at the palace. Naruhito and Masako were due to greet well-wishers from a palace balcony three times on Sunday, along with the crown prince and his family.

"We made the decision to cancel the public event at the palace, which is attended every year by many people in close proximity, after considering the risk of the virus spreading," Kenji Ikeda, the vice grand steward of the agency, said at a press conference, according to the Kyodo news agency. The last time the emperor's birthday celebration was cancelled was 1996, amid a hostage crisis at the Japanese embassy in Peru.

The agency's decision to scrap the celebrations comes after Japan's health minister, Katsunobu Kato, said people should avoid crowds and non-essential gatherings. "We want to ask the public to avoid non-urgent, non-essential gatherings," Kato said. "We want elderly and those with pre-existing conditions to avoid crowded places."

block-time published-time 2.27am GMT

Hong Kong increases emergency fund to HK$25bn

Carrie Lam, Hong Kong's chief executive, has boosted the funds available to tackle the coronavirus outbreak to HK$28bn (US$3.60bn) from HK$25bn pledged previously to ease the impact on the city's battered economy.

Lam last week had said the government would give one-off payments to businesses across the city and the hospital authority.

One person has died from the virus in Hong Kong and 60 people have been infected.

The numbers are very small compared with China but the city is facing an economic crisis with the double hit of the virus and last year's street protests. Visitor numbers have fallen off a cliff.

enltrIf you've hated Hong Kong's crowded streets, now is the time to come. Early indications suggest visitor arrivals are DOWN 99%. @ericlamTO           https://t.co/lPMLe3T08k           pic.twitter.com/9NYWKfzfWB

- David Ingles (@DavidInglesTV) February 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.29am GMT

block-time published-time 2.16am GMT

After a very strong day yesterday when they were buoyed by more central bank stimulus, China's stock markets have dipped a bit today.

The Shanghai Composite is off 0.2%  although the Shenzhen Composite, which is more tech heavy, has just gone back into positive territory.

In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng is down 1%.

Elsewhere in Asia Pacific, losses have widened from the last time I updated the scoreboard. The Nikkei is down 1%  now and the Kospi in Seoul is off 1.3%.

Sydney is still down 0.2%, but no doubt saved from further falls by publication of minutes from the Reserve Bank of Australia today which painted a gloomy picture of the economy, especially on consumer demand. Policymakers are ready with more stimulus, which investors just love. Bad news is good news, folks.

enltrNothing really new in #RBA minutes...given the SOMP, parliamentary testimony since the last meeting. RBA considered the impact of the bushfires & Covid-19. Weighed up the costs & benefits of further rate cuts and decided to hold...but remains prepared to ease further if needed            pic.twitter.com/2zBHdPThFf

- Shane Oliver (@ShaneOliverAMP) February 18, 2020

The bank also warned about downside cornavirus risks.

enltr* #RBA : CORONAVIRUS A MATERIAL NEAR TERM RISK TO CHINA, TRADE * RBA: CUT COULD SPUR BORROWING AND STRONG UPSWING IN HOUSING * RBA REVIEWED CASE FOR FURTHER RATE CUT AT FEBRUARY MEETING * RBA PREPARED TO EASE FURTHER TO SUPPORT GROWTH, JOBS, CPI            $aud pushing through 0.67 handle

- Kyle Rodda (@KyleR_IG) February 18, 2020

block-time published-time 1.53am GMT

All infected people in Wuhan being 'rounded up'

In China, the fight to contain the virus is continuing despite encouragement that the number of new cases has fallen below 2,000 for the first time since January.

The Global Times newspaper reports that a "dragnet style" operation is under way in Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak, to make sure all those infected are "rounded up".

The operation was ordered by the city's new party chief, Wang Zhonglin, on Sunday and aims to be completed in three days. Big data and AI would be used to assist the operation.

enltrIf Wuhan fails to round up all #COVID19 patients, no matter how many makeshift hospitals we build, it would be inadequate to curb the epidemic, analysts said.            https://t.co/wd8iOpfyKE           pic.twitter.com/cjlhlUqkPM

- Global Times (@globaltimesnews) February 17, 2020

Here is what the news outlet reported yestedray:

The three-day campaign aims to fulfill five objectives: have all suspected victims receive nucleic acid tests; round up all infected patients; check all patients with fever; put under quarantine anyone who has had close contact with patients; and ensure all communities and villages implement 24-hour closed-off management measures.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.53am GMT

block-time published-time 1.35am GMT

It is not all gloom and doom in the economics department. It seems that in Hong Kong, where toilet paper is running short, some manufacturers are doing quite well. The Hong Kong-listed paper maker Vinda has seen its shares rise 41% this year.

enltrCoronavirus survival starter kit, @DavidInglesTV always comes through with the chart goods. Year-to-date gains for            #coronavirus related stocks: Online healthcare platform Ping An Good Doctor 36% Toilet paper maker Vinda 41% Instant noodle maker Nissin Foods 13%            pic.twitter.com/mHV3hNC95H

- Haidi Lun Stroud-Watts ??? (@HaidiLun) February 18, 2020

This follows an armed raid on a truck load of toilet rolls in Hong Kong amid panic-buying of necessities.

block-time published-time 1.24am GMT

Canada to evacuate citizens from Diamond Princess

A flight has left Canada  to evacuate its citizens aboard the Diamond Princess in Yokohama, Canada's chief public health officer has said in the last hour.

enltr1/4 The #GoC is assisting Canadians to return home following the outbreak of            #COVID19 on the            #DiamondPrincess cruise ship docked in Yokohama, Japan. Precautions are in place to detect, prevent and control any potential            #COVID19 :            https://t.co/3tjfijMcRZ

- Dr. Theresa Tam (@CPHO_Canada) February 18, 2020

Dr Theresa Tam said Canada would evacuate asymptomatic Canadians and they would undergo a 14-day quarantine at Cornwall airbase in Ontario.

It follows similar moves by the US and Australia to evacuate people from the ship on which 454 people have been infected with the virus.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.25am GMT

block-time published-time 1.13am GMT

Asian stock markets have seen a dip this morning after Apple's announcement that the outbreak was causing shortages of the iPhone and that it would fail to meet its revenue target for this quarter.

The Nikkei in Tokyo fell 0.6%  this morning and the ASX200 was down 0.2% in Sydney. Seoul was down 0.56%. Chinese and Hong Kong markets open shortly.

Apple's announcement follows a profit waring from Cathay Pacific on Monday. The Hong Kong-based airline, already hit hard by the city's protest movement, has cancelled 40% of its flights this month and next because of the virus.

BHP, the world's biggest mining company, said that it might have to cut its growth forecasts for the year if the outbreak is not contained in the March quarter.

But... stock markets have weathered the coronavirus outbreak without too much alarm because investors have bet that central banks, led by China, will pump enough stimulus back into their economies to make sure things stay on an even keel.

The US Federal Reserve cut interest rates last year and that has helped fuel a boom in the US economy which is also helping to shrug off fears about a China slowdown.

block-time published-time 12.59am GMT

There are rumbling concerns that passengers who were allowed to leave the cruise ship MV Westerdam in Cambodia may yet be infected with the virus.

UK officials are trying to contact Britons who disembarked after experts said the checking process may not have been handled properly. One person tested positive after leaving the vessel, which was refused by five countries due to concerns that passengers were infected.

Passengers from the Westerdam cruise ship on a bus for a visit to the Cambodian capital Phnom Penh. Photograph: STR/FRESH NEWS/AFP via Getty Images

Mark Harris, a professor of virology at the University of Leeds, said: "If you have got people who are infected at an early stage they might not test positive, they might not show any symptoms but they could go on to develop full-blown disease. "

Check out our full story here:

Related:  Coronavirus: UK trying to contact Britons who left cruise ship in Cambodia

block-time published-time 12.33am GMT

The latest figures show that more than 12,000 people have recovered from the infection out of a total of more than 73,000 who have contracted it.

We have to assume that many more will recover if we factor in the latest comments by the head of the World Health Organization.

WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus talks to the media in Geneva on Monday. Photograph: Salvatore Di Nolfi/EPA

Speaking in Geneva, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said data from China had helped form a "a clearer picture of the outbreak" and that it appeared that four out of five people infected would recover. It was not as deadly as Sars or Mers, he said, adding:

More than 80% of patients have mild disease and will recover, 14% have severe disease including pneumonia and shortness of breath, 5% have critical disease including respiratory failure, septic shock and multi-organ failure, and 2% of cases are fatal,. The risk of death increases the older you are.

Our health editor, Sarah Boseley, has the full story here:

Related:  Coronavirus causes mild disease in four in five patients, says WHO

block-time published-time 12.22am GMT

98 new deaths recorded in China

Those national health commission figures have been released in the last few minutes.

98 new fatalities were recorded on Monday, the commission said on Tuesday morning, taking the death toll in mainland China rose to 1,868. There were 93 deaths in Hubei, 72 of them in the capital Wuhan where the outbreak started.

Across mainland China, there were 1,886 new confirmed infections  on Monday, bringing the total so far to 72,436, the commission said.

enltr #Coronavirus has killed 1,868 on Chinese mainland as of Monday, over 12,000 patients recovered. Other key figures: - 72,436 confirmed cases, another 60 in HK (1 death), 10 in Macao and 22 in Taiwan (1 death) - 12,552 discharged from hospital - 11,741 in critical condition            pic.twitter.com/kWy7MjM9Rg

- CGTN (@CGTNOfficial) February 18, 2020

block-time published-time 12.12am GMT

Welcome to our rolling coverage of the Covid-19 outbreak, which we can start by relaying the latest figures from the health commission in Hubei.

It said on Tuesday morning that 93 more deaths were recorded on Monday, taking the total in the stricken province to 1,789. Another 1,807 cases were added as well for a total in the province of 59,989.

Those numbers are lower than the figures from Sunday (100 deaths and 1,933 new cases) so will give some encouragement to China's efforts to lockdown its citizens and contain the spread. But these are, of course, only the figures from the health commission and must be treated with some caution.

We haven't got the national figures from China yet but we expect them to be out soon.

The other key developements are

•The WHO says the virus causes only mild disease in 80% of people and has a markedly greater imnpact on older people.•WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said data from China had helped form a "a clearer picture of the outbreak".•UK officials are trying to track Britons who left the MV Westerdam cruise ship in Cambodia amid fears the virus could have spread more widely than thought.•Another 99 people have tested positive on board the cruise ship Diamond Princess•Apple has warned of a shortage of iPhones due to factory closures in China.•Germany's central bank has warned about the risk to the country's economy amid already slowing orders from China.•China is considering delaying its annual people's congress, set for 5 March in Beijing.•The Tokyo Marathon has been scaled down to just elite runners.

The WHO says the virus causes only mild disease in 80% of people and has a markedly greater imnpact on older people.

WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said data from China had helped form a "a clearer picture of the outbreak".

UK officials are trying to track Britons who left the MV Westerdam cruise ship in Cambodia amid fears the virus could have spread more widely than thought.

Another 99 people have tested positive on board the cruise ship Diamond Princess

Apple has warned of a shortage of iPhones due to factory closures in China.

Germany's central bank has warned about the risk to the country's economy amid already slowing orders from China.

China is considering delaying its annual people's congress, set for 5 March in Beijing.

The Tokyo Marathon has been scaled down to just elite runners.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.18am GMT