A mystery coronavirus outbreak in New Zealand has forced the government to postpone the dissolution of parliament five weeks ahead of a general election that the opposition party is now demanding be delayed.

Opposition National leader Judith Collins criticised the government on Wednesday for a lack of transparency surrounding the community outbreak in Auckland and said the election - scheduled for September 19 - should be delayed until November or even next year.

She said the government, led by Jacinda Ardern, had failed to consult National on the decision to lockdown Auckland and was not sharing health information in a timely manner.

"We need to know what the prime minister is proposing for the election date," Collins said.

"It is unsustainable to expect there to be a fair and just election at a time when the opposition parties are not free to campaign and people have no certainty as to whether they will be able to cast their vote on election day."

Hours after New Zealand's first positive test of community-transmitted Covid-19 in three months, prime minister Jacinda Ardern made the decision to place Auckland into stage 3 lockdown - closing schools and businesses.

Panic buying returned to supermarkets ahead of the lockdown, which began at midday, and many locals tried to flee the city. Queues for testing were up to five hours long in some parts of the city, local media reported.

Four people within the same family tested positive for the illness in south Auckland on Tuesday, and the origins of where they contracted the disease remain a mystery.

Another four "probable" cases, all closely connected to the original cluster, were confirmed in Auckland on Wednesday. All four were displaying symptoms of Covid-19.

Genomic sequencing was being deployed, Ardern said, and if the source could not be located by Friday it was likely the lockdown would be extended.

The workplace of one of the family member's has been shut down and workers and their families ordered to stay at home by the director-general of health.

Contact tracing was also underway in the city of Rotorua, which two of the family members visited over the weekend while infectious and displaying symptoms.

"I know this is unsettling but we do have a plan," the prime minister said on Wednesday.

But opposition leader Judith Collins criticised the government for the return of the virus.

"I'm extremely disappointed," she said. "The disappointment is that it has occurred at all"

The dissolution of parliament, due to take place on Wednesday,  was delayed and a decision would be made on Monday, Ardern said. The electoral commission was working through the implications of the outbreak for the upcoming general election, scheduled for 19 September.

"It's too early to make decisions but there is a bit of flexibility to move the election date if required," Ardern told a televised media conference, adding that the poll could be rescheduled for any date before 21 November.

An election could continue under stage 2 restrictions, but it would have to be moved if the lockdown was tightened to the next level. Ardern said she would make a firmer decision on the election date by Monday.

Per the Prime Minister's announcement, the dissolution of Parliament will no longer be held today. The dissolution can be rescheduled for any time before 13 October 2020 (i.e. 3 years after the writ for the 2017 general election was returned). #nzpol - NZ Parliament (@NZParliament) August 11, 2020

Addressing the media for more than two hours, Ardern gave a detailed timeline of the latest cases, revealing it took her seven hours to make the decision to shut down New Zealand's economic hub for the second time.

By comparison, Melbourne took two weeks to enter lockdown after mystery cases began to be recorded.

Auckland's level 3 lockdown lasts until midnight on Friday, but residents would know before then if it would be extended, or be increased to Level 4, the PM said.

Aged care facilities went into full lockdown in a bid to protect the vulnerable residents, who made up the bulk of deaths during New Zealand's first outbreak.

This is how the NZX responded this morning pic.twitter.com/cp4g5vmNB0 - Nicholas Pointon (@nichpointon) August 11, 2020

Experts have said it is likely Auckland's lockdown will stay in place longer than three days, and they overwhelmingly supported the government's "rapid response" approach, as it was likely there were now more cases circulating in the community.

The family involved had all worked, travelled and moved around the city while symptomatic, meaning spread of the illness could be extensive.

"It's obviously disappointing to have cases of community transmission again in New Zealand. But we knew this could happen at some point. Now the race is on to find the source of the cases and break any chains of transmission," said Associate Professor Siouxsie Wiles of Auckland University. "Any delays just mean more opportunities for the virus to spread further...we only have to look to Victoria to see how catastrophic any delays can be."

"People need to prepare themselves for these restrictions being in place for longer than three days if more cases come to light or the source of the infection proves difficult to pin down."

The rest of New Zealand has had its alert level increased from 1 to 2, meaning social-distancing and heightened hygiene practices are now in place.

Demand for testing, panic-buying of essential goods, and widespread purchasing of face masks was reported country-wide.

"The best-case scenario is if we're able to identify the source of the infection," Ardern said.

"You will hear us continue to give updates as to whether or not we're getting closer to that information. If we aren't able to identify the source and we see positives that are difficult to link, that makes it more difficult."

Director-general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, said there was no country in the world better prepared than New Zealand to beat back an outbreak.

"We've done this before, we can do this again," he said.

The prime minister said 5m face masks would be made available for New Zealanders from government stocks and she urged Aucklanders to wear them whenever venturing out of the home; though she shied away from making the request mandatory.

Ardern also encouraged the public to make their own face masks from cloths or bandannas if they were unable to buy or access them.

New Zealand currently has the capacity to test more than 12,000 people a day, with stocks of 270,000 tests in-country.

Nine police checkpoints have been erected around Auckland's regional boundaries, and more officers have been deployed to public hotspots such as supermarkets.

So far Aucklanders had largely reacted calmly to the news, though there were reports of long lines at testing facilities, and isolated incidents of panic-buying and disorder at some supermarkets. Some Aucklanders were also turned away from police checkpoints after trying to leave the city post-lockdown.

Dr Hiran Thabrew, a child psychiatrist and paediatrician at the University of Auckland and Auckland district health board, said returning to lockdown would provoke feelings of anxiety, disappointment and "even a sense of grief" for many.