block-time published-time 1.16am BST

Here is your end-of-the-day recap

As we all amble into the weekend (if you're still paying attention to things like "time" and "days" at this stage of sheltering in place) let's take a look at some of the top stories of the late afternoon.

•California governor Gavin Newsom signed two executive orders to facilitate mail-in voting for the 2020 election after Donald Trump sought to discourage it by defunding the Postal Service.•New Jersey governor Phil Murphy also announced an executive order making it easier to vote by mail.•Elizabeth Warren demanded a probe of the recently-appointed Trump-allied postmaster.•Maxine Waters held a press conference at the main US Post office in Los Angeles to bring attention to Trump's actions against the USPS.•Joe Biden called the USPS situation "bizarre".•Kanye West may appear on the ballot in Iowa after a swathe of petitions was delivered there today.•Washington congresswoman Pramila Jayapal endorsed new Democratic vice presidential nominee Kamala Harris in a Los Angles Times op-ed.•Trump held a little rally in New Jersey of police officers.•The US Department of Defense has established a new task force to investigate UFOs.

California governor Gavin Newsom signed two executive orders to facilitate mail-in voting for the 2020 election after Donald Trump sought to discourage it by defunding the Postal Service.

New Jersey governor Phil Murphy also announced an executive order making it easier to vote by mail.

Elizabeth Warren demanded a probe of the recently-appointed Trump-allied postmaster.

Maxine Waters held a press conference at the main US Post office in Los Angeles to bring attention to Trump's actions against the USPS.

Joe Biden called the USPS situation "bizarre".

Kanye West may appear on the ballot in Iowa after a swathe of petitions was delivered there today.

Washington congresswoman Pramila Jayapal endorsed new Democratic vice presidential nominee Kamala Harris in a Los Angles Times op-ed.

Trump held a little rally in New Jersey of police officers.

The US Department of Defense has established a new task force to investigate UFOs.

block-time published-time 1.06am BST

In other news, the Pentagon announced Friday it has established a UFO task force to "improve its understanding" of "unidentified aerial phenomena".

"The mission of the task force is to detect, analyze and catalog UAPs that could potentially pose a threat to U.S. national security," the department of defense said in a statement.

block-time published-time 1.02am BST

The governor of New Jersey announced on Friday the majority of its 2020 election would be carried out by mail

Governor Phil Murphy, a Democrat, is the latest to announce plans to move as much voting as possible to mail-in ballots to address the spread of Covid-19.

He said during a news conference that he will sign an executive order calling for all registered voters to get a ballot beginning Oct. 5 along with a prepaid return envelope.

Though he did not cite him by name, he made clear in the press conference the move is in response to Donald Trump attempting to starve the Postal Service of cash to purposely hinder mail-in voting.

The postal service, the governor said, was "being turned into a political football" by people who don't believe in getting people to turn out to vote.

block-time published-time 12.47am BST

Donald Trump spoke to a group of several dozen police officers at a 'Cops for Trump' rally Friday evening at his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey.

He spoke of his brother Robert, whom he visited in the hospital earlier in the day, telling the police "he respected you." Robert Trump is in the hospital with a "serious" condition, the White House has confirmed.

enltr"We can't lose this election, ok?" Trump tells police officers at event a Bedminster. pic.twitter.com/Ef4RT2krZ6

- Jennifer Jacobs (@JenniferJJacobs) August 14, 2020

Former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani also spoke at the event, targeting newly-announced Democratic vice presidential candidate Kamala Harris, calling her a "bully" and a "horrible person."

enltrRudy Giuliani: "I interviewed an African-American gentleman the other day. I have the tape. And he said that this is the best President for the African-American community since Abraham Lincoln -- nobody even close." pic.twitter.com/tiXRWpcled

- The Hill (@thehill) August 14, 2020

Giuliani also for some reason announced that he interviewed one African American man who said Trump was good.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.59am BST

block-time published-time 12.39am BST

Joe Biden has commented on the Post Office drama of the week, calling the removal of post boxes due to lack of funding "bizarre" at a fundraiser on Friday.

The USPS announced late Friday it would stop removing collection boxes after backlash.

"We are suspending the removal of collection boxes at this time," the agency said in a statement. "All postings on collection boxes will be removed, as we will no longer be pulling any boxes."

block-time published-time 11.47pm BST

A binder full of petitions to put Kanye West's name on the ballot in the 2020 presidential elections was submitted in Iowa on Friday, making it the latest state to potentially include the rapper-turned-candidate in its elections.

West is already on the ballot in Colorado, Oklahoma, and Vermont. Petitions were also recently submitted to add his name in Wisconsin.

Journalist Ben Jacobs discovered the petitions in Iowa were submitted by a Republican operative there. He also found West is registered as a Republican voter in Wyoming.

Republicans are reportedly working to support West's campaign in hopes it will split the Democratic vote and aid Donald Trump's chances of winning.

There is speculation West is actively working with Trump as he met with the president's son in law Jared Kushner and reportedly talks to him daily. The rapper's wife Kim Kardashian West has met with Trump in the White House in the past to advocate for the release of prisoners.

block-time published-time 11.13pm BST

Backlash around the postal service continues: representative Maxine Waters reportedly will hold a presser at the Los Angeles post office at 4pm PST today, to bring attention to the new USPS rules from the Trump administration and their effects on postal operations.

enltr"Auntie Maxine" is mad: "Enough is enough!" says @RepMaxineWaters advisory - announcing she's marching down to the main Post Office in Los Angeles today at 4 pm, holding presser to bring attention "to effects Trump Administration's new USPS rules are having on postal operations."

- Carla Marinucci (@cmarinucci) August 14, 2020

Elizabeth Warren has also demanded action surrounding Trump's USPS actions. She called for a probe of new Trump-appointed postmaster Louis DeJoy and promised to use "every in the toolbox to stop Trump & DeJoy from sabotaging the USPS".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.58pm BST

block-time published-time 10.47pm BST

The Washington congresswoman Pramila Jayapal endorsed new Democratic vice presidential nominee Kamala Harris in a Los Angles Times op-ed on Friday.

Jayapal highlighted Harris's immigrant background and their shared South Asian heritage and said Harris is uniquely equipped to take on Donald Trump's racist rhetoric. From the piece:

Sen. Harris' nomination offers a clear contrast to a xenophobic president who has attacked immigrants and asylum seekers and the very idea of immigration at every turn, issuing a Muslim ban, separating families, caging children and even threatening student visa programs that allowed Sen. Harris' mother and me to come to America in the first place.

Jayapal said that in 2016 when she became the first South Asian American woman to be elected to the House, Harris became the first South Asian American woman to be elected to the Senate. Together they represent just two of 79 women of color to ever have served in Congress.

This op-ed comes as Trump recently targeted Harris with racist birther theories. The president, who first gained momentum in politics with a racist campaign claiming Barack Obama was not born in the US, said in a press conference on Thursday that he "heard she doesn't meet the requirements" to be vice president.

Jayapal does not comment on that specific controversy in her op-ed, but cites the immigrant experience as an asset.

"Immigrants and the children of immigrants are resilient," Jayapal wrote. "We push boulders up mountains and succeed because we have to. And that's the kind of leadership we need."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.14pm BST

block-time published-time 10.35pm BST

The former Missouri senator Claire McCaskill weighed in on Donald Trump's post office drama in a tweet on Friday, calling him a "liar" who is "trying to steal an election in broad daylight".

Her tweet came in response to a report that showed Trump had met with the new postmaster general, Louis DeJoy, last week despite saying he had not spoken to the new official.

Trump has named DeJoy, a North Carolina ally and Republican National Convention fundraiser, to the helm of the Postal Service. The action has many concerned Trump will leverage this ally's new position to block funds from the postal service, which Trump has advocated for to suppress mail-in voting.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.59pm BST

block-time published-time 10.28pm BST

The California governor, Gavin Newsom, announced on Friday two executive orders that would "jump start" the state's mail-in ballot process.

enltrI signed 2 EOs that jump started our mail in ballot process. We are providing drop off sites and safe voting sites. I signed legislation to double down on those commitments. And have a provision that allows 17 extra days to collect ballots. Because we believe in DEMOCRACY. https://t.co/jMhBprfji4

- Gavin Newsom (@GavinNewsom) August 14, 2020

The orders include the provision of safe voting sites and drop off sites for ballots, in addition to an extension of 17 days to collect ballots.

They came in direct response to Donald Trump's statements that he refuses to provide additional funding to the US Post Office ahead of November elections that will rely largely on mail-in ballots in an effort to suppress votes.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.59pm BST

block-time published-time 10.24pm BST

Kari Paul here in Oakland, California, blogging for you over the next few hours. Stay tuned for more news.

block-time published-time 10.12pm BST

Time for a late day recap

Here's what we've covered thus far in the latter half of the day. Be sure to keep following the blog as our West Coast team keeps you in-the-loop:

•Donald Trump in his presser briefing addressed charges filed against an former FBI lawyer, avoids rebuking a newly elected QAnon -supporter, before denying invoking misogyny and racism against California senator and VP pick Kamala Harris and Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren•New Jersey will mostly vote-by-mail this election, even as•Chaos continues between the Trump administration and USPS, including hundreds of sorting machines that have been removed, forcing even Barack Obama to speak out.•A GAO report found Homeland Security secretary Chad Wolf, among others, were illegally appointed

Donald Trump in his presser briefing addressed charges filed against an former FBI lawyer, avoids rebuking a newly elected QAnon -supporter, before denying invoking misogyny and racism against California senator and VP pick Kamala Harris and Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren

New Jersey will mostly vote-by-mail this election, even as

Chaos continues between the Trump administration and USPS, including hundreds of sorting machines that have been removed, forcing even Barack Obama to speak out.

A GAO report found Homeland Security secretary Chad Wolf, among others, were illegally appointed

Stay tuned for more!

block-time published-time 10.02pm BST

Are California schools prepared for virtual learning?

The start of the school year is a time of anticipation, anxiety and energy. This year, as 97% percent of school California's school districts begin the fall semester online, that anticipation has been multiplied exponentially, California school chief Tony Thurmond said today.

Thurmond joined governor Gavin Newsom and education expert Linda Darling-Hammond at today's presser to give a rundown of how educators across the start are preparing for a new school year after having months to reflect on the shortcomings of the virtual learning rollout last spring.

Chief among concerns is how to close the digital divide that's meant even access to computers and devices - a gap that remains, despite ongoing efforts of school districts and nonprofits to get tech into the hands of every student. Thurmond faulted a worldwide run on technology for backlogs that have stalled efforts to deliver devices to students.

Roughly 7,000 students in Oakland this week lacked equipment and hotspots when the school year began earlier this week. Education advocates across the state continue to worry that low-income students will be left behind as the pandemic continues.

Darling-Hammond said plans are afoot to deliver instruction to students with disabilities and others who aren't well-served by online teaching. Even though school districts that find themselves on the state's watchlist - areas that face troubling rates of infections - are typically not allowed to hold in-person classes, they may still be able to offer in-person services for vulnerable students assuming they move in accordance with county health guidelines and work in very small groups.

The announcements come as infections and hospitalizations appear to have ticked down after a month of record-setting case numbers and death tolls. But school districts also move forward as Covid cases among children surges, challenging the assumption that children are unlikely to catch and spread the virus.

Read more:

Related:  Surge in Covid cases among children fuels fears over US school reopenings

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.16pm BST

block-time published-time 9.47pm BST

Marge Simpson has words for Trump advisor

Marge Simpson. Yes, the fictional character from the decades-running TV sitcom The Simpsons has something to say to Donald Trump and his campaign, excoriating senior legal advisor Jenna Ellis, who tweeted likening California senator Kamala Harris' voice to hers, a racist and sexist trope that invokes the common, "angry Black woman" stereotype.

enltrMarge Simpson has something to say. pic.twitter.com/viux96bAPf

- TheSimpsons (@TheSimpsons) August 14, 2020

"As an ordinary suburban housewife, I feel a little disrespected. I teach my children not to name call Jenna. I was going to say I'm pissed off, but I'm afraid they'd bleep it.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.48pm BST

block-time published-time 9.28pm BST

Meghan Markle talks voting rights to mark women's suffrage

Meghan Markle highlighted voting rights as an issue she is particularly passionate about during a conversation Friday at the 19th Represents, a summit to commemorate the 100th anniversary of women's suffrage in the US.

"I think it's often challenging for men and women alike, but certainly for people to remember just how hard it was to get the right to vote. And to be really aware of not taking that for granted," she said in an interview with Emily Ramshaw, CEO and co-founder of 19th News, a news organization.

Noting her husband has never been able to vote, Marke added: "I think it's such an interesting thing to say the right to vote is not a privilege, it is a right in and of itself. But I really do hope what you're able to encourage...women understand that their voices are needed now more than ever."

Markle, who repeatedly referred to voting rights as an issue she was passionate about, said she looked forward to using her voice in ways she hasn't been able to in the past.

block-time published-time 9.16pm BST

Why is Guyana co-nominating a Trump appointee for the IDB?

That's what other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean want to know. Guyana co-nominated White House adviser Mauricio Claver-Carone, the son of Cuban immigrants who had already been nominated by Donald Trump to lead the IDB - Latin America's main development bank. Claver-Carone told Reuters that Guyana's move reflected growing support for his candidacy.

But critics note no one from outside the Latin American and Caribbean region has lead the bank in its 60 year history, and Claver-Carone's appointment could complicate diplomacy should the president lose reelection in November.

Opponents also note the suspicious timing. Guyana only began production of an estimated 8 billion barrels of oil and natural gas in recent years after discovering a massive reserve just off its Caribbean coast in 2017. The estimate grew from 6 billion in January.

With the potential to be the largest oil producer in the Western Hemisphere, it has been in the middle of a resource grab by American oil companies.

Argentina, Mexico, Costa Rica  and Chile, as well as the European Union's foreign policy chief Josep Borrell, want to delay the 12 September vote, expressing concerns about having someone from outside the region lead the bank for the first time in six decades.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.22pm BST

block-time published-time 8.45pm BST

DHS secretary appointed illegally, watchdog report finds

According to a new report from the US Government Accountability Office, Acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf and acting Deputy Secretary Ken Cuccinelli are ineligible to serve in their current roles and were appointed in a way that circumvented federal laws.

enltrGovernment watchdog report that finds that Trump's acting Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security are not eligible to serve in their current roles based on the Federal Vacancies Reform Act @USGAO report here: https://t.co/Vim3Xk81Zf pic.twitter.com/RxhsAK8KP2

- Robbie Gramer (@RobbieGramer) August 14, 2020

The GAO concluded that their appointments were in violation of the Vacancies Reform Act.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.05pm BST

block-time published-time 8.40pm BST

California ends ban on high capacity gun magazines

A three-judge panel of the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals throws out California's ban on high-capacity ammunition magazines, saying the law violates the Second Amendment's protection of the right to bear firearms. Judge Kenneth Lee wrote for the panel's majority that "even well-intentioned laws must pass constitutional muster".

From the AP:

[The ban] strikes at the core of the Second Amendment - the right to armed self-defense."

[Lee also] noted that California passed the law "in the wake of heart-wrenching and highly publicized mass shootings," but said that isn't enough to justify a ban whose scope "is so sweeping that half of all magazines in America are now unlawful to own in California."

block-time published-time 8.17pm BST

USPS warns 46 states' ballots may not arrive in time

According to the Washington Post, the USPS had warns 46 states, and Washington DC that some mailed ballots may not arrive in time to be counted for November election.

From the Post :

Some states anticipate 10 times the normal volume of election mail. Six states and D.C. received warnings that ballots could be delayed for a narrow set of voters. But the Postal Service gave 40 others - including the key battleground states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Florida - more-serious warnings that their long-standing deadlines for requesting, returning or counting ballots were "incongruous" with mail service and that voters who send ballots in close to those deadlines may become disenfranchised.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.06pm BST

block-time published-time 8.14pm BST

Barack Obama: Trump attempting to 'kneecap' USPS

In a podcast with former campaign manager, David Plouffe, former president Barack Obama called out the Trump campaign's efforts to impede the US Postal Service directly. Obama said:

What we've seen in a way that is unique to modern political history is a president who is explicit in trying to discourage people from voting. What we've never seen before is a president say: 'I'm going to try to actively kneecap the postal service to [discourage] voting and I will be explicit about the reason I'm doing it'. That's sort of unheard of.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.34pm BST

block-time published-time 7.58pm BST

Hundreds of USPS sort machines taken offline

Both Vice and CNN obtained internal documents that the USPS is removing hundreds of high-volume mail-processing machines from facilities across the country.

From Vice:

"One of the documents also suggests these changes were in the works before Louis DeJoy, a top Trump donor and Republican fundraiser, became postmaster general, because it is dated May 15, a month before DeJoy assumed office and only nine days after the Board of Governors announced his selection."

Postal workers are expressing concern that these removals may decrease their capacity to process mail during election season.

enltr"Interviews with six postal workers and union officials, who spoke to Motherboard on condition of anonymity because they're not authorized to speak to the media, revealed these machine removals are still occurring in Michigan, West Virginia, Massachusetts, Maryland, and Texas." https://t.co/Sba0kabsA5

- Laura Wagner (@laurawags) August 14, 2020

The USPS had initially proposed removing as much as 20% of its letter sorting machines but then revised its plans weeks later, reducing the number to closer to 15 percent.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.06pm BST

block-time published-time 7.51pm BST

New Jersey governor: election to be mostly by mail

Despite increased reports of delays and slowdowns at the US Postal Service on account of the Trump administration, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy insisted Americans "must recognize that this is not a regular election year," and that and the 2020 general election will be mostly by mail.

Via a statement from the governor:

"Allowing people to spend five or ten minutes casting their ballots in person to protect the integrity of a presidential election doesn't seem like such a great risk.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.03pm BST

block-time published-time 7.21pm BST

Trump campaign rolls out events during DNC week

Is the GOP trolling the Democrats' revised national convention? Ahead of kick-off next week, Republicans unveiled three new stops on its on the campaign trail for Donald Trump, including key battleground states like Arizona, Minnesota and Wisconsin - where parts of the Democratic National Convention are still set to take place.

So where's the president headed?

•Mankato, Minnesota•Oshkosh, Wisconsin•Yuma, Arizona

Mankato, Minnesota

Oshkosh, Wisconsin

Yuma, Arizona

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.03pm BST

block-time published-time 7.05pm BST

Trump avoids questions on GOP rep's QAnon links

When pressed on his tweet congratulating QAnon supporting Marjorie Taylor Greene, Donald Trump danced around an answer.

Reporters noted how even some members of the Republican party have disowned her campaign following a series of racist videos that emerged complaining of an "Islamic invasion" into government offices.

enltrTrump refuses to answer a question about whether he embraces the lunatic QAnon conspiracy theory pic.twitter.com/j1GPDznrxl

- Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) August 14, 2020

Taylor Green also claimed Black and Hispanic men are held back by "gangs and dealing drugs", and pushes an antisemitic conspiracy theory that the billionaire philanthropist George Soros, who is Jewish, collaborated with the Nazis.

In response, the president rambled about Tayler Greene's victory, neither offering her support nor rebuking her comments.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.07pm BST

block-time published-time 6.55pm BST

Trump: "I have not been blunt' on Harris, invokes indigenous racial

Donald Trump rejected backlash to his critiques of California senator  Kamala Harris, telling reporters at his press conference Friday that he "had not been blunt" in referring to her as "nasty" or mean to Democratic rival Joe Biden.

When the reporter followed up asking "do you have a problem with a strong woman of color running in this election?" The president responded "not at all," before once again invoking a go-to racial slur against indigenous Americans to refer to Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.57pm BST

block-time published-time 6.49pm BST

Trump addresses Clinesmith charges in press conference

Donald Trump opened his press conference with a brief statement on Kevin Clinesmith, the former FBI lawyer who was assigned to the Russia investigation, and now plans to admit that he altered an email from the CIA investigators relied on to seek renewed court permission in 2017 for a secret wiretap on Carter Page.

"That's just the beginning, I would imagine".

block-time published-time 6.28pm BST

Early afternoon summary

It's been a busy morning and there is a lot more action to come, so stay tuned.

Here are the main events so far today in US political news.

•Joe Biden and Kamala Harrissigned the official paperwork required for them to receive the Democratic Party's nominations for president and vice-president respectively, which will happen at the convention next week.•A former FBI lawyer intends to plead guilty to falsifying a document as part of a deal with prosecutors conducting their own criminal inquiry of the Russia investigation, at the orders of the DoJ, the New York Times reported.•Donald Trump's brother Robert has been taken to hospital in New York "very ill", but with few details public. The president intends to visit him this afternoon.•Republican congressman Thomas Massie urged Donald Trump to pardon whistleblower Edward Snowden, after the president gave an interview where he said Snowdon, who is out of reach of the US authorities who want to prosecute him for revealing classified files about US secret surveillance of the public, is not being treated fairly.•The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has warned that the US death toll from the coronavirus will officially reach 200,000 by Labor Day in early September.

Joe Biden and Kamala Harrissigned the official paperwork required for them to receive the Democratic Party's nominations for president and vice-president respectively, which will happen at the convention next week.

A former FBI lawyer intends to plead guilty to falsifying a document as part of a deal with prosecutors conducting their own criminal inquiry of the Russia investigation, at the orders of the DoJ, the New York Times reported.

Donald Trump's brother Robert has been taken to hospital in New York "very ill", but with few details public. The president intends to visit him this afternoon.

Republican congressman Thomas Massie urged Donald Trump to pardon whistleblower Edward Snowden, after the president gave an interview where he said Snowdon, who is out of reach of the US authorities who want to prosecute him for revealing classified files about US secret surveillance of the public, is not being treated fairly.

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has warned that the US death toll from the coronavirus will officially reach 200,000 by Labor Day in early September.

block-time published-time 6.10pm BST

We're waiting for the president to begin a press briefing at the White House.

There could be many topics to hand for Donald Trump after another tumultuous week in Washington politics.

Also, Trump is later expected to visit his brother Robert Trump, who was taken to hospital in New York this morning, though no details are publicly known of his illness or condition.

One issue we expect Trump to address is the report this morning that a former FBI lawyer will plead guilty to falsifying a document as part of a deal with prosecutors conducting their own criminal inquiry of the Russia investigation, according to three people familiar with the case, as the New York Times scoop reported.

Keeping in mind, however, this paragraph:

The Justice Department's independent inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, has found that law enforcement officials had sufficient reason to open the Russia investigation, known inside the F.B.I. as Crossfire Hurricane, and found no evidence that they acted with political bias.

That doesn't mean there were mistakes along the way but a "witch hunt" it was not. The investigation actually began in the summer of 2016 into allegations that Trump and his election campaign were colluding with the Kremlin to get Trump into the White House, with the Russians actively interfering to achieve that aim.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.15pm BST

block-time published-time 6.00pm BST

There are growing fears over the handling of November's US presidential election after the postal service warned that the rules in a key battleground state could result in millions of votes left uncounted, my colleague Oliver Milman writes.

A record number of Americans are expected to vote via the postal service because of concerns over in-person voting during the coronavirus pandemic, which has so far claimed more than 160,000 US lives.

But in a letter to Pennsylvania's top official overseeing elections, the US Postal Service (USPS) warned that a one-week turnaround for mail-in ballots may not be possible.

Pennsylvania is a key swing state won by Donald Trump by less than 1% in 2016, and it could play a pivotal role again in 2020. Voters are able to request a mailed ballot up to seven days before the election, but ballots returned after election day cannot be counted.

In its letter, the USPS said its delivery capabilities will struggle to meet this rule, which "creates a risk that ballots requested near the deadline under state law will not be returned by mail in time to be counted under your laws as we understand them."

Pennsylvania officials have asked the state's supreme court to allow mail-in ballots to be counted up to three days after the election, as long as they are postmarked before election day.

block-time published-time 5.38pm BST

Trump going into 'win at all costs' mode?

Things are really ramping up at the White House this week or, specifically, in the Oval Office and the mind of Donald Trump.

It's looking increasingly like we are seeing the beginning of the final election push, where, to use a version of the words of former Trump fixer and now-felon Michael Cohen, in the forward of his new book that "all that matters is winning".

The nightly press conferences Trump's been holding have been an extraordinary stream of untruths and sinister threats, with a lot of projection of his own administration's dark tactics onto Joe Biden, such as Trump saying the Democrat won't follow science on the coronavirus, when public health expert-led science is exactly what Trump has been avoiding as much as possible for months.

He also leaned in to treasury secretary Steve Mnuchin and joked about how they couldn't give the United States Post Office the money the Democrats are requesting to be able to cope with mass voting by mail during the pandemic, because states would be "sending ballots all over the place, they don't even know where they're going, we're not going to give them that".

And warning that "it's going to be the greatest fraud in the history of elections", then admitting that he was holding back money because  he wants to curb mail-in voting  (which is thought more likely to favor the Democrats than Trump and the Republicans).

Then last night reaching for the same racist lie that he used to besmirch Barack Obama and updating the playbook to attackJ oe Biden's vice presidential pick, Kamala Harris.

Related:  As he struggles in the polls, Trump reaches for the racist playbook again

Now we await a Trump press conference where he may address any and all of these topics but will, surely, focus on the news that his administrations investigation of the motivations and methods of the investigation into allegations that Trump and his 2016 campaign colluded with the Russians is now beginning to  bear fruit for the president .

Cohen says of the Trump modus operandi, when he was working closely alongside him: "To Trump, life was a game and all that mattered was winning. In these dangerous days, I see the Republican Party and Trump's followers threatening the constitution-which is in far greater peril than is commonly understood-and following one of the worst impulses of humankind: the desire for power at all costs."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.04pm BST

block-time published-time 5.20pm BST

Biden and Harris sign paperwork for Democratic nomination

Pictures hitting the screens now of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris sitting at appropriately distanced tables in Wilmington, Delaware, home of Biden.

They were seen signing official paperwork required for becoming the Democratic Party nominees for president and vice president, respectively.

Biden earlier this week announced his choice of Harris to be his running mate for the White House.

The two will formally accept the party's nominations at the Democratic National Convention next week.

Biden and Harris sit down to sign the required documents for receiving the Democratic nomination for President and Vice President of the United States, in Wilmington, Delaware moments ago. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP

block-time published-time 5.15pm BST

Donald Trump to hold press briefing at White House at 1pm

The president has slotted in an unexpected press briefing this afternoon, earlier than what have become his nightly platforms around 5.30 or 6pm or so. He'll give a press conference at the White House at 1pm.

No word on topic but you can imagine the Durham reinvestigation of the Trump-Russia investigation might be top of the Trump Parallel Agenda.

That refers to breaking news in the New York Times just now that:

A former FBI lawyer intends to plead guilty to falsifying a document as part of a deal with prosecutors conducting their own criminal inquiry of the Russia investigation, according to three people familiar with the case.

At the direction of US attorney general Bill Barr, Connecticut federal prosecutor John H Durham was given the task of looking into the origins and execution of the investigation into allegations that Donald Trump and his 2016 election campaign colluded with the Russians to help Trump get elected.

The investigation was ultimately taken over by special council Robert Mueller in 2017, and also included an examination of allegations that the president obstructed justice during the investigation. Mueller presented his findings in 2019 and later testified to Congress.

Mueller concluded that the Russian government interfered in the 2016 election, but his investigation didn't find sufficient evidence to establish a criminal conspiracy between Trump's campaign and Russia. Mueller also examined about a dozen possible instances of obstruction of justice and pointedly said he could not exonerate the president.

In April this year, Barr said without evidence that he believed the Russia investigation that shadowed Donald Trump for the first two years of his administration was started without any basis and amounted to an effort to "sabotage the presidency".

Durham's investigation of the investigation has been ongoing.

Related:  Barr claims Trump-Russia investigation was FBI attempt to 'sabotage' the president

block-time published-time 4.47pm BST

Ex-FBI lawyer expected to plead guilty in Trump administration review of Russia investigation - report

Prosecutors are not expected to reveal any evidence of a broad anti-Trump conspiracy among law enforcement officials, the New York Times reported moments ago, writing:

The former FBI lawyer intends to plead guilty to falsifying a document as part of a deal with prosecutors conducting their own criminal inquiry of the Russia investigation, according to three people familiar with the case.

The lawyer, Kevin Clinesmith, 38, who was assigned to the Russia investigation, plans to admit that he altered an email from the C.I.A. that investigators relied on to seek renewed court permission in 2017 for a secret wiretap on the former Trump campaign adviser Carter Page, who had at times provided information to the spy agency. Mr. Clinesmith's lawyers said he made a mistake while trying to clarify facts for a colleague, the people said.

Mr. Clinesmith had written texts expressing opposition to President Trump, who is sure to tout the plea agreement as evidence that the Russia investigation was illegitimate and politically motivated. Mr. Trump has long been blunt about seeing the continuing investigation by the prosecutor examining the earlier inquiry, John H. Durham, as political payback whose fruits he would like to see revealed in the weeks before the election.

Attorney General William P. Barr has portrayed Mr. Durham's work as rectifying what he sees as injustices by officials who sought in 2016 to understand links between the Trump campaign and Russia's covert operation to interfere in the election.

block-time published-time 4.34pm BST

Fresh support rallied for Edward Snowden

It's curious that Donald Trump suddenly thinks he might like Edward Snowden after all and lend him brain space. Especially, you know, with  everything else  that's going on.

But it's still an enormously important justice and civil and human rights issue.

Here's the American Civil Liberties Union today, tweeting : "Edward Snowden is a patriot. Our democracy is better off because of him. As we said four years ago, the president should pardon him."

Here's Glenn Greenwald today, the journalist who scooped the world for the Guardian with the story in 2013.

enltrTrump's statement - that "a lot of people "think Edward Snowden is "not being treated fairly" - is factually indisputable: https://t.co/34YRG40USm pic.twitter.com/hld3VlXUF8

- Glenn Greenwald (@ggreenwald) August 14, 2020

And here's podcaster Nick Gillespie.

enltrI think @Snowden should be allowed to return to the US without facing criminal charges. His revelations were vital to a much-needed reckoning of govt overreach. Come on @realDonaldTrump, pardon him. https://t.co/8yyt3GHaLl

- Nick Gillespie (@nickgillespie) August 14, 2020

block-time published-time 4.18pm BST

Donald Trump's brother Robert hospitalized - report

The US president's brother has been taken to hospital in New York City because he is "very ill", sources tell ABC news.

The details of his condition are unknown.

Donald Trump is expected to visit his brother, according to a senior administration official. He's already scheduled to visit his nearby country club in Bedminster, New Jersey, on Friday and deliver remarks to the City of New York Police Benevolent Association. White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany confirmed the hospitalization to ABC News, adding that the president and his brother "have a very good relationship" and that the president would be providing more details later.

We will bring you more as soon as possible.

block-time published-time 4.01pm BST

Back in 2016 and 2017, a petition was started urging Barack Obama to pardon Snowden.

The campaign, organized by the American Civil Liberties Union, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, included a petition been signed by technologists, law professors and celebrities. At a news conference in 2016, Snowden appeared by remote video link, thanking the organizers and arguing that his fate will have a broader impact.

"If we are to sustain a free society through the next century, we must ensure that whistle-blowers can act again, and safely, as a check on future abuses of power," Mr. Snowden said. If he is sentenced to a long prison term, he added, people in the future who have information that the public needs to know will be afraid to come forward," he said at the time, the New York Times reported (paywall warning).

The Pardon Snowden petition reached a million signatures in 2017 and was delivered to the White House. At the time the organizing campaign groups argued that Snowden's revelations triggered efforts across the U.S. government to limit or end several of the NSA's domestic surveillance programs, as well as triggering a national dialogue on privacy and pushing technology companies to increase their use of encryption, Forbes reported (another paywall warning).

Signatories included lawyers, politicians, technologists, civil rights advocates, artists, cryptographers and more.

Of course Edward Snowden has neither been able to return to the US nor been pardoned.

Here's a link to the Guardian's  Today in Focus  podcast episode "Snowden, life after leaking".

block-time published-time 3.32pm BST

Here's a reminder of what Barack Obama's attorney general Eric Holder said about Edward Snowden in 2016, via a CNN report at the time.

Former US Attorney General Eric Holder says Edward Snowden performed a "public service" by triggering a debate over surveillance techniques - but still must pay a penalty for illegally leaking a trove of classified intelligence documents.

"We can certainly argue about the way in which Snowden did what he did, but I think that he actually performed a public service by raising the debate that we engaged in and by the changes that we made," Holder told David Axelrod on "The Axe Files," a podcast produced by CNN and the University of Chicago Institute of Politics.

"Now I would say that doing what he did -- and the way he did it -- was inappropriate and illegal," Holder added.

block-time published-time 3.11pm BST

Donald Trump did an interview with the New York Post that was published yesterday, in which he said he thinks a "lot of people" think Edward Snowden is "not being treated fairly".

Trump's comments reflect a remarkable softening in his views about the man he once deemed a "traitor" worthy of execution, the Post reports.

This is quite the tangle because the president is not a fan of rebel Republican congressman Thomas Massie, who tweeted earlier today urging the president to pardon Snowden.

Trump has called Massie a " third rate Grandstander " and "a disaster for America, and for the Great State of Kentucky!", for trying to obstruct legislation.

Snowden, meanwhile, is the American whistleblower who copied and leaked highly classified information from the National Security Agency in 2013 when he was a subcontractor. He revealed the news covertly to the Guardian at the time, then did interviews with this outlet after he fled to Hong Kong, before retreating to Moscow to avoid any extradition to the US.

Related:  Edward Snowden: the whistleblower behind the NSA surveillance revelations

The NY Post writes :

Trump polled his aides on Thursday about whether he should let anti-surveillance whistleblower Edward Snowden return to the US from Russia without going to prison, saying he was open to it.

"There are a lot of people that think that he is not being treated fairly. I mean, I hear that," Trump told The Post in an exclusive interview in the Oval Office, before soliciting views from his staff.

Trump commented on Snowden for the first time as president after accusing former President Barack Obama of spying on his 2016 campaign.....

...Republican lawmakers and the Justice Department's inspector general recently highlighted misuse of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the secret FISA court to surveil former Trump adviser Carter Page.

"Snowden is one of the people they talk about. They talk about numerous people, but he is certainly one of the people that they do talk about," Trump said on Thursday, before turning to his aides. "I guess the DOJ is looking to extradite him right now? ... It's certainly something I could look at. Many people are on his side, I will say that. I don't know him, never met him. But many people are on his side."

The president then asked his staff: "How do you feel about that, Snowden? Haven't heard the name in a long time."

After polling the room, Trump added: "I've heard it both ways. From traitor to he's being you know persecuted. I've heard it both ways."

Snowden's legal team has tried in vain to negotiate a prison-free return to the US for the former National Security Agency contractor, who exposed that the FISA court was secretly approving the dragnet collection of domestic call records.

Before taking office, Trump tweeted at least 45 times denouncing Snowden as a traitor and calling for his execution.

Meanwhile, take a look back at the Guardian's "NSA files" coverage.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.43pm BST

block-time published-time 2.32pm BST

CBS This Morning have run a segment on how the #WeHaveHerBack campaign is fighting against the sexism and misogyny that Kamala Harris is already facing during her run for VP.

They spoke to gender equality activist Cecile Richards about the campaign and the excitement she feels around having a woman on the ticket in 2020.

You can watch it here:

enltrWhen Sen. Kamala Harris officially accepts the Democratic VP nomination, she'll become the 3rd woman in U.S. history on a major party's presidential ticket. @Sho_TheCircus ' @alexwagner explains how the "We Have Her Back" campaign is working to fight any misogyny she might face. pic.twitter.com/hoJ4ZBqlm0

- CBS This Morning (@CBSThisMorning) August 14, 2020

And that should be it from me today, I'm handing over to Joanna Walters shortly, and I will see you next week...

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.58pm BST

block-time published-time 2.26pm BST

The family of a coronavirus victim are to sue Verizon, where he worked, for what they say is its failure to protect Alfred Salvatore as he continued to work for the company during the pandemic.

Alfred Salvatore, a 47-year-old service technician at Verizon for over 20 years in Chester, Pennsylvania, died from coronavirus on 24 April, after repeatedly sounding the alarm over the lack of getting any protections from Covid-19 from his employer.

His wife, Natalie Salvatore, has now filed a fatal claim petition against Verizon with the Pennsylvania department of labor and industry. As a service technician, Salvatore was considered an essential worker, and continued working through the pandemic.

"He was constantly telling me he put in several complaints to his immediate supervisor and even above them, that when he went to his hub there was no hand sanitizer, there was no disinfectant spray, there was nothing to take with him to do his job. Communications were considered essential work, but I'm still confused why he wasn't given any kind of PPE" said Natalie.

Verizon is requesting the fatal claim petition be dismissed or disallowed.

Read more here:  Family sues Verizon after worker who 'wasn't given any PPE' dies of Covid-19

Related:  Family sues Verizon after worker who 'wasn't given any PPE' dies of Covid-19

block-time published-time 2.11pm BST

I'm not entirely convinced it will swing any votes, but Katy Perry has just endorsed Kamala Harris to her Twitter and Instagram fans, with a combined follower count of no less than 212 million. Perry writes:

I've had the privilege of getting to know Harris over the years and Joe Biden choosing her as his running mate is already a testament to his decision making: Kamala is exactly the kind of leader WITH experience we desperately need right now. She's the type of person willing to put in the WORK to make our country better. Less than 3 months until Election Day. LET'S DO THIS YA'LL

View this post on Instagram

margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px; I've had the privilege of getting to know @kamalaharris over the years and @joebiden choosing her as his running mate is already a testament to his decision making: Kamala is exactly the kind of leader WITH experience we desperately need right now. She's the type of person willing to put in the WORK to make our country better. Less than 3 months until Election Day. LET'S DO THIS YA'LL ???? Have you registered to vote? Head to IWillVote.com to register, make a plan, and go vote! You can also text Ready to 30330 to get involved with the campaign ??????

color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;A post shared by KATY PERRY (@katyperry) on Aug 14, 2020 at 6:07am PDT

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.13pm BST

block-time published-time 2.08pm BST

Republican congressman Thomas Massie calls for Edward Snowden pardon

Kentucky congressman Thomas Massie, a Republican, has made a surprising call this morning for Edward Snowden to receive a presidential pardon from Donald Trump

enltr. @realDonaldTrump should pardon Edward @Snowden. https://t.co/TOuw46Cb9s

- Thomas Massie (@RepThomasMassie) August 14, 2020

If you recall, Snowden is currently in exile having leaked national security information. At the time, civil liberties groups such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the American Civil Liberties Union warned that the surveillance his leaks revealed went well beyond what Congress intended and what the US constitution allows.

We had an in-depth interview with Snowden about his new life in Russia back in September last year, conducted by my colleague Ewen MacAskill, who was one of the reporters who worked on the NSA files in 2013.

Related:  'They wanted me gone': Edward Snowden tells of whistleblowing, his AI fears and six years in Russia

And if you need a refresher on just what Snowden's leaks revealed about US state surveillance programmes, we've got you covered: The NSA files decoded - what the revelations mean for you

block-time published-time 1.54pm BST

Exclusive: Biden campaign releasing Spanish-language ad in Arizona and Florida battlegrounds

The Biden campaign has released a new Spanish-language ad introducing Joe Biden to voters as a man committed to his family and his faith.

The ad, " Hombre de Bien," which was shared exclusively with the Guardian, will run in Arizona and Florida, two battleground states where Latino voters comprise a significant share of the electorate.

The Joe Biden ad, "Hombre de Bien"

In the 30-second spot, a narrator describes Biden as an "hombre de bien" - a good man. It begins with a scene after Biden lost his wife and daughter in a car accident in 1972. He had just been elected to the Senate but knew his two young sons needed him. He started to take the Amtrak train to Washington D.C. from his home in Wilmington, Delaware, so he could spend time with his sons in the mornings and evenings each day.

"A good man is one who travels four hours per day by train so he can have breakfast with his family," the narrator says.

It also shows Biden, who is Catholic, receiving ashes on his forehead and contrasting it with a photo of Trump posing for a photo with a bible outside St John's Church, near the White House, after he cleared peaceful protesters during a Black Lives Matter demonstration. The ad stresses that Biden has dedicated his life to service, adding that Trump likes to be served.

The Trump campaign is also running Spanish-language ads, with an emphasis on Florida, that warns Democrats will bring socialism to America. In a recent radio spot, the narrators accuse Democrats of waving the "Che Guevara flag" over the Biscayne, "burning churches and even the Virgin Mary" and wanting to shut down Goya, which some boycotted after the company's CEO praised the president's leadership.

In a recent interview, Stephanie Valencia, the co-founder of EquisLabs, a polling and data firm focused on the Latinx electorate, said her research found that many Latinos were unfamiliar with Biden.

"Latinos know Joe Biden was the vice president but they don't know him," she said.

Her polling found that Latino voters were positively persuaded when they learned about his personal story - specifically his commitment to his children after suffering the loss of his wife and daughter - and that his Catholic faith helped him through these moments of tragedy, as the ad seeks to highlight.

The ad comes as Biden ramps up its paid media spending, with less than three months before the election. The campaign announced last week that it would spend $280 on television and digital advertising this fall across 15 battleground states, beginning in September.

A memo outlining the campaign's paid media strategy for Latinos said it planned to invest in "culturally competent" and "creative" English-language and Spanish-language advertising mostly in Colorado, Florida, Arizona, Nevada, and Virginia. It will also spend on Latino paid media in Pennsylvania and North Carolina as well.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.57pm BST

block-time published-time 1.44pm BST

Donald Trump has been whipping up a frenzy as ever with his morning Twitter storm. He's been retweeting alt-right conspiracy theorist Mike Cernovich, and agreeing with actor James Wood that in November's election Trump is the only defender in a last stand for the country.

enltrThank you James. Sadly, you are 100% correct!!! https://t.co/tk9k4SJxTa

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 14, 2020

He's also retweeted the right wing Daily Caller's Chuck Ross talking about "a Barr-Durham October Surprise". This is the concern that some of Biden's supporters have expressed that the Connecticut's US Attorney's investigation into the origins of the FBI's Trump-Russia investigation, will opt to release findings in Trump's favour just prior to the election.

enltrThe hand-wringing over a Barr-Durham October Surprise is pretty rich given all the political damage that the debunked collusion conspiracy theory did over the course of 3 years. Imagine if Comey, Mueller, Wray had disclosed the truth about collusion when they learned it.

- Chuck Ross (@ChuckRossDC) August 14, 2020

Shirish Dáte, the reporter who yesterday asked the president if he regrets "all the lying", has responded straight to that point this morning.

enltrWhat if Comey had held a news conference in October 2016 laying all this out? That Trump had been briefed about the Russian theft of that material but was using it anyway and about all the contacts his campaign had had with Russians? You would have been okay with that?

- S.V. Dáte (@svdate) August 14, 2020

block-time published-time 1.25pm BST

New Biden campaign ad repeats call for national mask mandate

We knew that a Joe Biden media blitz was coming when the campaign announced huge spending plans. The latest ad is out today, directly repeating his call for nationwide mask mandates.

The new Biden campaign ad 'Ready to lead'

A campaign official says it will run in Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Florida, Arizona and Nevada. A direct challenge to Trump's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, the voiceover says

Joe Biden knows we need to listen to  medical experts, and take action now. That starts by expanding testing; calling for mask mandates nationwide, starting immediately;  and producing more protective gear here at home.

There's another ad that's new today too, called 'Dignity' and aimed squarely at seniors. It features a clip of Biden talking in which he says "I'll have from day one ready to go the best medical experts and scientists to advise on our response. And I will not abandon you."

The campaign is said to be spending $20 million this week, and $24 million next week on media buys.

block-time published-time 1.15pm BST

Dodger Stadium will serve as a vote center for presidential election

Also on the intersection of sport and politics - the Los Angeles Dodgers are announcing today that Dodger Stadium will serve as a vote center for the presidential election in November.

The first Major League Baseball team to make their venue available for voting, any registered voter in Los Angeles County can visit the stadium over a five-day period during the election. Parking, they say, will be free.

Dodger Stadium will serve as a vote center for the presidential election Photograph: Mark J Terrill/AP

Associated Press report that the initiative is a joint effort between the Dodgers and More Than A Vote, a non-profit coalition of Black athletes and artists working to educate, energize and protect young communities of color by fighting systemic voter suppression.

Los Angeles Lakers star LeBron James helped created More Than A Vote, and he said in a statement: "We are all in this together. This is exactly why we created More Than a Vote. A lot of us now working together and here for every team who wants to follow the Dodgers lead and turn their stadium into a safer place for voting."

Dodger Stadium has been closed to the general public during the season, but the stadium and surrounding property have hosted county's largest Covid-19 testing site and been a staging ground for emergency equipment and a food distribution site for those experiencing food insecurity.

The team said that all Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and public health guidelines will be followed regarding social distancing during its use for the election.

block-time published-time 1.05pm BST

High school football returns for first time since Covid-19 crisis

Getting sport back up and running again has been a vocal cry from Republicans trying to end coronavirus restrictions as quickly as possible. The Associated Press report that last night what is believed to be the first high school football matchup since sport was stopped by Covid-19 took place in Utah.

Players from the Herriman Mustangs (L) and the Davis Darts (R) square off Photograph: George Frey/Reuters

Herriman High School's Mustangs took on the Davis High School Darts. Fans wore masks and players drank from their own water bottles instead of sharing.

The stand was sold to 25% capacity, with tickets being sold online in advance. Fans were asked to keep their masks on for the entire game, and instructed to leave as soon as it ended.

A 25 percent capacity crowd were asked to maintain social distancing at the game Photograph: George Frey/Reuters

The home team's marching band wasn't present, though both schools brought cheerleaders to the game. They wore masks before kickoff but, like the players, did not during the game.

Herriman Mustangs cheerleaders work masks on the sidelines Photograph: George Frey/Reuters

For the record, Davis beat Herriman 24-20, but it was an event that was probably more important for testing the ability to put on games than the actual result.

A masked official talks to a Darts player Photograph: George Frey/Reuters

Utah has seen around 45,000 cases of coronavirus, leading to just over 350 deaths in the state. An average of around 350 new cases are being seen every day at the moment, down from a mid-July peak of around 650 news cases each day.

block-time published-time 12.56pm BST

I am as guilty as anyone of tending to just focus on Donald Trump and Joe Biden in the race for the White House, but this morning we've got a great interview with  Howie Hawkins, the Green party nominee for president.

He argues that "with Trump collapsing, and Biden not being very progressive" it could be a year when the Green Party can increase their vote share to as much as 5%.

It is an ambitious target for a party hampered by the view that many on the left have, which is that a vote for anybody other than the Democratic Party effectively helps hand the White House back to Donald Trump. That's one of the reasons why as well as championing the Green New Deal, the party backs election reform.

Read it here:  'A big victory would be 5%': Green party's Howie Hawkins eyes progress

block-time published-time 12.29pm BST

One of the things that the Washington Post editorial board criticised Donald Trump for was his threats to defund the USPS, making it harder for the country to vote by mail for November's election.

CNN have a report this morning on the Pennsylvania election officials seeking to extend the deadlines for receiving mail-in ballots, citing the slowdown in mail.

Pennsylvania officials said Thursday that they are willing to count mail-in ballots up to three days after the November general election, provided they are mailed by November 3, a significant change in a key swing state.

"Ballots mailed by voters on or before 8:00 p.m. on Election Day will be counted if they are otherwise valid and received by the county boards of election on or before the third day following the election," the Department of State said in a court filing Thursday.

They've made the move after the USPS indicated that it could not guarantee the timely delivery of ballots in the general election under the current state deadlines. The time frame now given by the service for the ballots arriving - two-to-five days - is longer now than it was for Pennsylvania's primary. The move comes as CNN also reports that the USPS plans to remove hundreds of high-volume mail-processing machines from facilities across the country.

Republicans are likely to oppose the decision, one which could have a significant impact on the dynamics of election night. Pennsylvania is a state that Trump carried in 2016, but recent polls place Biden between 4 and 9 points ahead of his rival there. If it becomes close, and the state can't be called for several days while mail-in ballots arrive and are counted, that could leave Pennsylvania's 20 electoral college votes seemingly in the balance for some time after 3 November.

Read it here: CNN - Pennsylvania election officials seek to extend deadline for receiving mail-in ballots, citing slowdown in mail

block-time published-time 12.16pm BST

The Washington Post editorial board came out with some extremely strong words last night about the conduct of the president running up to November's election. In a piece titled "Trump's campaign to discredit the election is deeply dishonest and dangerous" they write:

A decent, democratic president, genuinely concerned with honest elections and his people's fundamental right to vote, would be touting improvements and offering assistance to make sure they continue through November. A desperate, demagogic president, behind in the polls, would sow confusion and conspiracy theories, trying to delegitimize in advance any result other than a victory for him. That is what Mr. Trump is doing.

Read it here: Washington Post - Trump's campaign to discredit the election is deeply dishonest and dangerous

block-time published-time 12.07pm BST

The failure to agree on a package to continue economic stimulus measures during the coronavirus pandemic is beginning to have an effect in the real world away from Capitol Hill. Millions of Americans will be left with lower unemployment insurance for at least a few more weeks as the Senate doesn't reconvene until after 8 September.

While the new unemployment insurance claims dipped under a million of the first time in 20 weeks yesterday, there's no doubt the number of jobs out there are shrinking, and there's bad news from the aviation industry this morning. Employment in the sector had already fallen from around 512,000 workers in March to about 380,000 in June, but now major US airlines have warned they will lay off tens of thousands of workers in October when the Cares Act payroll support program for the industry expires.

Michael Sainato has more for us here:  Major US airlines to lay off thousands of workers as Covid-19 support expires

Related:  Major US airlines to lay off thousands of workers as Covid-19 support expires

There's another looming issue as coronavirus support is withdrawn - America's water supply. Millions of families in America risk losing running water over unpaid bills as moratoriums on shutoffs expire across the country. At least 115 local moratoriums on water disconnections, including the statewide orders in Indiana and Ohio, have already expired.

Nina Lakhani reports for us:  Millions in US face losing water supply as coronavirus moratoriums end

Related:  Millions in US face losing water supply as coronavirus moratoriums end

block-time published-time 11.56am BST

University of Oregon to cover up racist murals

Also in Oregon, in a victory for a campaign against racism, the University of Oregon has announced it will cover four murals in one of its libraries. They have long been criticised for containing racist depictions.

Fran Smith, a student who petitioned the university to cover-up the murals in 2017, told The Oregonian/Oregon Live that:

Without the momentum of the Black Lives Matter movement and other racial justice movements behind it, I don't think that the university would be making these sudden attempts to try to rectify its mistakes.

Provost Patrick Phillips  said that after the earlier protests, the university had attempted to address the issue by hosting a series of discussions and events to contextualise the mural. However he now says:

We tried the context thing, and it was clear that it was creating, still, this unwelcoming, unsupportive and - quite frankly - exclusionary symbol to students. It wasn't working to address the issues that we want. It maybe addresses it from one point of view, but for the entire community, it definitely was not.

One of the murals, which mentions the need to conserve "our racial heritage", has been a frequent target of vandalism. Two of the murals illustrate humanity's development of arts and sciences. The scenes feature Indigenous people performing tasks form the Stone Age and prehistoric times, while white people are depicted as the advanced culture at the top of the tree.

Another student, Angela Noah, who is a member of the White Mountain Apache Tribe, told local media that the murals and the statues of pioneers on campus "just reminded me that I wasn't supposed to be here as an Indigenous woman."

block-time published-time 11.44am BST

Oregon State Police leaving Portland after two-week assignment

Oregon State Police are leaving Portland after a two-week assignment to help protect the federal courthouse that has been the scene for 78 consecutive nights of Black Lives Matter protests against racial injustice in the city.

State police had been sent to Portland on 30 July under an agreement between Gov. Kate Brown and the US Department of Homeland Security to try to curtail the clashes that had happened throughout the month protestors and federal officers ordered into the city by Donald Trump.

The move seems to explicitly follow the announcement earlier this week by new Multnomah County District Attorney Mike Schmidt that his office will not be prosecuting hundreds of people who have been arrested during the protests

Capt. Timothy R. Fox of the Oregon State police - in a somewhat pointed statement - told television stations that they are "continually reassessing our resources and the needs of our partner agencies and at this time we are inclined to move those resources back to counties where prosecution of criminal conduct is still a priority."

The troopers will now return to their regular assignments, Fox said.

Local media report that Oregon State Police Superintendent Travis Hampton was in Portland every night of the two weeks that troopers were assigned.

He said "Policing large crowd events that routinely turn violent is one of the most challenging aspects of law enforcement, but our troopers met the challenge nightly with our colleagues at the Portland Police Bureau and Multnomah County Sheriff's Office. Our troopers sustained frequent injury and handled the most difficult of circumstances with restraint and professionalism, in service to the citizens and visitors of Portland."

block-time published-time 11.41am BST

Good morning and welcome to today's coverage of US politics and the ongoing coronavirus crisis. This was one of the key moments from yesterday's press conference, when Shirish Dáte asked President Donald Trump to his face: "Do you regret all your lying?"

Here's where we are up to and what we might expect to see today

•1,187 new coronavirus deaths and 53,213 new cases were reported in the US yesterday. The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases among Americans since the pandemic started rose to over 5,250,000•Donald Trump admitted he opposed additional funding for the United States Postal Service in order to undermine mail-in voting. He also revived racist birther conspiracy theories, targeting VP pick Kamala Harris•Joe Biden and Harris announced that they are calling for a nationwide mask mandate, asking every governor to require residents to wear masks in public to slow the spread of coronavirus•Oregon State Police pulled out the troopers who had been helping to police the nightly Black Lives Matter demonstrations in Portland•The Senate adjourned with no coronavirus stimulus package in sight. It will be out of session now until after 8 September•A US-brokered historic peace deal between Israel and the United Arab Emirates was yesterday's biggest surprise. The UAE becomes the third Arab country to establish full diplomatic ties with Israel. The move has already been denounced today by Iran and Turkey•Today Donald Trump delivers remarks at the City of New York Police Benevolent Association. Jill Biden is campaigning for her husband at a seniors for Biden event

1,187 new coronavirus deaths and 53,213 new cases were reported in the US yesterday. The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases among Americans since the pandemic started rose to over 5,250,000

Donald Trump admitted he opposed additional funding for the United States Postal Service in order to undermine mail-in voting. He also revived racist birther conspiracy theories, targeting VP pick Kamala Harris

Joe Biden and Harris announced that they are calling for a nationwide mask mandate, asking every governor to require residents to wear masks in public to slow the spread of coronavirus

Oregon State Police pulled out the troopers who had been helping to police the nightly Black Lives Matter demonstrations in Portland

The Senate adjourned with no coronavirus stimulus package in sight. It will be out of session now until after 8 September

A US-brokered historic peace deal between Israel and the United Arab Emirates was yesterday's biggest surprise. The UAE becomes the third Arab country to establish full diplomatic ties with Israel. The move has already been denounced today by Iran and Turkey

Today Donald Trump delivers remarks at the City of New York Police Benevolent Association. Jill Biden is campaigning for her husband at a seniors for Biden event

You can get in touch with me at martin.belam@theguardian.com