Good evening and here is our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Patrick Keneally bringing you the main stories on Thursday 7 May.

NSW and Victoria hold firm on coronavirus restrictions

Premiers in Australia's two most populous states have warned that social distancing restrictions will not be eased before Mother's Day, despite Queensland's decision to allow up to five members to visit a household from Sunday.

The Morrison government this week has attempted to build the case for opening up the economy by pointing to the accumulating costs of the restrictions, and Friday's national cabinet meeting is expected to try to land a timetable for easing the lockdowns implemented to try to flatten the curve of Covid-19 infections.

But before Friday's deliberation, premiers in New South Wales and Victoria have warned that Australia risks throwing away the successful containment of the pandemic.

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, expressed his reservations in stark language: "We would all like to get back to normal and we will get there faster if we follow the evidence - if we don't fritter away all the gains we've made.

The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said it was very unlikely she would be in a position to ease current restrictions before Sunday: "I doubt that NSW will be in a position to implement anything before Mother's Day."

Australia hits back at US claim linking coronavirus to Wuhan lab

The Australian government has pushed back at US claims the coronavirus may have originated in a Wuhan lab and has determined that a "dossier" giving weight to the theory is not a Five Eyes intelligence document.

It is understood the Morrison government sees the promotion of the theory the virus leaked out of a laboratory in Wuhan, China, as counterproductive to Australia's push to gain broad international support for an independent inquiry into the origins and overall handling of the pandemic.

But the government appears to be walking a diplomatic tightrope, declining to back up the claim while also not wishing to antagonise its US allies - given that Donald Trump and the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, have claimed there is enormous evidence for the theory.

'You are a numpty': insults fly in NSW inquiry on coronavirus response

A New South Wales parliamentary inquiry into the state's handling of the coronavirus crisis has descended into name-calling and accusations that MPs were "winking" at each other during the video conference.

In what was the first NSW parliamentary hearing to be held entirely online, MPs traded insults as technical delays, unmuted microphones and facial expressions disrupted proceedings.

At one point the health minister, Brad Hazzard, accused Labor's Walt Secord and Adam Searle of winking at each other on camera while he was speaking.

The health minister also called Robert Borsak, from the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party, "a numpty" and Borsak told him "I like the fact I get under your skin".

NRL paves way for anti-vaxxers to play

The NRL has issued a statement on the brewing stoush over vaccinations.

The league had indicated that players would be required to get a flu shot in order to train during the Covid-19 pandemic, sparking anger among some players who claim to conscientiously object to vaccines.

In a statement today, the league said players could sign a waiver that would grant them an exemption from the vaccination requirement.

NSW deputy premier John Barilaro won't be fined for farm visit

NSW police say the NSW deputy premier John Barilaro's visit to his farm in Nerriga last weekend was not in breach of the Public Health Act.

"Subsequent inquiries by police from Southern Region revealed that he travelled to the property on Saturday (2 May 2020) and spent the weekend with his family," NSW police said.

"He also conducted various maintenance tasks at the property."

The travel and the stay did not breach the current ministerial directions, NSW police said.

Newmarch House operator appoints special adviser

The operator of Newmarch House at the centre of a western Sydney outbreak has said it has appointed an external adviser in line with a directive from the aged care regulator.

The Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission yesterday threatened to revoke the operator's licence amid the outbreak at the nursing home.

The move comes as three staff members test positive to Covid-19 in the past 24 hours. They are now self-isolating.

More than $15bn in stimulus paid out

Jenny Wilkinson, the Treasury deputy secretary of the fiscal group, has revealed that more than $15bn of stimulus has already been paid including:

•$5.2bn in $750 payments to households.•$7.5bn for cashflow boost to small businesses.•$2.4bn of jobkeeper wage subsidies that have been claimed, of which at least $1bn has already been paid and the rest is being processed.

$5.2bn in $750 payments to households.

$7.5bn for cashflow boost to small businesses.

$2.4bn of jobkeeper wage subsidies that have been claimed, of which at least $1bn has already been paid and the rest is being processed.

Labor's Murray Watt suggests that given that $9bn of superannuation has been withdrawn, households have got more from their private retirement savings than the government.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers                   •Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions•Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics•Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines•Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?•Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register•Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home•Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?•Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted•What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?•Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?•How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?•Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?•How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus•Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions

Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines

Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?

Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register

Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home

Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?

Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted

What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?

Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?

How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?

Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?

How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus

Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.