Good evening and here is our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Naaman Zhou bringing you the main stories on Saturday 25 April.

Death toll rises to 80

Australia's national coronavirus death toll has risen after a 90-year-old man died in Tasmania on Friday night. Investigations are continuing into the source of the outbreak in the north-west of the state, but it is thought it began with a passenger from the Ruby Princess cruise ship.

South Australia records third day with no new cases

South Australia has recorded no new cases of Covid-19 for the third day in a row - the second three-day streak since a "testing blitz" began last Thursday. From this Thursday, premier Steven Marshall said, the state may be ready to begin sentinel or surveillance testing. Meanwhile NSW recorded 12 new cases of Covid-19, its highest daily increase in a week. Four of those cases are at Newmarch House aged care home .

Victorian Liberals consider applying for jobkeeper

The Victorian branch of the Liberal party will explore the possibility of accessing the jobkeeper payment for its 12 employees after donations dried up.

The party's administrative committee voted for the state director, Sam McQuestin, to "explore" whether they would eligible for the scheme.

Apple and Google update coronavirus app

The tech giants have changed their planned contact tracing tool - which could or could not be integrated into Australia's coronavirus app.

The Apple-Google app has been changed to encrypt metadata for Bluetooth communications and exclude people who are further away from you. However, the Australian government has not yet confirmed if it will use the Apple-Google tool, or these new elements.

Anzac Day marked in isolation

Ceremonies around Australia and New Zealand were held with small crowds or outside houses to mark Anzac Day. At the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, nurse Sharon Bown spoke at a televised but empty dawn service.

The veteran combat nurse called on Australians to protect the most vulnerable during the coronavirus pandemic.

Coalition MPs ask for permanent jobseeker increase

The Nationals MP Pat Conaghan and the former prime minister Tony Abbott have asked Scott Morrison to make the higher jobseeker rate permanent when the coronavirus pandemic is over. Before the pandemic, the unemployment allowance (previously called Newstart) was only $40 a day, and had not been raised in real terms since 1994.

Potential app to make league fans self-isolate for 14 days before game

The chairman of the Australian Rugby League Commission has floated the possibility of having rugby league fans download an app and "self-isolate" for 14 days if they want to go to the State of Origin.

Peter V'landys has said the three-game series will go ahead at the end of the year, but the commission is still exploring ways to have a safer or smaller crowd.

Kerry Stokes visits Canberra after WA quarantine

The billionaire media mogul Kerry Stokes, who obtained an exemption from hotel quarantine and was allowed to go directly to his home after returning from overseas, travelled to Canberra for today's Anzac Day ceremony.

Stokes had completed his 14-day quarantine in WA, but the state retains a border closure, meaning he cannot return to the state without again going into quarantine, unless he is granted an exemption.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers                   •Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions•Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics•Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines•Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?•Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register•Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home•Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?•Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted•What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?•Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?•How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?•Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?•How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus•Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions

Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines

Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?

Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register

Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home

Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?

Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted

What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?

Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?

How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?

Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?

How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus

Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.