block-time published-time 7.56am GMT

Health authorities quarantined two hotels and closed ski schools in the Swiss  resort of St Moritz on Monday to try to curb an outbreak of the highly infectious new coronavirus variant.

A general view of St. Moritz, Switzerland December 11, 2020. Photograph: Arnd Wiegmann/Reuters

The eastern Swiss canton of Grisons ordered everyone to wear masks in the town of 5,200 residents that prides itself as a birthplace of modern winter sports. Mass testing of residents will take place on Tuesday. Schools and daycare venues are closed, Reuters reports.

“About a dozen cases are currently known in two hotels. To protect the health of the population and guests, the health department has quarantined the two hotels and ordered corona tests for their employees and guests,” the canton said in a statement.

The canton did not immediately say if the variant was believed to have come from Britain or South Africa.

While closing restaurants, bars, theatres and recreational venues to limit spread of the disease, Switzerland has left ski lifts open as long as they maintain measures like mask wearing to protect public health. St Moritz ski areas remain open, as well, following the variant outbreak.

block-time published-time 7.49am GMT

Justin McCurry in Tokyo

Japan’s prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, has vowed to push ahead with plans to hold the Tokyo 2020  Olympics, despite a surge in coronavirus cases in the host city and growing doubts  over the Games’ viability

Speaking in parliament on Monday, Suga said every measure would be taken to ensure the Olympics, due to open on 23 July, would be safe, describing them as “proof of humankind’s victory over the coronavirus”.

“We will have full anti-infection measures in place and proceed with preparation with a determination to achieve a Games that can deliver hope and courage throughout the world,” he said.

Japan  has managed to keep its Covid-19 caseload significantly lower  than many other comparable countries, and its death toll stands at 4,500 a year after it reported its first case.

But a recent surge  in infections forced Suga to declare a state of emergency  in Tokyo and three neighbouring areas on 7 January.

The measures, which include asking bars and restaurants to close early, and people to avoid non-essential outings, were expanded last week to cover more than half of Japan’s 126 million people.

“In order to restore a sense of safety, I will get the coronavirus pandemic, which has raged worldwide and is now severely affecting Japan, under control as soon as possible,” said Suga, whose approval ratings have plunged over his handling of the pandemic. “I will stand at the frontline of the battle.”

Most Japanese oppose holding the Olympics this year, with a recent poll showing that about 80% believe they should be postponed  again – an option ruled out by the International Olympic Committee [IOC] – or cancelled.

One of Suga’s cabinet ministers, Taro Kono, added to uncertainty over the Olympics’ future last week, suggesting in an interview that the Games “could go either way”.

The IOC and Tokyo 2020 organisers are expected to reveal their plans for a Covid-secure Games in the spring. Measures reportedly under consideration include requiring athletes to return home soon after they have finished competing and to restrict their movements while they are in Japan.

Japan will barely have begun its vaccine rollout – due to start in late February at the earliest – by the time the Olympic torch relay is due to begin in Fukushima on 25 March.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.56am GMT

block-time published-time 7.36am GMT

in the  UK, 24-hour vaccinations will be piloted in London hospitals by the end of January, vaccines minister Nadhim Zahawi said today.

He told Sky News: “We are going to pilot the 24-hour vaccination, the NHS is going to pilot that in hospitals in London and we will look at how we expand that.”

Pressed for when the pilots will start, he said: “By the end of January, absolutely.”

But he said 8am-8pm vaccination “works much more conveniently for those who are over 80 and then as you move down the age groups it becomes much more convenient for people to go late at night and in the early hours”.

He backed the target to offer a first jab to everyone by September as “achievable” and said that over-70s are being offered first jabs in areas only where “the majority” of over-80s have had their first shot.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.56am GMT

block-time published-time 7.26am GMT

UK  vaccine minister  Nadhim Zahaw i has reassured people aged over 80 who have not yet had their coronavirus jab that they will be offered one by mid-February, despite those aged over 70 being offered vaccination in some areas. Here he is on Sky News.

enltr"I don't want them to worry at all." @NadhimZahawi  has reassured over-80s who have not yet received a #COVID19  jab that they will all be offered one by mid-February - despite the programme also being opened up to over-70s from this week. #Coronavirus  : https://t.co/mvyHSkVXst pic.twitter.com/VlZCRjXalU

— Sky News (@SkyNews) January 18, 2021

block-time published-time 7.09am GMT

The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in  Germany  increased by 7,141 to 2,040,659, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Monday. The reported death toll rose by 214 to 46,633, the tally showed.

block-time published-time 7.00am GMT

Hi. Caroline Davies  here, taking over the blog for the next few hours. You can get in touch on caroline.davies@theguardian.com

block-time published-time 6.58am GMT

That’s it from me, Helen Sullivan , for today. Here is a story about a man who lived in an airport for three months because of his “fear of Covid”:

enltrA man who has been living in a secure section of Chicago’s international airport for three months told police he was too afraid of coronavirus to return home to Los Angeles: https://t.co/3LwogdRBVO

— Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) January 18, 2021

block-time published-time 6.49am GMT

Summary

Here are the key global developments from the last few hours:

•UK prepares to vaccinate over-70s. Coronavirus vaccines will be offered to millions of over-70s and the clinically extremely vulnerable from this week as the government expands the rollout amid a border crackdown to keep out new strains. More than 3.8 million people in the UK – including over-80s, care home residents, and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will be rolled out to the next two priority groups.•Chinese health authorities say they have traced 102 infections to a “superspreader” case, a 45-year-old man who travelled around the north-east of the country giving lectures on health.•Brazil’s health regulator on Sunday approved the urgent use of coronavirus vaccines made by Sinovac and AstraZeneca, enabling Latin America’s largest nation to begin an immunisation program that’s been subject to delay and political disputes.•The US is nearing 400,000 deaths. According to Johns Hopkins University, by Sunday evening 23,923,062 cases and 397,494 deaths had been recorded in the country. Ron Klain, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CNN on Sunday that Biden’s team projected another 100,000 deaths from Covid-19 in the first five weeks of the administration.•Florida analyst who clashed with governor over Covid data faces arrest. Rebekah Jones, the founder of Florida’s coronavirus database who has clashed publicly with Governor Ron DeSantis in a dispute over data manipulation, said she would surrender on Sunday after a warrant was issued for her arrest.•China reports 109 new infections. China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for the sixth consecutive day, with rising infections in the north-east fuelling concerns of another national wave ahead of a major holiday season.•China’s economy grew at the slowest pace in more than four decades last year despite a rebound after the country’s coronavirus outbreak, official data showed Monday. The 2.3% expansion is the lowest figure since the Chinese economy embarked on major reforms in the 1970s.•UK firms urge government to help struggling Eurostar: media. British business leaders called on the government to rescue Eurostar, reports said, after the firm said it was close to collapse following border closures to contain new Covid-19 strains.

UK prepares to vaccinate over-70s. Coronavirus vaccines will be offered to millions of over-70s and the clinically extremely vulnerable from this week as the government expands the rollout amid a border crackdown to keep out new strains. More than 3.8 million people in the UK – including over-80s, care home residents, and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will be rolled out to the next two priority groups.

Chinese health authorities say they have traced 102 infections to a “superspreader” case, a 45-year-old man who travelled around the north-east of the country giving lectures on health.

Brazil’s health regulator on Sunday approved the urgent use of coronavirus vaccines made by Sinovac and AstraZeneca, enabling Latin America’s largest nation to begin an immunisation program that’s been subject to delay and political disputes.

The US is nearing 400,000 deaths. According to Johns Hopkins University, by Sunday evening 23,923,062 cases and 397,494 deaths had been recorded in the country. Ron Klain, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CNN on Sunday that Biden’s team projected another 100,000 deaths from Covid-19 in the first five weeks of the administration.

Florida analyst who clashed with governor over Covid data faces arrest. Rebekah Jones, the founder of Florida’s coronavirus database who has clashed publicly with Governor Ron DeSantis in a dispute over data manipulation, said she would surrender on Sunday after a warrant was issued for her arrest.

China reports 109 new infections. China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for the sixth consecutive day, with rising infections in the north-east fuelling concerns of another national wave ahead of a major holiday season.

China’s economy grew at the slowest pace in more than four decades last year despite a rebound after the country’s coronavirus outbreak, official data showed Monday. The 2.3% expansion is the lowest figure since the Chinese economy embarked on major reforms in the 1970s.

UK firms urge government to help struggling Eurostar: media. British business leaders called on the government to rescue Eurostar, reports said, after the firm said it was close to collapse following border closures to contain new Covid-19 strains.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.32am GMT

block-time published-time 6.37am GMT

After sprinting ahead in the race to inoculate its population against the coronavirus, Israel has struck a deal with Pfizer, promising to share vast troves of medical data with the international drug giant in exchange for the continued flow of its hard-to-get vaccine, AP reports. Proponents say the deal could allow Israel to become the first country to vaccinate most of its population, while providing valuable research that could help the rest of the world. But critics say the deal raises major ethical concerns, including possible privacy violations and a deepening of the global divide that enables wealthy countries to stockpile vaccines as poorer populations, including Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza, have to wait longer to be inoculated. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu — who is stumping ahead of the country’s March elections as Israel’s vaccinator-in-chief — said earlier this month that he reached the deal with Pfizer’s chief executive to speed up vaccine deliveries to Israel. “Israel will be a global model state,” he said. “Israel will share with Pfizer and with the entire world the statistical data that will help develop strategies for defeating the coronavirus.” Israeli Health Minister Yuli Edelstein told The Associated Press the government will turn over data to “see how it influences, first of all, the level of the disease in Israel, the possibility to open the economy, different aspects of social life, and whether there are any effects of the vaccination.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.37am GMT

block-time published-time 6.27am GMT

The Australian Open  traditionally makes headlines weeks before it starts because it’s the first grand slam of the season.

This year, however, the early focus is on charter flights, coronavirus-positive passengers, and frustrated tennis players practising strokes against walls  and upturned mattresses in hotel quarantine.

Here’s everything you need to know about how we got here and what to expect from the 2021 Australian Open scheduled to run from 8-21 February:

Related:  Australian Open: how Covid is shaping the tennis tournament – explainer

block-time published-time 6.22am GMT

Related:  'Another rocky road': UK theatre bosses eye 2021 with resilience and realism

block-time published-time 5.51am GMT

UK prepares to vaccinate over-70s

Coronavirus vaccines will be offered to millions of over-70s and the clinically extremely vulnerable from this week as the government expands the rollout amid a border crackdown to keep out new strains, PA Media reports. More than 3.8 million people in the UK – including over-80s, care home residents, and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will be rolled out to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups, but that sites which have enough supply and capacity to vaccinate more people will be allowed to offer jabs to the next cohorts. Boris Johnson has pledged to offer vaccinations to the first four priority groups by the middle of next month, while Dominic Raab said on Sunday that all adults would be offered a first dose by September. The expanded rollout arrives as a ban on quarantine-free travel into the UK came into force at 4am in a bid to keep out new coronavirus strains – such as those which have been discovered in Brazil and South Africa. The new rules mean arrivals from every destination will need to self-isolate for 10 days, or receive a negative result from a coronavirus test taken at least five days after they enter the UK. Passengers flying in from overseas will now also have to show proof of a negative Covid test before setting off – as part of rules which had been due to come into force last week.

Updated at 7.34am GMT

5.44am GMT

A man has been living in a secure section of Chicago’s international airport for three months, apparently telling police he was too afraid of coronavirus to return home to Los Angeles, according to multiple reports.

The 36-year-old man, Californian Aditya Singh, was arrested this weekend and charged with criminal trespass to a restricted area of an airport, a felony, and theft, a misdemeanour, the Chicago Tribune  reported.

Prosecutors said on Sunday that, according to police, the man arrived on a flight from Los Angeles to O’Hare international airport on 19 October. Nearly three months later, on Saturday afternoon, Singh was approached by two United Airlines employees who asked to see identification. Singh allegedly showed them an airport ID badge that had been reported missing by its owner, an airport operations manager, on 26 October.

Assistant state attorney Kathleen Hagerty told Cook County judge Susana Ortiz that other passengers had been giving food to Singh, who does not have a criminal background. Hagerty said Singh had found the badge in the airport and was “scared to go home due to Covid”.

Ortiz reportedly told the court: “You’re telling me that an unauthorised, non-employee individual was allegedly living within a secure part of the O’Hare airport terminal from 10 October, 2020, to 16 January:

Related: Man found living in Chicago airport for three months 'due to fear of Covid'

5.22am GMT

The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 7,141 to 2,040,659, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Monday. The case total was lower than the nearly 15,000 cases reported on 16 January, but this is usual for the weekend tallies. The reported death toll rose by 214 to 46,633, the tally showed.

5.01am GMT

Chinese health authorities identify 'superspreader' case

Chinese health authorities say they have traced 102 infections to a “superspreader” case, a 45-year-old man who traveled around the northeast of the country giving lectures on health.

Jilin, which borders North Korea, reported 10 locally transmitted cases on Saturday, and 63 asymptomatic cases, which are counted separately. The Jilin health commission said all but one of the 63 asymptomatic cases were linked to the 45-year-old tutor who traveled on trains in Harbin, the capital of Heilongjiang province, and the Jilin cities of Changchun, Tonghua, and Gongzhuling.

State media reported the man gave four lectures at two health clubs in Gongzhuling and Tonghua between 8 and 11 January. Among the 102 cases linked to him were 79 people who attended the lectures and 23 of their close contacts. China is battling its worst outbreak in more than 10 months, including about 700 cases in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing.Mainland China reported 109 new cases on Sunday, including 93 local transmissions. Jilin recorded 30 locally transmitted cases on Sunday.

4.46am GMT

UK firms urge government to help struggling Eurostar: media

British business leaders called on the government to rescue Eurostar, reports said, after the firm said it was close to collapse following border closures to contain new Covid-19 strains.

Until recently a symbol of easy high-speed rail travel in Europe, Eurostar has been crippled by the coronavirus crisis, with its special platforms and facilities in Paris, London and Brussels now eerily quiet.

The group is currently running just one service a day between Paris and London, a far cry from before Covid-19 when it would operate two trains an hour during peak times.

A Eurostar train at Gare du Nord in Paris.Photograph: Éric Piermont/AFP/Getty Images

The London First lobby group said Eurostar needed “swift action to safeguard its future”, in a letter sent to Chancellor Rishi Sunak and seen by Bloomberg News.

The missive, signed by 25 executives and academics, warned the Treasury and Department for Transport not to let the firm “fall between the cracks of support”.

Last week, Eurostar - majority owned by French firm SNCF - reported services were down 85 percent from the previous year.

“The company is in a critical state, I’d even say very critical,” said Christophe Fanichet who heads SNCF Voyageurs, the passenger unit of the network.

Travel restrictions continue to be tightened with France now requiring UK arrivals to observe a seven-day quarantine and undertake a Covid test at the end, while Britain has also introduced new quarantine measures.

4.28am GMT

More now on the share market, in case you missed it:

Shares on Asian markets were having a mixed session on Monday despite data showing that China’s economy had bounced back in the final quarter of 2020. Factory output has soared back in the later part of the year after the Covid shutdowns and GDP was up 6.5% in the fourth quarter compared wit a hyear earlier, topping forecasts of 6.1%. Japan’s Nikkei is off 0.2% and Sydney is down 0.3%, but Hong Kong is up 0.7%. The FTSE100 is expected to open flat in London later as the public holiday in the US on Monday dampens trade.

Updated at 4.28am GMT

3.48am GMT

Carpet, as it turns out, is not a like-for-like substitute for a hard court. But, as Australian Open  competitors are fast learning, surfaces are what you make of them.

The same goes for mattresses, walls and double-glazed windows, all now proving their worth as essential apparatus in an athlete’s preparation for a grand slam.

Amid the confusion and complaints – and the odd mouse intrusion – players are getting inventive with the resources available to them in quarantine.

Switzerland’s Belinda Bencic, Uruguay’s Pablo Cuevas, Kazakhstan’s Yulia Putintseva and Britain’s Heather Watson are among more than 100 players and staff now in hard lockdown in Melbourne, after four new positive cases linked to the tournament were revealed on Monday.

The quartet – along with other players – shared footage of themselves training inside their hotel rooms. Within these makeshift training centres, balls have been smashed into bed linen, volleys practised against high-rise windows and 5km run in tiny hallways.

Related: Quarantined tennis players get creative amid Australian Open recriminations

3.27am GMT

China GDP grows at slowest pace in more than four decades in 2020

China’s economy grew at the slowest pace in more than four decades last year despite a rebound after the country’s coronavirus outbreak, official data showed Monday.

AFP: The 2.3 percent expansion is the lowest figure since the Chinese economy embarked on major reforms in the 1970s.

The National Bureau of Statistics said last year was a “grave and complex environment both at home and abroad” with the pandemic having a “huge impact”.

The figure was a marked slowdown from 2019 growth of 6.1 percent - itself already the lowest in decades - with the country hit by weak domestic demand and trade tensions.

But it is better than that forecast by an AFP poll of analysts from 13 financial institutions, who predicted a 2.0 percent expansion.

Covid-19, which has ravaged the world economy, first emerged in central China in late 2019. But the world’s second-largest economy also became the first to bounce back after imposing strict lockdowns and virus control measures.

It is expected to be the only major world economy clocking positive 2020 growth.

In the last three months of 2020, China’s economic rebound continued with a better-than-expected 6.5 percent growth on-year, a sustained improvement since the second quarter.

This brings it back to a pre-pandemic trajectory, although full-year 2020 growth is still its worst performance since 1976, when the economy shrank 1.6 percent.

That was two years before former leader Deng Xiaoping set in motion a shift away from communist-style central planning, turning China into an industrial, trade and tech powerhouse.

3.02am GMT

Podcast: Inside an NHS hospital at the peak of the coronavirus crisis

As the latest wave of Covid infections hits hospitals, wards are nearing capacity and oxygen supplies are straining at the volume of new patients. The Guardian’s Helen Pidd spent a day at Milton Keynes University hospital to witness the crisis up close:

Related: Inside an NHS hospital at the peak of the coronavirus crisis

2.55am GMT

Asian share markets pared early losses on Monday as data confirmed China’s economy had bounced back last quarter as factory output jumped, helping offset recent disappointing news on US consumer spending, Reuters reports. Chinese blue chips edged up 0.4% after the economy was reported to have grown 6.5% in the fourth quarter, on a year earlier, topping forecasts of 6.1%. Industrial production for December also beat estimates, though retail sales missed the mark. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan trimmed losses and were off 0.2%, having hit a string of record peaks in recent weeks. Japan’s Nikkei slipped 0.8% and away from a 30-year high. E-Mini futures for the S&P 500 dipped 0.3%, though Wall Street will be closed on Monday for a holiday. EUROSTOXX 50 futures eased 0.2% and FTSE futures 0.1%. The pick-up in China was a marked contrast to the U.S. and Europe, where the spread of coronavirus has scarred consumer spending, underlined by dismal U.S. retail sales reported on Friday. Also evident are doubts about how much of US President-elect Joe Biden’s stimulus package will make it through Congress given Republican opposition, and the risk of more mob violence at his inauguration on Wednesday.

2.29am GMT

Mexico reported 11,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 463 more fatalities on Sunday, according to the Health Ministry, bringing its total to 1,641,428 infections and 140,704 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the ministry has said, because of a lack of widespread testing.

2.19am GMT

China reports 109 new infections

China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for the sixth consecutive day, with rising infections in the northeast fuelling concerns of another national wave ahead of a major holiday season. Reuters: The National Health Commission said in a statement on Monday that a total of 109 new cases were reported on 17 January, unchanged from a day earlier. Of the 93 local infections, 54 were reported in Hebei province that surround Beijing. Northeastern Jilin province reported a record 30 new cases, underscoring the risk of new clusters emerging. Daily increases still remain a fraction of what the country saw at the height of the outbreak in early 2020, but authorities are implementing an aggressive package of measures including the lockdown of more than 28 million people in order to keep the disease from bringing the country to another painful standstill. Beijing, which reported two new local infections, will begin requiring travellers from abroad to undergo health monitoring for seven additional days following 21 days of medical observation, the official Xinhua news agency reported on Saturday.

People wearing face masks following the coronavirus outbreak skate on a frozen lake which has been turned to an ice rink, in Beijing, China 16 January 2021.Photograph: Tingshu Wang/Reuters

The city of Gongzhuling in Jilin province has also imposed strict new controls over its population, shutting down all but essential stores. It said in a notice that it is “strictly forbidden” for anyone to go out unless they are scheduled to get a COVID-19 test at a designated site. The outbreak in Jilin is believed to have been caused by an infected salesman travelling to and from the neigbouring province of Heilongjiang, the site of a previous cluster of cases. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to 115 from 119 cases a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in mainland China is 89,336, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,635. The data excludes cases from Macau and Hong Kong, which are Chinese cities but report new cases independently, and self-ruled Taiwan which China claims as its own. The World Health Organization team currently in China has already begun its investigations into the origins of the global pandemic. WHO representatives said on Friday that they have begun discussions with their Chinese counterparts via videoconference as they remain in quarantine.

1.46am GMT

Florida analyst who clashed with governor over Covid data faces arrest

Rebekah Jones, the founder of Florida’s coronavirus database who has clashed publicly with Governor Ron DeSantis in a dispute over data manipulation, said she would surrender on Sunday after a warrant was issued for her arrest.

The state department of law enforcement said it would not reveal details of the allegations against the 31-year-old data analyst until she was in custody. The agency had been investigating allegations Jones illegally accessed a state messaging system and staged an armed raid  at her Tallahassee home last month.

Jones, who was fired by the Florida department of health in May  for insubordination after claiming she was ordered to censor and manipulate information on the database she founded and managed, said she was told the charge was unrelated to that investigation, and accused DeSantis of retaliation:

Related: Florida analyst who clashed with governor over Covid data faces arrest

12.58am GMT

US nears 400,000 deaths, as additional 100,000 predicted in first five weeks of Biden administration

Joe Biden  ’s promise  to carry out 100m coronavirus vaccinations in his first 100 days in power is “absolutely a doable thing”, Dr Anthony Fauci said on Sunday.

The president-elect has announced ambitious initiatives  to combat Covid-19 and its economic toll, seeking to overcome the struggles and failures of the Trump administration, which has presided over a slow start to the biggest vaccination drive in US history.

The challenge is steep: Ron Klain, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CNN on Sunday, Biden’s team projected another 100,000 deaths from Covid-19 in the first five weeks of the administration.

According to Johns Hopkins University, by Sunday evening 23,923,062 cases and 397,494 deaths had been recorded in the US:

Related: Biden plan to vaccinate 100m people in 100 days ‘absolutely doable’, Fauci says

12.53am GMT

Nearly half of doctors working in high-pressure conditions during the first wave of coronavirus face ongoing distress, research suggests.

A study based on responses from more than 5,400 doctors in the UK and Ireland  found that 45% reported psychological distress as the pandemic accelerated to its initial peak in 2020.

Researchers from the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM) and psychologists from the University of Bath surveyed emergency, anaesthetics and intensive care professionals during the lead up to, peak and post-peak of the first wave of infections last year:

Related: Doctors in UK and Ireland face 'ongoing distress' from Covid first wave

12.34am GMT

The full story on Brazil now:

Related: Bolsonaro rival hails Covid vaccinations as 'triumph of science against denialists'

12.08am GMT

Brazil approves two Covid vaccines

Brazil’s health regulator on Sunday approved the urgent use of coronavirus vaccines made by Sinovac and AstraZeneca, enabling Latin America’s largest nation to begin an immunisation program that’s been subject to delay and political disputes, AP reports. Brazil currently has 6 million doses of Sinovac’s CoronaVac vaccine ready to distribute in the next few days and is awaiting the arrival of 2 million doses of the vaccine made by AstraZeneca and partner Oxford University. “This is good news for Brazil, but 6 million doses are still very few. It will not allow the entire population at risk to be fully immunized, nor is it clear how quickly the country will obtain more vaccines,” said Ethel Maciel, an epidemiologist at the Federal University of Espirito Santo. On Saturday night, the health regulator Anvisa rejected an application for use of a Russian vaccine called Sputnik V, submitted by Brazilian company União Química. Anvisa said it didn’t evaluate the application because it didn’t meet minimum requirements to start an analysis. Vaccination in Brazil is beginning later than neighbours such as Argentina and Chile despite a robust public health system and decades of experience with immunisation campaigns. The process to present and approve the Covid-19 vaccines was fraught with conflict, as allies of President Jair Bolsonaro sought to cast doubt on the efficacy of the Sinovac shot backed by his political rival, Sao Paulo state’s Gov. João Doria. “The rivalry between Brasilia and the state governments prevented any cooperative work,” said Maurício Santoro, professor of political science at the University of the State of Rio de Janeiro. “The governor lost the leadership position, but made Bolsonaro act more quickly to guarantee the start of vaccination.” The vaccination priority will be health professionals on the front line against coronavirus. Vaccination by the federal government will begin on Wednesday, Health Minister Eduardo Pazuello said on Sunday.

11.48pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. I’m on Twitter@helenrsullivan  and email on: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com

Brazil’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath.

Meanwhile the US death toll is nearing 400,000, according to Johns Hopkins University. It currently stands at 397,258.

Here are the other key developments from the last few hours:

•South Africa has delayed reopening its schools amid a rapid resurgence of Covid-19 driven by a more infectious variant of the virus.•There have been a further 38,598 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK, according to government data. This compares to 54,940 infections registered last Sunday and is the lowest number since 27 December.•The United Arab Emirates has lowered the minimum age requirement to receive a Covid-19 vaccination to 16, from 18 previously, its ministry of health said.•Israel’s prisons service has said they will begin vaccinating all incarcerated people against Covid-19, including Palestinians, following calls from right groups, Palestinian officials and Israel’s attorney general.•Greece’s health authorities have announced 237 new infections, taking the country’s total 148,607 confirmed cases. Today’s figure is significantly lower than last Sunday’s, when 445 new cases were reported, and is the smallest daily increase since October.•In th UK, over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the government has announced.•Portugal’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients.•Schools in Malawi will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday.45812021-01-17T23:48:22Zfalsefalse2021-01-18T07:56:53ZtrueAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/g5mgqfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/e55891222162da5e3907d7629e9d9f2284290b79/0_397_6048_3627/500.jpgfalseentrueHealth authorities quarantined two hotels and closed ski schools in the Swiss resort of St Moritz on Monday to try to curb an outbreak of the highly infectious new coronavirus variant. The eastern Swiss canton of Grisons ordered everyone to wear masks in the town of 5,200 residents that prides itself as a birthplace of modern winter sports. Mass testing of residents will take place on Tuesday. Schools and daycare venues are closed, Reuters reports. “About a dozen cases are currently known in two hotels. To protect the health of the population and guests, the health department has quarantined the two hotels and ordered corona tests for their employees and guests,” the canton said in a statement. The canton did not immediately say if the variant was believed to have come from Britain or South Africa. While closing restaurants, bars, theatres and recreational venues to limit spread of the disease, Switzerland has left ski lifts open as long as they maintain measures like mask wearing to protect public health. St Moritz ski areas remain open, as well, following the variant outbreak. Justin McCurry in Tokyo Japan’s prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, has vowed to push ahead with plans to hold the Tokyo 2020 Olympics, despite a surge in coronavirus cases in the host city and growing doubts over the Games’ viability Speaking in parliament on Monday, Suga said every measure would be taken to ensure the Olympics, due to open on 23 July, would be safe, describing them as “proof of humankind’s victory over the coronavirus”. “We will have full anti-infection measures in place and proceed with preparation with a determination to achieve a Games that can deliver hope and courage throughout the world,” he said. Japan has managed to keep its Covid-19 caseload significantly lower than many other comparable countries, and its death toll stands at 4,500 a year after it reported its first case. But a recent surge in infections forced Suga to declare a state of emergency in Tokyo and three neighbouring areas on 7 January. The measures, which include asking bars and restaurants to close early, and people to avoid non-essential outings, were expanded last week to cover more than half of Japan’s 126 million people. “In order to restore a sense of safety, I will get the coronavirus pandemic, which has raged worldwide and is now severely affecting Japan, under control as soon as possible,” said Suga, whose approval ratings have plunged over his handling of the pandemic. “I will stand at the frontline of the battle.” Most Japanese oppose holding the Olympics this year, with a recent poll showing that about 80% believe they should be postponed again – an option ruled out by the International Olympic Committee [IOC] – or cancelled. One of Suga’s cabinet ministers, Taro Kono, added to uncertainty over the Olympics’ future last week, suggesting in an interview that the Games “could go either way”. The IOC and Tokyo 2020 organisers are expected to reveal their plans for a Covid-secure Games in the spring. Measures reportedly under consideration include requiring athletes to return home soon after they have finished competing and to restrict their movements while they are in Japan. Japan will barely have begun its vaccine rollout – due to start in late February at the earliest – by the time the Olympic torch relay is due to begin in Fukushima on 25 March. in the UK, 24-hour vaccinations will be piloted in London hospitals by the end of January, vaccines minister Nadhim Zahawi said today. He told Sky News: “We are going to pilot the 24-hour vaccination, the NHS is going to pilot that in hospitals in London and we will look at how we expand that.” Pressed for when the pilots will start, he said: “By the end of January, absolutely.” But he said 8am-8pm vaccination “works much more conveniently for those who are over 80 and then as you move down the age groups it becomes much more convenient for people to go late at night and in the early hours”. He backed the target to offer a first jab to everyone by September as “achievable” and said that over-70s are being offered first jabs in areas only where “the majority” of over-80s have had their first shot. UK vaccine minister Nadhim Zahawi has reassured people aged over 80 who have not yet had their coronavirus jab that they will be offered one by mid-February, despite those aged over 70 being offered vaccination in some areas. Here he is on Sky News. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 7,141 to 2,040,659, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Monday. The reported death toll rose by 214 to 46,633, the tally showed. Hi. Caroline Davies here, taking over the blog for the next few hours. You can get in touch on caroline.davies@theguardian.com That’s it from me, Helen Sullivan, for today. Here is a story about a man who lived in an airport for three months because of his “fear of Covid”: Here are the key global developments from the last few hours: UK prepares to vaccinate over-70s. Coronavirus vaccines will be offered to millions of over-70s and the clinically extremely vulnerable from this week as the government expands the rollout amid a border crackdown to keep out new strains. More than 3.8 million people in the UK – including over-80s, care home residents, and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will be rolled out to the next two priority groups. Chinese health authorities say they have traced 102 infections to a “superspreader” case, a 45-year-old man who travelled around the north-east of the country giving lectures on health. Brazil’s health regulator on Sunday approved the urgent use of coronavirus vaccines made by Sinovac and AstraZeneca, enabling Latin America’s largest nation to begin an immunisation program that’s been subject to delay and political disputes. The US is nearing 400,000 deaths. According to Johns Hopkins University, by Sunday evening 23,923,062 cases and 397,494 deaths had been recorded in the country. Ron Klain, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CNN on Sunday that Biden’s team projected another 100,000 deaths from Covid-19 in the first five weeks of the administration. Florida analyst who clashed with governor over Covid data faces arrest. Rebekah Jones, the founder of Florida’s coronavirus database who has clashed publicly with Governor Ron DeSantis in a dispute over data manipulation, said she would surrender on Sunday after a warrant was issued for her arrest. China reports 109 new infections. China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for the sixth consecutive day, with rising infections in the north-east fuelling concerns of another national wave ahead of a major holiday season. China’s economy grew at the slowest pace in more than four decades last year despite a rebound after the country’s coronavirus outbreak, official data showed Monday. The 2.3% expansion is the lowest figure since the Chinese economy embarked on major reforms in the 1970s. UK firms urge government to help struggling Eurostar: media. British business leaders called on the government to rescue Eurostar, reports said, after the firm said it was close to collapse following border closures to contain new Covid-19 strains. After sprinting ahead in the race to inoculate its population against the coronavirus, Israel has struck a deal with Pfizer, promising to share vast troves of medical data with the international drug giant in exchange for the continued flow of its hard-to-get vaccine, AP reports. Proponents say the deal could allow Israel to become the first country to vaccinate most of its population, while providing valuable research that could help the rest of the world. But critics say the deal raises major ethical concerns, including possible privacy violations and a deepening of the global divide that enables wealthy countries to stockpile vaccines as poorer populations, including Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza, have to wait longer to be inoculated. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu — who is stumping ahead of the country’s March elections as Israel’s vaccinator-in-chief — said earlier this month that he reached the deal with Pfizer’s chief executive to speed up vaccine deliveries to Israel. “Israel will be a global model state,” he said. “Israel will share with Pfizer and with the entire world the statistical data that will help develop strategies for defeating the coronavirus.” Israeli Health Minister Yuli Edelstein told The Associated Press the government will turn over data to “see how it influences, first of all, the level of the disease in Israel, the possibility to open the economy, different aspects of social life, and whether there are any effects of the vaccination.” The Australian Open traditionally makes headlines weeks before it starts because it’s the first grand slam of the season. This year, however, the early focus is on charter flights, coronavirus-positive passengers, and frustrated tennis players practising strokes against walls and upturned mattresses in hotel quarantine. Here’s everything you need to know about how we got here and what to expect from the 2021 Australian Open scheduled to run from 8-21 February: Coronavirus vaccines will be offered to millions of over-70s and the clinically extremely vulnerable from this week as the government expands the rollout amid a border crackdown to keep out new strains, PA Media reports. More than 3.8 million people in the UK – including over-80s, care home residents, and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will be rolled out to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups, but that sites which have enough supply and capacity to vaccinate more people will be allowed to offer jabs to the next cohorts. Boris Johnson has pledged to offer vaccinations to the first four priority groups by the middle of next month, while Dominic Raab said on Sunday that all adults would be offered a first dose by September. The expanded rollout arrives as a ban on quarantine-free travel into the UK came into force at 4am in a bid to keep out new coronavirus strains – such as those which have been discovered in Brazil and South Africa. The new rules mean arrivals from every destination will need to self-isolate for 10 days, or receive a negative result from a coronavirus test taken at least five days after they enter the UK. Passengers flying in from overseas will now also have to show proof of a negative Covid test before setting off – as part of rules which had been due to come into force last week. A man has been living in a secure section of Chicago’s international airport for three months, apparently telling police he was too afraid of coronavirus to return home to Los Angeles, according to multiple reports. The 36-year-old man, Californian Aditya Singh, was arrested this weekend and charged with criminal trespass to a restricted area of an airport, a felony, and theft, a misdemeanour, the Chicago Tribune reported. Prosecutors said on Sunday that, according to police, the man arrived on a flight from Los Angeles to O’Hare international airport on 19 October. Nearly three months later, on Saturday afternoon, Singh was approached by two United Airlines employees who asked to see identification. Singh allegedly showed them an airport ID badge that had been reported missing by its owner, an airport operations manager, on 26 October. Assistant state attorney Kathleen Hagerty told Cook County judge Susana Ortiz that other passengers had been giving food to Singh, who does not have a criminal background. Hagerty said Singh had found the badge in the airport and was “scared to go home due to Covid”. Ortiz reportedly told the court: “You’re telling me that an unauthorised, non-employee individual was allegedly living within a secure part of the O’Hare airport terminal from 10 October, 2020, to 16 January: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 7,141 to 2,040,659, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Monday. The case total was lower than the nearly 15,000 cases reported on 16 January, but this is usual for the weekend tallies. The reported death toll rose by 214 to 46,633, the tally showed. Chinese health authorities say they have traced 102 infections to a “superspreader” case, a 45-year-old man who traveled around the northeast of the country giving lectures on health. Jilin, which borders North Korea, reported 10 locally transmitted cases on Saturday, and 63 asymptomatic cases, which are counted separately. The Jilin health commission said all but one of the 63 asymptomatic cases were linked to the 45-year-old tutor who traveled on trains in Harbin, the capital of Heilongjiang province, and the Jilin cities of Changchun, Tonghua, and Gongzhuling. State media reported the man gave four lectures at two health clubs in Gongzhuling and Tonghua between 8 and 11 January. Among the 102 cases linked to him were 79 people who attended the lectures and 23 of their close contacts. China is battling its worst outbreak in more than 10 months, including about 700 cases in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing.Mainland China reported 109 new cases on Sunday, including 93 local transmissions. Jilin recorded 30 locally transmitted cases on Sunday. British business leaders called on the government to rescue Eurostar, reports said, after the firm said it was close to collapse following border closures to contain new Covid-19 strains. Until recently a symbol of easy high-speed rail travel in Europe, Eurostar has been crippled by the coronavirus crisis, with its special platforms and facilities in Paris, London and Brussels now eerily quiet. The group is currently running just one service a day between Paris and London, a far cry from before Covid-19 when it would operate two trains an hour during peak times. The London First lobby group said Eurostar needed “swift action to safeguard its future”, in a letter sent to Chancellor Rishi Sunak and seen by Bloomberg News. The missive, signed by 25 executives and academics, warned the Treasury and Department for Transport not to let the firm “fall between the cracks of support”. Last week, Eurostar - majority owned by French firm SNCF - reported services were down 85 percent from the previous year. “The company is in a critical state, I’d even say very critical,” said Christophe Fanichet who heads SNCF Voyageurs, the passenger unit of the network. Travel restrictions continue to be tightened with France now requiring UK arrivals to observe a seven-day quarantine and undertake a Covid test at the end, while Britain has also introduced new quarantine measures. More now on the share market, in case you missed it: Shares on Asian markets were having a mixed session on Monday despite data showing that China’s economy had bounced back in the final quarter of 2020. Factory output has soared back in the later part of the year after the Covid shutdowns and GDP was up 6.5% in the fourth quarter compared wit a hyear earlier, topping forecasts of 6.1%. Japan’s Nikkei is off 0.2% and Sydney is down 0.3%, but Hong Kong is up 0.7%. The FTSE100 is expected to open flat in London later as the public holiday in the US on Monday dampens trade. Carpet, as it turns out, is not a like-for-like substitute for a hard court. But, as Australian Open competitors are fast learning, surfaces are what you make of them. The same goes for mattresses, walls and double-glazed windows, all now proving their worth as essential apparatus in an athlete’s preparation for a grand slam. Amid the confusion and complaints – and the odd mouse intrusion – players are getting inventive with the resources available to them in quarantine. Switzerland’s Belinda Bencic, Uruguay’s Pablo Cuevas, Kazakhstan’s Yulia Putintseva and Britain’s Heather Watson are among more than 100 players and staff now in hard lockdown in Melbourne, after four new positive cases linked to the tournament were revealed on Monday. The quartet – along with other players – shared footage of themselves training inside their hotel rooms. Within these makeshift training centres, balls have been smashed into bed linen, volleys practised against high-rise windows and 5km run in tiny hallways. China’s economy grew at the slowest pace in more than four decades last year despite a rebound after the country’s coronavirus outbreak, official data showed Monday. AFP: The 2.3 percent expansion is the lowest figure since the Chinese economy embarked on major reforms in the 1970s. The National Bureau of Statistics said last year was a “grave and complex environment both at home and abroad” with the pandemic having a “huge impact”. The figure was a marked slowdown from 2019 growth of 6.1 percent - itself already the lowest in decades - with the country hit by weak domestic demand and trade tensions. But it is better than that forecast by an AFP poll of analysts from 13 financial institutions, who predicted a 2.0 percent expansion. Covid-19, which has ravaged the world economy, first emerged in central China in late 2019. But the world’s second-largest economy also became the first to bounce back after imposing strict lockdowns and virus control measures. It is expected to be the only major world economy clocking positive 2020 growth. In the last three months of 2020, China’s economic rebound continued with a better-than-expected 6.5 percent growth on-year, a sustained improvement since the second quarter. This brings it back to a pre-pandemic trajectory, although full-year 2020 growth is still its worst performance since 1976, when the economy shrank 1.6 percent. That was two years before former leader Deng Xiaoping set in motion a shift away from communist-style central planning, turning China into an industrial, trade and tech powerhouse. Podcast: Inside an NHS hospital at the peak of the coronavirus crisis As the latest wave of Covid infections hits hospitals, wards are nearing capacity and oxygen supplies are straining at the volume of new patients. The Guardian’s Helen Pidd spent a day at Milton Keynes University hospital to witness the crisis up close: Asian share markets pared early losses on Monday as data confirmed China’s economy had bounced back last quarter as factory output jumped, helping offset recent disappointing news on US consumer spending, Reuters reports. Chinese blue chips edged up 0.4% after the economy was reported to have grown 6.5% in the fourth quarter, on a year earlier, topping forecasts of 6.1%. Industrial production for December also beat estimates, though retail sales missed the mark. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan trimmed losses and were off 0.2%, having hit a string of record peaks in recent weeks. Japan’s Nikkei slipped 0.8% and away from a 30-year high. E-Mini futures for the S&P 500 dipped 0.3%, though Wall Street will be closed on Monday for a holiday. EUROSTOXX 50 futures eased 0.2% and FTSE futures 0.1%. The pick-up in China was a marked contrast to the U.S. and Europe, where the spread of coronavirus has scarred consumer spending, underlined by dismal U.S. retail sales reported on Friday. Also evident are doubts about how much of US President-elect Joe Biden’s stimulus package will make it through Congress given Republican opposition, and the risk of more mob violence at his inauguration on Wednesday. Mexico reported 11,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 463 more fatalities on Sunday, according to the Health Ministry, bringing its total to 1,641,428 infections and 140,704 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the ministry has said, because of a lack of widespread testing. China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for the sixth consecutive day, with rising infections in the northeast fuelling concerns of another national wave ahead of a major holiday season. Reuters: The National Health Commission said in a statement on Monday that a total of 109 new cases were reported on 17 January, unchanged from a day earlier. Of the 93 local infections, 54 were reported in Hebei province that surround Beijing. Northeastern Jilin province reported a record 30 new cases, underscoring the risk of new clusters emerging. Daily increases still remain a fraction of what the country saw at the height of the outbreak in early 2020, but authorities are implementing an aggressive package of measures including the lockdown of more than 28 million people in order to keep the disease from bringing the country to another painful standstill. Beijing, which reported two new local infections, will begin requiring travellers from abroad to undergo health monitoring for seven additional days following 21 days of medical observation, the official Xinhua news agency reported on Saturday. The city of Gongzhuling in Jilin province has also imposed strict new controls over its population, shutting down all but essential stores. It said in a notice that it is “strictly forbidden” for anyone to go out unless they are scheduled to get a COVID-19 test at a designated site. The outbreak in Jilin is believed to have been caused by an infected salesman travelling to and from the neigbouring province of Heilongjiang, the site of a previous cluster of cases. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to 115 from 119 cases a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in mainland China is 89,336, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,635. The data excludes cases from Macau and Hong Kong, which are Chinese cities but report new cases independently, and self-ruled Taiwan which China claims as its own. The World Health Organization team currently in China has already begun its investigations into the origins of the global pandemic. WHO representatives said on Friday that they have begun discussions with their Chinese counterparts via videoconference as they remain in quarantine. Rebekah Jones, the founder of Florida’s coronavirus database who has clashed publicly with Governor Ron DeSantis in a dispute over data manipulation, said she would surrender on Sunday after a warrant was issued for her arrest. The state department of law enforcement said it would not reveal details of the allegations against the 31-year-old data analyst until she was in custody. The agency had been investigating allegations Jones illegally accessed a state messaging system and staged an armed raid at her Tallahassee home last month. Jones, who was fired by the Florida department of health in May for insubordination after claiming she was ordered to censor and manipulate information on the database she founded and managed, said she was told the charge was unrelated to that investigation, and accused DeSantis of retaliation: Joe Biden’s promise to carry out 100m coronavirus vaccinations in his first 100 days in power is “absolutely a doable thing”, Dr Anthony Fauci said on Sunday. The president-elect has announced ambitious initiatives to combat Covid-19 and its economic toll, seeking to overcome the struggles and failures of the Trump administration, which has presided over a slow start to the biggest vaccination drive in US history. The challenge is steep: Ron Klain, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CNN on Sunday, Biden’s team projected another 100,000 deaths from Covid-19 in the first five weeks of the administration. According to Johns Hopkins University, by Sunday evening 23,923,062 cases and 397,494 deaths had been recorded in the US: Nearly half of doctors working in high-pressure conditions during the first wave of coronavirus face ongoing distress, research suggests. A study based on responses from more than 5,400 doctors in the UK and Ireland found that 45% reported psychological distress as the pandemic accelerated to its initial peak in 2020. Researchers from the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM) and psychologists from the University of Bath surveyed emergency, anaesthetics and intensive care professionals during the lead up to, peak and post-peak of the first wave of infections last year: The full story on Brazil now: Brazil’s health regulator on Sunday approved the urgent use of coronavirus vaccines made by Sinovac and AstraZeneca, enabling Latin America’s largest nation to begin an immunisation program that’s been subject to delay and political disputes, AP reports. Brazil currently has 6 million doses of Sinovac’s CoronaVac vaccine ready to distribute in the next few days and is awaiting the arrival of 2 million doses of the vaccine made by AstraZeneca and partner Oxford University. “This is good news for Brazil, but 6 million doses are still very few. It will not allow the entire population at risk to be fully immunized, nor is it clear how quickly the country will obtain more vaccines,” said Ethel Maciel, an epidemiologist at the Federal University of Espirito Santo. On Saturday night, the health regulator Anvisa rejected an application for use of a Russian vaccine called Sputnik V, submitted by Brazilian company União Química. Anvisa said it didn’t evaluate the application because it didn’t meet minimum requirements to start an analysis. Vaccination in Brazil is beginning later than neighbours such as Argentina and Chile despite a robust public health system and decades of experience with immunisation campaigns. The process to present and approve the Covid-19 vaccines was fraught with conflict, as allies of President Jair Bolsonaro sought to cast doubt on the efficacy of the Sinovac shot backed by his political rival, Sao Paulo state’s Gov. João Doria. “The rivalry between Brasilia and the state governments prevented any cooperative work,” said Maurício Santoro, professor of political science at the University of the State of Rio de Janeiro. “The governor lost the leadership position, but made Bolsonaro act more quickly to guarantee the start of vaccination.” The vaccination priority will be health professionals on the front line against coronavirus. Vaccination by the federal government will begin on Wednesday, Health Minister Eduardo Pazuello said on Sunday. Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. I’m on Twitter @helenrsullivan and email on: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com Brazil’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. Meanwhile the US death toll is nearing 400,000, according to Johns Hopkins University. It currently stands at 397,258. Here are the other key developments from the last few hours: South Africa has delayed reopening its schools amid a rapid resurgence of Covid-19 driven by a more infectious variant of the virus. There have been a further 38,598 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK, according to government data. This compares to 54,940 infections registered last Sunday and is the lowest number since 27 December. The United Arab Emirates has lowered the minimum age requirement to receive a Covid-19 vaccination to 16, from 18 previously, its ministry of health said. Israel’s prisons service has said they will begin vaccinating all incarcerated people against Covid-19, including Palestinians, following calls from right groups, Palestinian officials and Israel’s attorney general. Greece’s health authorities have announced 237 new infections, taking the country’s total 148,607 confirmed cases. Today’s figure is significantly lower than last Sunday’s, when 445 new cases were reported, and is the smallest daily increase since October. In th UK, over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the government has announced. Portugal’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. Schools in Malawi will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday.28579falsefalseCaroline Davies (now) and Helen Sullivan (earlier)NHS advanced nurse practitioners Edwina Williams (R) and Kate Harrison (L) prepare Oxford/AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccines. A general view of St. Moritz, Switzerland December 11, 2020.A Eurostar train at Gare du Nord in Paris.People wearing face masks following the coronavirus outbreak skate on a frozen lake which has been turned to an ice rink, in Beijing, China 16 January 2021.

South Africa has delayed reopening its schools amid a rapid resurgence of Covid-19 driven by a more infectious variant of the virus.

There have been a further 38,598 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK, according to government data. This compares to 54,940 infections registered last Sunday and is the lowest number since 27 December.

The United Arab Emirates has lowered the minimum age requirement to receive a Covid-19 vaccination to 16, from 18 previously, its ministry of health said.

Israel’s prisons service has said they will begin vaccinating all incarcerated people against Covid-19, including Palestinians, following calls from right groups, Palestinian officials and Israel’s attorney general.

Greece’s health authorities have announced 237 new infections, taking the country’s total 148,607 confirmed cases. Today’s figure is significantly lower than last Sunday’s, when 445 new cases were reported, and is the smallest daily increase since October.

In th UK, over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the government has announced.

Portugal’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients.

Schools in Malawi will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday.