block-time published-time 6.24am GMT

Tokyo 2020 head says 'impossible' to delay Olympics as public opposition grows

The president of the Tokyo 2020  organising committee, Yoshiro Mori, has said preparations for the summer Olympics will continue, despite growing doubts that the Games can be held while the coronavirus pandemic  continues to rage.

Mori, a former Japanese prime minister, said postponing the Games a second time would be “absolutely impossible”.

“Spring will always come, morning will surely come even after long nights,” he said during an online event on Tuesday organised by the Kyodo news agency. “Believing in that, to give joy and hope to many people, we will do our best until the end.”

The Japanese government and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) decided in March last year to postpone Tokyo 2020  by a year due to the pandemic, and agreed that a second delay was out of the question. The only remaining options are to go head this summer or cancel the games altogether:

Related:  Tokyo 2020 head says 'impossible' to delay Olympics as public opposition grows

block-time published-time 6.13am GMT

More now on the resignation of Moncef Slaoui, the chief adviser for Operation Warp Speed.

Slaoui will be available to the incoming Joe Biden administration as a consultant for about four weeks, a Biden transition official told Reuters late on Tuesday. Slaoui’s role leading the Covid-19 vaccine development for the government effort is expected to be diminished after 20 January, according to CNBC , which first reported the development.

The Biden team has not asked Slaoui to stay past his current contract, which includes a 30 days’ notice before termination, CNBC said. The US Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees Operation Warp Speed, did not immediately respond to requests for comment late Tuesday. Operation Warp Speed is the US government’s program to distribute Covid-19 vaccines. The operation started last year as a national effort by the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of Defense, aiming to provide substantial quantities of safe and effective vaccines for Americans by January 2021.

Dr. Moncef Slaoui. Photograph: Patrick Semansky/AP

However, only about 2.6 million Americans had received a Covid-19 vaccine going into the last day of December, putting the United States far short of the government’s target to vaccinate 20 million people last month. “We know that it should be better and we are working hard to make it better,” Slaoui said at a media briefing late in December.  According to Politico, Slaoui had said he planned to step down by early this year, but last week he said he “decided to extend that in order to ensure that the operation continues to perform the way it has performed through the transition of administration.”

block-time published-time 5.49am GMT

California lifts stay-home order for Sacramento region

California lifted a stay-at-home order in the 13-county Sacramento region on Tuesday as hospital conditions improved, a rare turn of good news as the state pushes through what Governor Gavin Newsom called “its most intense surge” of the coronavirus. The order imposed 10 December banned gatherings outside a household and shuttered or restricted many businesses. With virus cases and hospitalisations more stable now, the region can resume outdoor dining and worship services, reopen hair and nail salons and other businesses, and increase capacity at retailers Gatherings of up to three households are allowed.

Registered Nurse Allison Shiftar puts on protective glasses as she gets ready to go into one of the triage rooms to care for a Covid-19 positive patient in the emergency department at Sutter Roseville Medical Center in Roseville, California. Photograph: Renée C Byer/AP

Newsom made the announcement in a social media post that remined people to wear masks, stay home as much as possible and offered the hopeful promise: “There is a light at the end of this tunnel.” Three of the state’s five regions — the San Francisco Bay Area, Central Valley and Southern California — remain under the stay-at-home order because their intensive care capacity at hospitals is severely limited. California has seen an enormous surge of cases, hospitalizations and deaths since Thanksgiving. The state is averaging 42,000 new virus cases a day and recorded 3,500 virus deaths in the last week. On Monday the death toll topped 30,000 since the pandemic began. Health officials are warning that hospitalizations and deaths are likely to continue to increase as people who contracted the virus during the holidays get sicker.

block-time published-time 5.32am GMT

Our full story on the latest from China now:

Related:  China sees biggest daily Covid tally since July as WHO prepares to fly in

block-time published-time 5.08am GMT

More now on the African Union securing 300m vaccine doses, via Reuters:

African officials have approached at least 10 vaccine manufacturers and developers as the continent seeks to vaccinate 60% of its population of 1.3 billion people, or about 780 million people. The Africa CDC has said some 1.5bn doses are needed for that, assuming two doses per person. It estimates the effort will cost some $10bn. Ndembi has said he’s very optimistic that can be achieved within two years. The Africa CDC has warned that taking much longer than that risks having the virus become endemic in parts of the African continent. In an address to South Africans on Monday night, Ramaphosa announced the country had secured 20 million vaccine doses “to be delivered mainly in the first half of the year.”

He gave no further details but said “we will make further announcements as we conclude our negotiations with vaccine manufacturers.” Africa has scrambled on multiple fronts to obtain vaccine supplies. Ramaphosa said the African Vaccine Acquisition Task Team recently created under the AU “has done tremendous work to secure vaccine doses” through what he called intensive engagement with manufacturers. “The South African government has also been engaging directly with several vaccine manufacturers for over six months,” he said. “Given the massive global demand for vaccines and the vastly greater purchasing power of wealthier countries, we are exploring all avenues to get as many vaccine doses as soon as possible,” Ramaphosa said.

block-time published-time 4.57am GMT

African Union secures nearly 300m vaccine doses

The African Union has secured close to 300 million COovid-19 vaccine doses in the largest such agreement yet for Africa, a continental official said Tuesday. AP: Nicaise Ndembi, senior science adviser for the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told The Associated Press in an interview that the current AU chair, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa, is expected to announce the news on Wednesday. The 300 million doses are being secured independently of the global Covax effort aimed at distributing Covid-19 vaccines to lower-income countries, Ndembi said. “We have reached the final stage of our deals,” he said, referring questions about who will be providing the vaccines and at what cost to the upcoming announcement. The news comes as coronavirus infections spike again in parts of Africa, especially South Africa, where a rapidly spreading variant of the coronavirus now makes up most of the new cases. The continent over the weekend surpassed 3 million confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic, with more than 1.2 million in South Africa. “We plan to have these by the end of the first quarter” of 2021, Ndembi said of the nearly 300 million doses, which will be allocated on the continental platform the AU set up last year to make it easier for Africa’s 54 countries to pool their purchasing power and buy pandemic supplies in bulk. “We’re expecting 600 million doses from the Covax facility,” he said, but African officials are still waiting on the details, so “we’re happy we have alternative solutions.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.57am GMT

block-time published-time 4.31am GMT

Micronesia president said first Covid case not a threat to country

The president of the Federated States of Micronesia has said the country’s first case of Covid-19 - detected in a sailor on board a ship held in an island lagoon - does not pose a threat to the wider community.

David Panuelo’s government announced last week that a lone sailor on board the government ship, MV Chief Mailo, had tested positive to the coronavirus after returning from the Philippines.

In a nationally televised address broadcast this week, Panuelo said the crew was permitted to return to the country after being tested for the virus, and because they feared piracy

“The crew was rightly fearful of increasing numbers of pirates in the region which contributed to their fears. So I could either abandon the ship that the government uses to service the state of Chuuk and leave its crew and the 12 year-old boy from Poluwat outside of our care or I could bring them home.”

Panuelo said the single case had been successfully quarantined, with the ship held in Pohnpei lagoon under guard.

“Citizens across the nation should remain calm… do not panic because the situation is contained.

“The individual with Covid-19 on the Chief Mailo does not present any immediate risk of the virus spreading to the broader community in Pohnpei,” he said.

The central business district of the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Oceania, South Pacific Ocean. Photograph: Dmitry Malov/Alamy

The Federated States of Micronesia have recorded zero cases of Covid-19 before this case.

Schools, churches and business remain open and there is no mandated requirement to wear masks in the archipelago, though it is encouraged, along with social distancing.

Already, FSM has received 9000 doses of the Moderna coronavirus vaccine from the United States, with which it has a compact of free association. An inoculation program for the 100,000-strong population has already begun.

Pacific island nations have been among the most successful in the world at keeping out the virus after closing their borders early in response to the threat, despite the huge cost to tourism-dependent economies.

Several island nations which were virus-free have lost that status recently with Solomon Islands, the Marshall Islands, Samoa and Vanuatu falling to the coronavirus pandemic sweeping the world.

However, several other island countries including Tonga, Palau, Nauru and Kiribati are believed to remain virus-free.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.17am GMT

block-time published-time 4.06am GMT

Former Bolivian president Evo Morales diagnosed with coronavirus

Former Bolivian President Evo Morales tested positive for the coronavirus and is getting treatment to combat symptoms, according to a statement issued by his office late on Tuesday.

“He is currently stable and is receiving medical attention,” the statement said, without providing details on his symptoms. Last week, 61-year old Morales participated in group meetings with coca growers in Cochabamba in the central part of the country. The critical-care wards of major hospitals in Bolivia and neighboring Peru have been near collapse after end-of-year holidays, reflecting regional health concerns as much of Latin America struggles to secure adequate Covid-19 vaccine supplies. While daily cases remain below last year’s peak, depleted resources, weary medical workers and a recent rush of severe cases are taxing already ailing healthcare systems from Chile to Mexico, officials say. Bolivia has had 176,761 confirmed cases of Covid-19 and 9,454 deaths.

block-time published-time 4.06am GMT

Indonesia's president receives vaccine

Indonesian president Joko Widodo became the first person in the country to receive a shot of a Chinese-made Covid-19 vaccine on Wednesday morning, as health officials began an immunisation campaign in one of the world’s most populous countries.

Indonesia, which is struggling to contain one of the worst outbreaks in South-East Asia, has approved the Sinovac vaccine for emergency use.

The vaccine will be rolled out over the coming months, with priority given to health care workers, civil servants and other vulnerable groups. It will be free to all Indonesian citizens.

President Joko Widodo, left, receives a shot of the coronavirus vaccine in Jakarta. Photograph: Agus Suparto/AP

To reach herd immunity, the government estimates that it must vaccinate 181.5 million people (about 67%) of its population. This will be a mammoth and complex task for health teams working across the sprawling archipelago, especially in areas where transport and infrastructure are less developed. Two shots of the jab must be administered, and the vaccines - which have been protected by armed guards since arriving in the country - must be kept at cooler temperatures of 2-8 degrees Celsius.

“We know that the cold-chain distribution is not complete. This is the obstacle,” Budi Gunadi Sadikin, Indonesia’s health minister said on Tuesday.

block-time published-time 3.40am GMT

Mexican health authorities will make a decision this week on whether to authorize Russia’s Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine after getting access to data on it, Deputy Health Minister Hugo Lopez-Gatell said on Tuesday. Reuters: Lopez-Gatell said President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador had instructed authorities to “proceed speedily” with the process. “The file has been under review since the weekend by (health regulator) COFEPRIS and very soon there will be a decision regarding the authorization for emergency use, as occurred with the other two vaccines,” he said at a regular government news conference. He later said Cofepris was expected to make a decision this week on authorization for emergency use in Mexico. Lopez-Gatell, Mexico’s coronavirus czar, said on Monday evening that Mexico was considering acquiring 24 million doses of Sputnik V. Mexico has already authorized the vaccines developed by Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE and AstraZeneca Plc. Lopez-Gatell said he met with Russian officials to discuss the vaccine during a trip last week to Argentina, whose government has started rolling out Sputnik V to health workers.

block-time published-time 3.09am GMT

China sees highest daily case rise in five months

China has recorded the biggest daily jump in Covid cases in more than five months, despite three cities in lockdown, increased testing and other measures aimed at preventing another wave of infections in the world’s second biggest economy.

Most of the new patients were reported near the capital Beijing, but a province in northeast China also saw a rise in new cases, official data showed on Wednesday.

The National Health Commission said in a statement that a total of 115 new confirmed cases were reported in the mainland compared with 55 a day earlier. This was the highest daily increase since July 30.

The commission said 107 of the new cases were local infections. Hebei, the province that surrounds Beijing, accounted for 90 of the cases, while northeastern Heilongjiang province reported 16 new cases.

The number of new cases reported in recent days remains a small fraction of what China saw at the height of the outbreak in early 2020.

Hebei has put three cities - Shijiazhuang, Xingtai and Langfang - into lockdown as part of the efforts to keep the virus from spreading further, while Beijing city authorities have stepped up screening and prevention measures to prevent another cluster from developing there.

The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to 38 from 81 cases a day earlier.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.09am GMT

block-time published-time 2.53am GMT

WHO mission will fly directly to Wuhan

The World Health Organisation’s investigative mission will fly directly to Wuhan, China’s foreign ministry has confirmed. In a regular press briefing on Tuesday afternoon, spokesman for China’s ministry, Zhao Lijian, said the team would fly directly from Singapore into Wuhan. Zhao didn’t answer questions about whether the team would quarantine, and gave no further details.

The WHO delegation of scientists tasked to research the origins of the virus are expected to arrive in China tomorrow, after almost a year of negotiation. They had expected to travel to Wuhan and talk with scientists on the ground , in the city where the outbreak is believed to have begun, but Chinese authorities had been cagey about the details and nothing had been confirmed.

Security guards standing in front of the closed Huanan wholesale seafood market, where health authorities say a man who died from a respiratory illness had purchased goods from, in the city of Wuhan, Hubei province. Photograph: Noel Celis/AFP/Getty Images

Members of the WHO team began departing their home countries early last week, only to discover Chinese officials hadn’t finalised necessary permissions.  The head of the WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “very disappointed” but Chinese authorities said the two sides were still in discussions. The research mission is a priority for the WHO, and has widespread international backing, however observers have urged people to manage expectations about the team coming to any conclusions on the trip, and researchers have said the mission is not about apportioning blame.

“This is about reducing the risk. And the media can help by avoiding Trump style finger-pointing. Our job is not political,” said Fabian Leendertz, professor in the epidemiology of highly pathogenic microorganisms at Germany’s public health body, the Robert Koch Institute, and part of the team, yesterday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.18am GMT

block-time published-time 2.28am GMT

US Operation Warp Speed chief resigns - reports

Operation Warp Speed Chief Adviser Dr. Moncef Slaoui has resigned at the request of the incoming Biden team, in a plan that would see him stay in the role for a month to help with the transition, CNBC reported on Tuesday. The chief adviser for the US Covid-19 vaccine program, Slaoui’s role leading vaccine development for the government effort is expected to be diminished after 20 January, CNBC said.

block-time published-time 2.01am GMT

In England, thousands of hospital patients are to be discharged early to hotels or their own homes to free up beds for Covid-19 sufferers needing life-or-death care, the Guardian has learned.

Hospital chiefs in England  intend to start discharging patients early on a scale never seen before, as an emergency measure to create “extra emergency contingency capacity” and stop parts of the NHS collapsing, senior sources said.

Documents seen by the Guardian also revealed that the NHS  is asking care homes to start accepting Covid patients directly from hospitals and without a recent negative test, as long as they have been in isolation for 14 days and have shown no new symptoms:

Related:  Hospital patients to be sent to hotels to free up beds for critical Covid patients

block-time published-time 1.44am GMT

And now a break from the bad news:

block-time published-time 1.25am GMT

English Covid rules have changed 64 times since March, says barrister

Lockdown rules in England  have been changed at least 64 times by the government since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, a human rights barrister has calculated, amid growing calls for clearer guidance for the public.

Adam Wagner, of Doughty Street Chambers, said that new national regulations, local regulations, regulations on face coverings or rules on travel quarantine have passed into law on average every four-and-a-half days since the first restrictions were introduced in the spring:

Related:  English Covid rules have changed 64 times since March, says barrister

block-time published-time 1.01am GMT

In the UK, people who were trapped in poverty before the pandemic have suffered the most financial damage during the crisis, according to a report warning the government that more support is needed to help hard-pressed families.

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation said those who had been struggling to make ends meet before March last year were more likely to work in precarious jobs or sectors of the economy that had been hardest hit by lockdowns.

Calling on the government to make permanent a £20 per week rise in universal credit  benefit payments – which is due to be cut from the end of March – it said that many families had been pushed to the brink  during the latest lockdown and had few resources left:

Related:  Lowest paid in UK have suffered the most financially in the pandemic, report finds

block-time published-time 12.33am GMT

US CDC expands pre-flight Covid testing

Anyone flying to the US will soon need to show proof of a negative test for Covid-19, health officials announced Tuesday. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention requirement expands on a similar one announced late last month for passengers coming from the United Kingdom. The new order takes effect in two weeks, AP reports. Covid is already widespread in the US, with more than 22 million cases reported to date, including more than 375,000 deaths. The new measures are designed to try to prevent travelers from bringing in newer forms of the virus that scientists say can spread more easily. The CDC order applies to US citizens as well as foreign travellers. The agency said it delayed the effective date until 26 January to give airlines and travellers time to comply. International travel to the US has already been decimated by pandemic restrictions put in place last March that banned most foreigners from Europe and other areas. Travel by foreigners to the US and by Americans to international destinations in December was down 76% compared to a year earlier, according to trade group Airlines for America. The new restrictions require air passengers to get a Covid-19 test within three days of their flight to the US, and to provide written proof of the test result to the airline. Travellers can also provide documentation that they had the infection in the past and recovered. Airlines are ordered to stop passengers from boarding if they don’t have proof of a negative test. “Testing does not eliminate all risk,” CDC Director Robert R. Redfield said in a statement. “But when combined with a period of staying at home and everyday precautions like wearing masks and social distancing, it can make travel safer, healthier, and more responsible by reducing spread on planes, in airports, and at destinations.” The CDC order is “a reasonable approach” to reducing the risk of new variants from abroad entering the US, said Dr. Ashish Jha, dean of Brown University’s school of public health.

block-time published-time 12.09am GMT

New data shows 50.4% efficacy for China's CoronaVac vaccine in Brazil

A coronavirus vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech was just 50.4% effective at preventing symptomatic infections in a Brazilian trial, researchers said on Tuesday, barely enough for regulatory approval and well below the rate announced last week. Reuters: The latest results are a major disappointment for Brazil, as the Chinese vaccine is one of two that the federal government has lined up to begin immunisation during the second wave of the world’s second-deadliest Covid-19 outbreak. Several scientists and observers blasted the Butantan biomedical center for releasing partial data just days ago that generated unrealistic expectations. The confusion may add to skepticism in Brazil about the Chinese vaccine, which President Jair Bolsonaro has criticized, questioning its “origins.” “We have a good vaccine. Not the best vaccine in the world. Not the ideal vaccine,” said microbiologist Natalia Pasternak, criticizing Butantan’s triumphant tone. Last week, the Brazilian researchers had celebrated results showing 78% efficacy against “mild-to-severe” Covid-19 cases, a rate they later described as “clinical efficacy.” They said nothing at the time about another group of “very mild” infections among those who received the vaccine that did not require clinical assistance. Ricardo Palacios, medical director for clinical research at Butantan, said on Tuesday that the new lower efficacy finding included data on those “very mild” cases. Piecemeal disclosures about Chinese vaccine trials globally have raised concerns that they are not subject to the same public scrutiny as U.S. and European alternatives. Palacios and officials in the Sao Paulo state government, which funds Butantan, emphasised the good news that none of the volunteers inoculated with CoronaVac had to be hospitalised with Covid-19 symptoms. Public health experts said that alone will be a relief for Brazilian hospitals that are buckling under the strain of surging case loads. However, it will take longer to curb the pandemic with a vaccine that allows so many mild cases.

block-time published-time 11.57pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the global coronavirus pandemic.

My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest developments from around the world for the next few hours.

As always, the best place to find me is on Twitter @helenrsullivan.  You can also send an email to: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com

The Chinese-developed Coronavac Covid-19 vaccine has demonstrated a 50 percent efficacy following tests in Brazil, the organization in charge of its production in the South American country said on Tuesday.

Coronavac has been given to frontline health care workers in close contact with coronavirus patients.

Meanwhile the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has approved an order expanding coronavirus testing requirements for nearly all international air travellers starting 26 January.

•Angela Merkel suggested Germany’s hard lockdown may last a further eight to 10 weeks. Health officials are particularly concerned about the spread of the new, far more contagious variant from the UK, which is thought to have been in Germany for several weeks.•Portuguese president tests negative after a Covid positive test. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa has now tested negative for coronavirus after a positive test saw him cancel all public engagements two weeks before a presidential election.•Chinese coronavirus vaccine shows 50% efficacy in Brazil. The Chinese-developed Coronavac Covid-19 vaccine has demonstrated a 50% efficacy following tests in Brazil.•French coronavirus cases up 19,753 over 24 hours. France reported 19,753 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours on Tuesday, while the number of Covid-19 patients in intensive care units continued to rise.•Greece urges EU to adopt vaccine certificate for travel. Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis urged the EU to adopt a “standardised” vaccination certificate to boost travel this year.•Dutch extend coronavirus curbs until 9 February. The Netherlands is extending coronavirus restrictions until 9 February as infections are still high and the government is “very concerned” about the UK variant of the disease, prime minister Mark Rutte said.•UK private Covid test companies accused of failing to deliver. Private companies have been accused of cashing in on the coronavirus pandemic by offering expensive Covid tests to customers with urgent travel plans, then failing to deliver.

Angela Merkel suggested Germany’s hard lockdown may last a further eight to 10 weeks. Health officials are particularly concerned about the spread of the new, far more contagious variant from the UK, which is thought to have been in Germany for several weeks.

Portuguese president tests negative after a Covid positive test. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa has now tested negative for coronavirus after a positive test saw him cancel all public engagements two weeks before a presidential election.

Chinese coronavirus vaccine shows 50% efficacy in Brazil. The Chinese-developed Coronavac Covid-19 vaccine has demonstrated a 50% efficacy following tests in Brazil.

French coronavirus cases up 19,753 over 24 hours. France reported 19,753 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours on Tuesday, while the number of Covid-19 patients in intensive care units continued to rise.

Greece urges EU to adopt vaccine certificate for travel. Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis urged the EU to adopt a “standardised” vaccination certificate to boost travel this year.

Dutch extend coronavirus curbs until 9 February. The Netherlands is extending coronavirus restrictions until 9 February as infections are still high and the government is “very concerned” about the UK variant of the disease, prime minister Mark Rutte said.

UK private Covid test companies accused of failing to deliver. Private companies have been accused of cashing in on the coronavirus pandemic by offering expensive Covid tests to customers with urgent travel plans, then failing to deliver.