The two biggest stories this year are coronavirus and Black Lives Matter, and one of the places they meet is on a cul-de-sac in Romford, Essex, silent on a weekday afternoon apart from the thrum of lawnmowers. Inside one of those tidy houses lives Intisar Chowdhury, with his wide grin and big glasses and life story that you partly know.

He's the son of Abdul Mabud Chowdhury, the hospital doctor who even while sick with coronavirus wrote an open letter to Boris Johnson pleading for more masks and gowns for NHS colleagues. When he died three weeks later, 18-year-old Intisar was thrust into the headlines. This was early in the course of the pandemic, when each evening brought news of hundreds more Covid-19 deaths. As the adults in power tore lumps out of each other, a grieving teenager spoke with poise about the government's lack of consideration for black and Asian carers. Of the more than 30 doctors the British Medical Association knows to have died in this pandemic, around 90% came from ethnic minorities, it says.

When we met earlier this month, Intisar showed podcast producer Mythili Rao and me the garden where his parents threw parties, the conservatory where his dad's tablas sit silent. He has had more life pushed into the past few weeks than most schoolboys should have to live over 18 years. He could, maybe should, have taken a rest. Instead he is doing something extraordinary.

Outraged by the police killing of George Floyd, he wants to use whatever attention he has gained to battle racism. Along with his friend Clara, he appealed last month for other teenagers to recount the racism they face at school. As the call-out spread across social media, dozens of stories flooded in, from Lincolnshire to Surrey to Kent. Assembled into a dossier and reported exclusively by the Guardian, they comprise a horrific indicator of the abuse and even assaults dished out to black and Asian children by their peers and sometimes teachers in English schools.

And they crack some of the orthodoxies around race. Those big-name commentators fretting they could be silenced by "cancel culture" would do well to listen to these children who usually have no voice. Those who affect to believe that the Black Lives Matter movement is all about rusty statues or that the UK is a "post-racial" utopia should read the accounts from black schoolboys told by teachers to stop hanging out together "because we looked threatening in a gang", or the Muslims warned by staff not "to congregate in large groups" - supposedly to prevent terrorist radicalisation.

Then there's Appy, a black girl who goes to her Midlands grammar with natural hair, only to be told by senior staff it's against "governmental regulations". She is frogmarched to a storeroom, given a roll of navy blue fabric and ordered to sew her own headscarf.

In a different classroom, a teacher interrupts his presentation with a slide from a Ribena ad ­­- a cartoon of a fat, purple blackcurrant with outsized facial features. He spends the next five minutes calling the only two black students in class, "the Ribena boys". When one of them writes "the entire class laughed", you feel the heat of his shame.

We entrust our children to teachers, telling them that doing well in education helps you do well at life, believing that classrooms teach tomorrow's adults to live together. But what many kids learn is that there isn't the same tolerance for them as for others, whether on the syllabus or in the playground. Nor do their teachers necessarily get it: while 25% of pupils at English schools are from ethnic minorities, 93% of heads are white British.

This dossier doesn't pretend to be science. It is a self-selected sample of students telling their side of the story, although no school we put allegations to denied them. As a gauge of the scope or scale of racism in schools, this collection is useless ­­- but so is everything else. Academics at the University of Manchester note that the only record is those incidents that schools log with police as hate crimes. What this collection gives instead is rare indeed: a record by minority-ethnic students of their daily humiliations, the sort of thing that teens don't tell their parents, out of guilt or a sense of isolation.

I remember that feeling. I started school at my mother's primary in Hackney, east London, until she fell badly ill and I was moved to my local primary in Edmonton, north London. It was topsy-turvy: from holding my mum's hand to being handed to a childminder, from multicultural inner London to (then) white-working class outer suburb. As almost the only Indian-origin kid at the new school, I went out on that first break into the playground to find what seemed like every single boy in the school hanging off the fence and chanting "rubber lips, nigger lips" ­- and worse. I was friendless, helpless. This continued day after day, so I went to a teacher who shrugged that they'd eventually get bored. Again, the helplessness.

It actually stopped on day four, thanks to a spelling test where I got top marks. From then on, all the boys with skinhead brothers wanted to copy my answers. So: good marks equalled not getting your head kicked in. It was my introduction to what meritocracy meant for the likes of me.

That was back in the 1980s, and I'd assumed things had got better. In many places I'm sure they have, but to read this dossier is to see why in a poll published by ITV last week, 62% of black Britons agreed that the education system had a culture of racism. It is also to see just how school communities can punish their non-white children.

Black girls are still policed for their physical appearance; Asian kids are laughed at for having strict parents. In the whiter areas or the better schools, there is often a sense that the minority-ethnic children are lucky just to be there. Naomi told me about starting primary in Chelmsford, Essex, and being the only black girl in her class. Kids called her "poo", said she smelled and laughed at her hair. "I felt very, very ugly," she said. One bully physically assaulted her.

Raised a Christian, she would ask God "what I did wrong for me to be black ... Like, my whole life is a mistake". She was six and this was 2010, just two years before the Olympics ceremony celebrated multicultural Britain.

For Naomi, as for me, being the target of racist abuse was an intimate shame, something that followed us home from the school gate and made us wonder what was wrong with us. Yet to see so many similar stories gathered together at first provokes sadness, then anger, but finally a strange optimism. Because in their collected weight, these testimonies show that it wasn't our fault at all. The responsibility always lay with our tormentors and the society that enabled them. And for an 18-year-old boy to achieve that, in the depths of his own grief, is a remarkable feat.

Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist

Hear a special discussion on racism in schools on Thursday's edition of the Guardian's Today in Focus podcast