A senior Chinese diplomat has pushed back at claims of rising interference in Australian politics while calling on both countries to take steps to repair the rift in the relationship.

Wang Xining, the deputy head of mission of China's embassy in Australia, argued diplomatic channels between the two countries remained open but there were "some shadows" over the relationship "so we need to make our position much more clear in order to remove the shadows".

Addressing the National Press Club in Canberra on Wednesday, Wang revisited one of the major sources of diplomatic tension in recent times, saying China had been offended by Australia's call for an inquiry into the origins of coronavirus because it came at a time when Wuhan was coming out of restrictive lockdown.

But he refused to say whether he accepted the coronavirus originated in China, saying it should be left to scientists to determine.

Wang's speech came after months of tensions in the relationship, fuelled by issues including a war of words over the Covid-19 inquiry, a dispute over the Chinese government's crackdown on freedoms in Hong Kong, and claims and counter-claims over each country's spying activities.

Last week Chinese authorities began a trade investigation into Australian wine imports, after imposing steep tariffs on Australian barley and suspending certain red meat import permits on technical grounds and issuing travel warnings to Chinese students and tourists.

Wang appeared at the National Press Club for an hour to press his case that China was not interested in interfering in Australia's internal affairs or undermining its sovereignty - but that both sides needed to treat each other with respect to "make our partnership work for our people, for our children and for the world".

He argued Australia should refrain from interfering in China's internal affairs - a concept that Beijing has repeatedly invoked in rejecting international alarm about the harsh new national security law in Hong Kong.

"We should not let cold-hearted and dark minds cast shadow over our partnership," Wang said. "We are not trying to turn Australia into the People's Republic of China ... we're not asking Hungry Jack's to sell Chinese dumplings."

Pressed on China's use of soft power programs, Wang argued there was a big difference between foreign interference and foreign influence - the latter of which had a neutral meaning. He argued Australia would not enjoy affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness "without accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

His comments come at a time when political support appears to be building for a parliamentary inquiry into alleged efforts by the Chinese Communist party to exert influence over the Australian universities.

Wang insisted the concerns about China's Thousand Talents Plan - aired in News Corp's the Australian this week - were based on "hearsay and gossip". He said diplomats and scientists were "trying very hard to spread sunshine over our relationship" while some reporters were "trying to cast a shadow".

He also urged Australia not to push away foreign investment "on account of ill-founded and in many cases imported assertions" of security breaches, infringement of intellectual property rights and forced technology transfer.

Wang offered the most expansive account yet of the Chinese government's objections to Australia's decision to publicly calling for an independent international investigation into the origins and handling of coronavirus in late April.

He said the Australian government had shown a lack of courtesy by failing to consult the Chinese government before making that call publicly.

He said the Chinese people saw Australia's inquiry push as singling them out at a time when Wuhan had just come out of a restrictive lockdown and when the US government was attempting to push more pressure on China.

"Finally our people back in China thought they were able to take a breath because they were under huge pressure, in the first three months, they sacrificed a lot ... All of a sudden, there was this shocking proposal from Australia, supposed to be a good friend of China."

Wang said while coronavirus was first identified and reported in China, he cited remarks by Michael Ryan, a senior World Health Organization official, earlier this month that the fact the "fire alarm" was first triggered in Wuhan "doesn't necessarily mean that is where the disease crossed from animals into humans".

Wang played down complaints from senior Australian government ministers of being unable to secure a phone call with their Chinese counterparts, saying he did not think the embassy in Canberra had received any requests for such a call.

But he left open the possibility such requests may have been made made via the Australian embassy in Beijing.

Asked whether China was sending a message to other middle powers to not to stand up to the country, Wang said that was "a very lopsided interpretation of what happened between us".

Speaking in advance of Wang's speech, Scott Morrison said Australia was seeking "a mutually beneficial relationship" but would would not trade away the national interest.

"It is an important partnership, but it's one that goes both ways, and that's how we will always seek to approach it," the prime minister said. "But, at the same time, our sovereignty just like theirs I think will be paramount."