block-time published-time 3.17am GMT

Papua New Guinea's low testing rates for Covid-19 - and flawed testing procedures - are hampering efforts to properly trace and treat the disease.

The country's pandemic response controller, police commissioner David Manning, said improperly handled swabs were reaching laboratories compromised and unable to be tested.

Fewer than 42,000 tests have been done across the country of nearly nine million people, over the course of the entire pandemic.

"We can only find out the extent of the outbreak in the country if we proactively test people," Manning said.

There have been 850 confirmed cases in PNG, and nine known deaths. But the real impact of the virus is likely many times greater.

A nurse sits at a table set up as a Covid-19 screening station at Warangoin Clinic in East New Britain Province. Photograph: Kalo Fainu/The Guardian

Australia has announced US$111-million in funding for Covid-19 vaccination across PNG over three years.

Manning urged PNG citizens to adopt a 'Niupela Pasin' - 'new normal' - for living with the risk of Covid-19.

"Please wear a face mask in public places, avoid shaking hands or physical contact, avoid crowds, maintain physical distancing and regularly wash hands or sanitise your hands.

"God has spared us from the wrath of Covid-19 but let us not take this for granted. We must do our part to protect ourselves and our loved ones. More than two million people have died globally from Covid-19 so please be proactive in preventing its spread in PNG."

block-time published-time 2.45am GMT

In recent nights, rioters have poured on to the streets of 10 Dutch cities in what has been the closest Europe  has come to open revolt against the coronavirus restrictions imposed across the continent.

The violence, the worst in four decades, might be put down to the liberty-loving culture of the country but, perhaps not coincidentally, the Netherlands  is also the very last EU member state to start vaccinating the public and offer some hope that there is light at the end of the tunnel.

The reality is, however, that the Dutch are not standout stragglers among the pack of 27 member states. The EU as a whole has been lethargic in getting the vaccines they have purchased into the arms of the citizens whose taxes have paid for it:

Related:  Covid vaccine supply issues could see Dutch violence repeated in rest of EU

block-time published-time 2.32am GMT

New Zealand hopes for Covid all-clear after no new cases reported

New Zealand's Northland region has edged closer to containing the latest outbreak of coronavirus after all 16 close contacts of a woman infected with the disease returned negative tests.

Around 10,000 New Zealanders took Covid-19 tests this week, 8,000 of them in Northland, where the infected woman lives, making it one of the highest testing rates in the world

No one else in the community has tested positive.

"We are still investigating but this is an encouraging response and does provide us some reassurance," , said the Covid response minister, Chris Hipkins.

The infected woman, a 56-year-old New Zealander, remains in self-isolation, as do all her close contacts:

Related:  'Encouraging signs': New Zealand hopes for Covid all-clear after no new cases reported

block-time published-time 2.04am GMT

Mexico Deputy Health Minister Hugo Lopez-Gatell said on Tuesday that emergency use of Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine should be authorised within days, after a favourable recommendation by a committee within Mexico's health regulator, Reuters reports. The exact arrival of the first shipments of Sputnik V to Mexico had not been confirmed, Lopez-Gatell said, though officials said earlier in the day that 200,000 doses could arrive next week.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.04am GMT

block-time published-time 1.30am GMT

Biden vows to vaccinate 300m people in US by end of summer or early fall

Joe Biden vowed on Tuesday to ramp up vaccination programs so that most of the US population is inoculated by the end of summer or early fall.

"This will be enough vaccine to fully vaccinate 300m Americans by the end of the summer," the US president said on Tuesday afternoon, later adding "end of summer, beginning of the fall", in a briefing at the White House.

The new  administration will increase vaccine supplies to states, exercise an option to buy a total of 200m more vaccine doses from Pfizer and Moderna and will give states more lead time on the amount of vaccine it will deliver.

The administration's immediate plan is to  accelerate vaccine distribution to deliver roughly 1.4m shots a day and 10m doses a week for the next three weeks, as part of the White House's earlier-stated ambition to vaccinate 100 million people in 100 days:

Related:  Biden vows to vaccinate 300m people in US by end of summer or early fall

block-time published-time 1.29am GMT

Germany considering stopping most flights to country

The German government is discussing reducing to almost zero the number of flights into Germany in an effort to prevent more virulent mutant Covid variants gaining a foothold in Germany, the interior minister, Horst Seehofer, told Bild newspaper.

Other measures being considered included closures of borders to regions where mutant strains were more prevalent, he added.

"The risk posed by these virus mutations demands of us that we consider even drastic measures," Seehofer told Bild. "They include stricter border controls, especially at frontiers with high-risk regions, but also a reduction of air traffic to Germany to almost zero, as Israel is currently doing."

block-time published-time 1.24am GMT

Cuba's coronavirus cases, death toll surge

Cuba's death toll from the coronavirus reached 200 on Tuesday, with authorities reporting nearly as many deaths so far in January as in the six previous months combined, due to an unprecedented acceleration in infections.

While Cuba had just a tenth of the world average of daily infections per capita for much of last year, cases have surged since the government reopened borders in November and loosened restrictions on daily life.

A medical student knocks on doors to investigate and early detect possible coronavirus cases in Santa Clara, Cuba, 19 Jan 2021. Photograph: Roberto Machado Noa/REX/Shutterstock

The situation in Cuba is now much worse than at any other point during the pandemic, and edging closer to that world average. The health ministry has reported 54 deaths in January so far compared with 60 in the previous six months, with daily infection numbers hitting new records on a regular basis - 786 on Tuesday - and cases spread throughout the Caribbean island nation.

block-time published-time 1.12am GMT

Let WHO experts meet Wuhan families, says coronavirus victim's son

A relative of a coronavirus victim in China is demanding to meet a visiting World Health Organization  team, saying it should speak to affected families who say their voices are being stifled by the Chinese government, the Associated Press reports.

China approved the visit by researchers under the auspices of the UN agency only after months of negotiations. It has not indicated whether the experts will be allowed to gather evidence or talk to families, saying only that the team can exchange views with Chinese scientists.

"I hope the WHO experts don't become a tool to spread lies," said Zhang Hai, whose father died of Covid-19 in February 2020, after travelling to the Chinese city of Wuhan and getting infected. "We've been searching for the truth relentlessly. This was a criminal act and I don't want the WHO to be coming to China to cover up these crimes."

China's foreign ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Wuhan doctor: China authorities stopped me sounding alarm on CovidRead more

The WHO team arrived in Wuhan on 14 January to investigate the origins of the virus, and is expected to begin field work this week after a 14-day quarantine:

Related:  Let WHO experts meet Wuhan families, says coronavirus victim's son

block-time published-time 12.39am GMT

The Biden administration is increasing vaccination efforts with a goal of protecting 300 million Americans by early fall, as the administration surges deliveries to states for the next three weeks following complaints of shortages and inconsistent supplies.

"This is enough vaccine to vaccinate 300 million Americans by end of summer, early fall," Biden said. "This is a wartime effort," he added, saying more Americans had already died from the coronavirus than during all of the second world war:

block-time published-time 12.08am GMT

Most poor nations 'will take until 2024 to achieve mass Covid-19 immunisation'

Most poor countries will not achieve mass Covid-19 immunisation until at least 2024 and some may never get there, according to a new forecast, which maps a starkly divided world over the next few years in which a handful of developed countries are fully vaccinated while others race to catch up.

Countries such as the UK, US, Israel and those in the EU will probably achieve "widespread vaccination coverage" - meaning priority and vulnerable groups, and almost all of the rest of the population - by late 2021, according to analysis from the Economist Intelligence Unit. They will be followed by a slew of other developed countries by the middle of 2022 and then most middle-income countries by the end of that year:

Related:  Most poor countries will not achieve mass Covid-19 immunisation until 2024

block-time published-time 11.46pm GMT

Global coronavirus cases pass 100m

The number of confirmed coronavirus cases around the world on Tuesday passed 100 million since the start of the pandemic, according to Johns Hopkins University.

The current total stands at 100,164,399.

Worldwide, at least 2,153,477 people have lost their lives to Covid-19.

The official number of cases registered since the pandemic first broke out in China, in late 2019, represents just a fraction of the real number of infections around the world, AFP reports.

Many countries were late to implement systematic testing, and some continue to test only the most seriously ill.

The poorest nations meanwhile only have the capacity for limited testing.

The United States, which passed 25 million confirmed cases last weekend, remains the country with the largest outbreak.

India is second with 10.7 million cases, and Brazil third with 8.9 million cases.

block-time published-time 11.32pm GMT

UK Covid hotel quarantine system to target travellers from high-risk areas

A hotel quarantine system targeted at arrivals from high-risk countries will be announced by the home secretary, Priti Patel, on Wednesday, after ministers met to sign off the more targeted approach.

Boris Johnson rejected calls at Tuesday evening's meeting for a blanket policy in favour of imposing hotel quarantine on British citizens from a limited number of countries such as South Africa and Brazil.

Ministers were presented with a number of options, with some - including Patel and the health secretary, Matt Hancock, in favour of a more blanket approach, a larger number of countries on the list or even a temporary closure of UK borders.

Labour said a country-by-country quarantine policy would be "half-baked" and leave the UK's vaccination programme vulnerableto as-yet unknown strains of coronavirus.

The Guardian's Jessica Elgot  and Natalie Grover  report:

Related:  UK Covid hotel quarantine system to target travellers from high-risk areas

block-time published-time 11.32pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

In just over a year, 100 million people have been infected with Covid-19. At least 2,153,477 have died.

I'll be bringing you the latest as the staggering infections milestone is passed.

Here are the other key developments from the last few hours:

•AstraZeneca's chief executive has insisted the UK will come first for vaccines as he rejected calls to divert doses to the European Union following a breakdown in supply.•US states will get a 17% increase in the amount of vaccines from next week after shortages across the country. The government will supply 10.1 million first and second doses , up from this week's allocation of 8.6 million.•Leaders of tribes in the Amazon rainforest have urged governments to ensure vaccine rollouts reach all its communities, according to Reuters. Head of the Coordinating Body of Indigenous Peoples of the Amazon Basin (COICA), Jose Gregorio Diaz, said his people faced a "health emergency".•The death toll in France rose to more than 74,000 on Tuesday, as its new case figures stayed above 20,000 for the fourth day in a row. President Emmanuel Macron hopes a new 6pm curfew will be enough to contain the surge.•Iceland has issued its first vaccine "passports" in an attempt to ease international travel for people who have had the jab, AFP reports.•Lebanon has hit a new daily record of Covid-19 deaths amid a second day of protests against strict lockdown measures. Another 73 people died in the last 24 hours from the virus, according to Associated Press.•Brazil has had 61,963 new recorded cases and another 1,214 deaths. The South American country has now had 8,933,356 confirmed infections since the start of the pandemic, while the death toll has risen to 218,878.•The Gambian health ministry has said it will "name and shame" people refusing to self-isolate, after 40 refused to do so last week or escaped treatment clinics. The west African country has recorded 128 deaths since the pandemic began.

AstraZeneca's chief executive has insisted the UK will come first for vaccines as he rejected calls to divert doses to the European Union following a breakdown in supply.

US states will get a 17% increase in the amount of vaccines from next week after shortages across the country. The government will supply 10.1 million first and second doses , up from this week's allocation of 8.6 million.

Leaders of tribes in the Amazon rainforest have urged governments to ensure vaccine rollouts reach all its communities, according to Reuters. Head of the Coordinating Body of Indigenous Peoples of the Amazon Basin (COICA), Jose Gregorio Diaz, said his people faced a "health emergency".

The death toll in France rose to more than 74,000 on Tuesday, as its new case figures stayed above 20,000 for the fourth day in a row. President Emmanuel Macron hopes a new 6pm curfew will be enough to contain the surge.

Iceland has issued its first vaccine "passports" in an attempt to ease international travel for people who have had the jab, AFP reports.

Lebanon has hit a new daily record of Covid-19 deaths amid a second day of protests against strict lockdown measures. Another 73 people died in the last 24 hours from the virus, according to Associated Press.

Brazil has had 61,963 new recorded cases and another 1,214 deaths. The South American country has now had 8,933,356 confirmed infections since the start of the pandemic, while the death toll has risen to 218,878.

The Gambian health ministry has said it will "name and shame" people refusing to self-isolate, after 40 refused to do so last week or escaped treatment clinics. The west African country has recorded 128 deaths since the pandemic began.