Roger Matthews, who has died aged 71 of the effects of Covid-19, was one of the founders of a strand of academic criminology known as left realism, which challenged both the heavily punitive conception of law and order on the right, and the idealistic perspective of crime from the left.

Roger's main contributions were related to the study of state responses to prostitution, but his work spanned a range of research interests, including prisons and penal policy; armed robbery; crime, disorder and community safety; shoplifting; use of CCTV; antisocial behaviour; diversion from custody; and community-based sanctions and desistance.

Early in his career, at Middlesex Polytechnic (now Middlesex University London), Roger was among a group of criminologists, who also included Jock Young and John Lea, developing a response to Thatcherite crime control politics that also underlined the failure of the left to recognise the significant impact of crime on working-class and other marginalised communities. This work was detailed in his book Realist Criminology (2014).

His texts Prostitution, Politics and Policy (2008) and Exiting Prostitution: A Study on Female Desistance (2014) have both been highly influential. Roger insisted that we take seriously the real impact of prostitution on communities, as well as how the police and government tend to over-police and under-protect the women who are harmed in it. He campaigned to decriminalise anyone selling sex but to criminalise those buying it, placing him at odds with the widespread academic inclination to decriminalise the entire industry.

For the past two decades, I worked with Roger on the issues of harm caused by prostitution to women and wider society. Although he was criticised for arguing that women in prostitution are victims of sexual exploitation, whether they be escorts working from high-class hotels or street-based, Roger suggested that women are taking charge of their lives when they decide to leave prostitution and that, without recognition of one's status as a victim, there can be no rallying of support and care. He valued and championed the voices of the survivors of prostitution, bringing them into his research and policy.

As a teacher he was entertaining and challenging. Proud of his working-class origins, Roger was committed to the democratisation of higher education. From his role as a senior lecturer in criminology at Middlesex University London (1977-90), he moved to the University of Leicester, then returned in 1993 to Middlesex, first as reader and then as professor of criminology until 2004. He was professor of criminology at London South Bank University (2004-11) and finally at the University of Kent.

Born in London, to Catherine (nee Dodds Henry), who worked for the electricity board, and Cecil Matthews, a bus driver, Roger spent his early years in West Hampstead before the family moved to Kilburn. He attended Quintin Kynaston grammar school (now Harris Academy St John's Wood) but was a frequent truant.

When Roger met his future wife, Jane Nottingham, in 1967 she encouraged him to do his A-levels by post. He then applied to Middlesex University to do a degree, and, having been awarded a first, did his MA at Sussex and a PhD at Essex University.

Notorious for writing his books and essays in longhand, Roger would call in favours to get his work typed up. He was known for mentoring and supporting students and younger academics, encouraging them to consider their work as part of a quest for change.

Roger was described by a fellow academic as "one of the last Rolling Stones of criminology", and his no-nonsense approach meant that his work had a broad appeal beyond the academic community. His Doing Time: An Introduction to the Sociology of Imprisonment (1999) remains one of the most accessible yet scholarly examinations of the realities of imprisonment.

Driven by a strong desire to make a real difference to ordinary people's lives, he worked tirelessly to build bridges between academia and policy makers.

He was part of the Islington Crime Survey (1986), which repositioned understandings of crime - finding, for example that it is mainly local in nature and perpetrated against others within the same class or household.

He was instrumental in developing prison education opportunities, bringing the Inside-Out programme, which facilitates dialogue between prisoners and college students, to the University of Kent.

A member of the European Group for the Study of Deviance and Social Control, in recent years Roger built networks with scholars and policymakers across the world, most notably in Latin America, and he was a founding member of the Latin American Society on Penal Law and Criminology.

Even in hospital, Roger continued to work on completing his next book. He was also contemplating retirement and a move to Bath to be with his grandchildren.

At one time he was a keen amateur jazz musician, and his other interests included following the fortunes of Tottenham Hotspur and tinkering with old car engines.

Roger is survived by Jane, whom he married in 1972, their daughters, Joanna and Amy, and his five grandchildren.

Roger Matthews, criminologist, born 14 August 1948; died 7 April 2020