China's threats of a consumer boycott against Australia over calling for an independent investigation of Covid-19 are a "wake-up call" to its coercive behaviour, Martin Parkinson has said.

The former secretary of the departments of prime minister and cabinet and treasury made the comments on Thursday evening in an interview with the ABC's 7.30, praising the Morrison government's $200bn of economic stimulus but warning Australia faces a "hard slog for a lengthy period of time".

Scott Morrison's call to reform the World Health Organization and give investigators powers akin to weapons inspectors has sparked a war of words with China, Australia's biggest trading partner.

China's ambassador to Australia, Jingye Cheng, has warned that China could boycott Australian goods in retaliation and publicised the content of a private call with the head of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, claiming Frances Adamson had admitted Australia has no details of the proposal.

Asked about the deterioration in relations, Parkinson said the Morrison government had "handled the crisis really well" although he could not judge whether "enough work" had been done to prepare for statements about an investigation.

"On the issue of the inquiry that it has raised, it is absolutely right that we should have an inquiry into the lessons that we need to learn as nation states and as a global community so that we are better placed to deal with the pandemics as they emerge into the future," he said.

"I do think the Chinese ambassador has done us a favour.

"He has now put front and centre before the Australian public the sorts of coercive behaviours that they are prepared to use if countries don't fall into line.

"I think that should come as a real wake-up call to the Australian community."

Parkinson was careful to distinguish between "the Chinese government" and the Chinese people, who he argued have the same "characteristics and desires of the Australian people".

"At the end of the day, [the Chinese government] will basically respond to their own self-interests.

"So I think we shouldn't be too spooked by what he said, but I do think we should listen to what he says and think carefully about how we would react as a country were such threats to turn into reality."

The interruption of global supply chains as a result of Covid-19 has already prompted Morrison to suggest Australia needs to rebuild a sovereign manufacturing industry, and hawks in the government such as the Liberal MP Andrew Hastie have urged Australia to be less reliant on China.

Parkinson warned that even if 80% to 90% of the economy can be revived by easing restrictions, Australia could find itself "effectively stuck in recession for a long period of time" without the final 10% to 20% online.

Parkinson said in addition to economic reform, Australia would need to "accelerate the digitisation of the economy, encourage greater innovation and agility in our firms and develop a really coherent and bipartisan strategy about our engagement with Asia".

Parkinson defended the scale of fiscal stimulus, arguing it was "far better to [err] on the side of what turns out to be excessive expenditure than to err on the side of not providing enough stimulus".

"I actually don't think at all that the government has erred in the sense of providing too much.

"I think you can only reach that view if you think that, as soon as the government takes the restraints off, the economy will bounce back to where it was before.

"If you run through individual sectors, you cannot help but come back to the view that we are going to be in for a long, hard slog for a lengthy period of time."

On 28 April the Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, told a Senate inquiry into the Covid-19 response that "a diversification of supply chains happens naturally when we see this type of shock".

However, Kennedy noted it is "valuable to the Australian economy to be complementary to Chinese growth", citing the iron ore and metallurgical coal prices and export levels.

He concluded Australia will both diversify and continue to trade with China. "There is great economic return to Australia in continuing to support China's economic development and growth."