Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

Global death toll passes 232,000

The total number of coronavirus deaths across the world has reached at least 232,817, according to Johns Hopkins University, which has tracked the spread of the virus during the pandemic.

The US has the highest number of deaths with at least 63,763, followed by  Italy with 27,967.

Trump claims Covid-19 originated in Chinese lab

Asked by a reporter whether he had seen anything that gives him a high degree of confidence that the Wuhan Institute of Virology was the origin of the virus, Donald Trump responded: "Yes I have."

The US president said he could not say why he believes the virus came from the lab, adding that China either could not stop the spread of the virus, or let it spread. Trump declined to say whether he holds the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, responsible for what he deems is misinformation.

Germany eases lockdown measures

Germany is to reopen museums, galleries, zoos and playgrounds, and allow religious services to resume, in measures agreed by the chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the leaders of 16 federal states.

This will take place under strict conditions. Certain states have already allowed some of these activities to restart, but measures on people keeping physical distance from each other will stay in place.

Large-scale public gatherings will remain banned until the end of August.

Brazil sees record 7,218 new cases

Brazil reported a record 7,218 confirmed new cases of coronavirus, raising the total to 85,380. The death toll rose by 435 to 5,901, the health ministry said.

There has been outrage in the country over the approach of the far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, who has previously attacked what he termed the "hysteria" over Covid-19.

Russian prime minister diagnosed with coronavirus

The Russian prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, has said he has been diagnosed with coronavirus and will self-isolate from the government, in the country's highest-profile case of the disease yet.

Mishustin disclosed that he was infected during a video call with Vladimir Putin, Russian state news agencies reported on Thursday evening.

It was unclear how severe Mishustin's case of the disease is, although one news agency reported that he had an elevated temperature of 39 degrees.

New York subway to close nightly for cleaning

For the first time in decades, New York will no longer be "the city that never sleeps". The governor, Andrew Cuomo, along with New York City mayor Bill de Blasio, announced a partnership that will halt train services every night from 1am to 5am for disinfecting and cleaning.

New York state had more than 300,000 confirmed cases of the virus and 18,000 deaths as of midday Thursday.

Portuguese football to return on 30 May

Portugal's government has announced the country's football league, the Primeira Liga, can resume behind closed doors from 30 May.

The prime minister, António Costa, said: "The games will be played behind closed doors, with no spectators in the stands, whatever the stadium, be it a league match or the Portuguese Cup final."

Costa earlier announced his strategy to progressively lift lockdown measures imposed six weeks ago.

The three-phase plan, starting on Monday, will open up different sectors of the economy every 15 days starting with small neighbourhood shops, hairdressers, car dealerships and bookshops.

Eurozone records 3.8% slump

The head of the European Central Bank has warned that the eurozone could be on course for a 15% collapse in output in the second quarter as evidence of the economic toll caused by Covid-19 pandemic started to emerge, with France and Italy falling into recession.

After news that the 19-nation monetary union area had contracted a record 3.8% in the first three months of 2020, Christine Lagarde said much worse was possible in the April-June period, when the impact of lockdown restrictions would be most severe.

Five Australian defence personnel test positive

Five Australian defence force personnel have tested positive for Covid-19 after contracting it in the Middle East.

The five people are asymptomatic and have arrived back in Australia. They were tested after a number of local contractors became infected with the virus.

Another resident dies at Australian care home

Another resident of Anglicare's Newmarch House in western Sydney has died from Covid-19.

Anglicare said the resident died yesterday afternoon, bringing the total number of Covid-19 deaths at the care home to 13.

There are now at least 37 residents and 22 staff members who have contracted the virus at the home.