Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Justine Landis-Hanley bringing you the main stories on Tuesday 12 May.

Frydenberg delivers 'sobering' economic update

The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, presented what he called "sobering" economic data in Parliament House, the day he was originally scheduled to deliver the 2020-21 federal budget and the first financial surplus in over a decade.

Frydenberg warned GDP is forecast to fall by more than 10% ($50bn) in the June quarter. This would be the largest fall on record; the equivalent of the total quarterly production of South Australia, Tasmania, the Northern Territory and the ACT.

The Treasury also predicts unemployment will reach around 10%, or 1.4 million people, during the June quarter.

Frydenberg tested for Covid-19 after parliamentary coughing fit

During his delivery of the dire economic news, Frydenberg broke out into a coughing fit so bad that he had to pause for water several times during his speech.

According to a statement put out by the treasurer, he left Parliament House after question time under the advice of the chief medical officer, and was tested for coronavirus.

He expects the test result will come back tomorrow.

Chinese government delists Australian abattoirs

China has suspended imports from four big Australian abattoirs amid escalating tensions between both countries over Scott Morrison's push for an independent coronavirus inquiry, as first reported by The Weekly Times.

The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, said in a statement that he was "concerned that the suspensions appear to be based on highly technical issues, which in some case date back more than a year".

At a press conference, Birmingham told reporters he saw no relation between the government's push for an inquiry into the origins of coronavirus and Australia's export arrangements, and "would expect that no other counterpart country should see a relationship between those factors either".

Chief scientist's forum releases Covid-19 vaccine report

The rapid research information forum, chaired by the chief scientist Dr Alan Finkel, has published its latest report examining the most promising Covid-19 vaccines in development globally.

According to the report, there are 10 vaccine candidates in clinical trials globally, many of which will likely generate initial human safety and efficacy results this year. An Australian-produced vaccine is expected to enter human clinical trials in July.

But, the report warned, "it's too early to select the 'most promising' vaccine candidate as we do not yet know their safety of efficacy, or our capability to manufacture them at large scale".

Crossbench want bushfires included in Senate Covid-19 hearings

The crossbench MPs Rebekha Sharkie (Centre Alliance) and Helen Haines (independent) have called for the Senate select committee scrutinising Australia's handling of Covid-19 to also look into the government's bushfire response.

The crossbench asked the committee to hold special public hearings on the support offered to communities hit hardest by the 2019-20 bushfires.

"... with all the public attention focused on the Covid-19 response, our communities are telling us that the promised bushfire recovery support is not reaching the individuals, businesses and primary producers who need it in a timely manner," Sharkie said.

AFL players face the swab

The AFL announced that every player and staff member must undergo a Covid-19 swab test before resuming full-contact training next week.

The league is still negotiating with state governments what conditions it will need to follow in order to restart the season, but said it would announce dates for both a return to training and the resumption of the season later this week.

Meanwhile, under Queensland's "no jab, no play" rule, the Gold Coast Titans players Bryce Cartwright and Brian Kelly are unlikely to play again this season after refusing to have the flu vaccine.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers                   •Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions•Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics•Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines•Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?•Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register•Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home•Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?•Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted•What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?•Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?•How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?•Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?•How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus•Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions

Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines

Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?

Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register

Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home

Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?

Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted

What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?

Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?

How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?

Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?

How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus

Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.