For two long weeks few people, outside of perhaps some family members, knew where Cheng Lei was.

She stopped posting on social media and answering calls from friends. Her two young children in Melbourne couldn't speak to her.

The well-known TV anchor simply stopped showing up at the state broadcaster, CGTN in Beijing, and her colleagues weren't told why. At some point during that fortnight, any evidence she had worked for them was completely scrubbed from the internet.

Meanwhile, Lei sat in a solitary suicide-proofed room where the lights are rarely if ever turned off, detained by Chinese authorities.

Unable to call anyone or access a lawyer, accounts from other people held in similar detention conditions suggest her days are broken up only by interrogations from Chinese authorities over the still unknown allegations she faces.

But according to human rights groups, dissidents, and China academics, it's possible the charges hardly matter, and the most relevant factor is her Australian citizenship.

Amid deteriorating relations with China, led by the hardliner Xi Jinping, experts fear Lei may be collateral in Beijing's increasingly aggressive foreign policy, and another example of a foreign citizen picked up by authorities on spurious charges and held as bargaining chips in what's been dubbed "hostage diplomacy".

"No one is immune these days from arrest in China - tycoons, celebrities, journalists, the former head of Interpol - many people, both foreigners and locals, have disappeared into the Chinese justice system without clear explanations why," Elaine Pearson, the head of Human Rights Watch Australia told Guardian Australia this week.

Beijing, for its part, denies that it engages in hostile diplomacy or that any of its arrests, charges and sentences against foreigners are anything other than the fair prosecution of its rule of law.

But Lei's detainment follows a string of cases in which Australians have been caught up in China's opaque legal system, including most recently the Australian writer Dr Yang Hengjun, and the timing of the arrest raises significant questions.

Diplomatic spats between Canberra and Beijing are nothing new, but experts agree relations between the two countries have taken a particularly sour turn since the Australian government began pushing for a global investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 virus back in April.

Australia's lead on the probe prompted a furious backlash from China. The country's ambassador to Australia, Cheng Jingye, suggested it could prompt a boycott from Chinese international students, and soon after Beijing announced a crippling tariff on barley imports from Australia.

Add to that Australia's decision to join other nations in banning Huawei from its 5G network, its criticisms of the crackdown on Hong Kong and Chinese encroachment in the South China Sea, and - most egregiously - its continued strong support of the US, and there is no shortage of conflict between the two nations.

"It's not just about the Australian unilateral call for a Covid inquiry, although that didn't help, but there are a range of different destabilising forces in the bilateral relationship at the moment," Dr Bec Strating, the executive director of La Trobe Asia told Guardian Australia.

"You've seen China's use of economic coercive tactics to try to bring Australia into line, and on the other side the increasingly hardline rhetoric in the Australian debate. It all suggests that the relationship is quite fragile at the moment."

Cheng's detention conditions

After the Australian government revealed on Monday Chinese authorities had detained Cheng, the ABC reported the news anchor is currently being held in what's known as "residential surveillance at a designated location".

One of the more opaque aspects of China's justice system, RSDL is a type of a black site detention classified by United Nations human rights experts as a type of enforced disappearance where detainees are at risk of torture.

It is routinely criticised as lacking transparency and judicial fairness, with vaguely defined offences and conviction rates of around 99%.

As well as arrest and detention, foreigners - including Australian human rights academic Chongyi Feng - have also been subject to exit bans, secret legal mechanisms which prevent an individual leaving the country.

Why Cheng?

Weeks after her arrest, it remains unknown why Cheng, a Chinese-born Australian citizen and business news anchor for CGTN, has been targeted by authorities. On Tuesday the Chinese foreign ministry declined to provide details on the case.

CGTN is China's English-language state media channel, a network widely considered to be one of the most vocal arms of China's propaganda system. It has repeatedly come under fire overseas for its broadcasts, including forced confessions by dissidents.

Cheng regularly published long posts about life in China during coronavirus on Facebook, including some criticisms of the Chinese government's actions.

But people familiar with Cheng's work say that although she walked the thin line with criticism of the government, English-language journalists were generally given more leeway in China.

Pete Humphrey, a China academic and former foreign correspondent who was arbitrarily detained in China between 2013 and 2014, said there was no precedent for Cheng's case.

"You cannot consider Ms Cheng as a 'foreign journalist', her status is unique ... she is a Chinese journalist with Australian citizenship.

"This is going to make things very complicated. Beijing will handle her roughly, as though she is one of their own, they will therefore treat her harshly. But it will also play up the Australian connection at a time when diplomatic relations are tense and it wants to bully Australia."

Peter Dahlin, director of a human rights NGO, Safeguard Defender, speculated that Cheng's detention was more likely to be part of the "tit-for-tat with Australia" than her having fallen victim to a power struggle within CGTN - a scenario he said has led to ramifications before.

"Journalists in CGTN are quite lowly ranked, they don't really have any power," he said. "It seems more likely they're looking for someone who could be a suitable target."

Track record of hostage diplomacy

China has repeatedly rejected allegations that it engages in "hostage diplomacy" in disputes with countries including Australia and Canada, as well as with the families of Uighur people held in Xinjiang internment camps.

Strating though said there were "numerous examples" of cases where China's detention of foreign citizens "without much regard for due legal process" "has been interpreted as being in the pursuit of a broader geo-strategic or political objective".

The most prominent case to date came in December 2018, when former Canadian diplomat Michael Kovrig and businessman Michael Spavor were both arrested and charged for "spying on national secrets" and providing intelligence for "outside entities" in China.

The arrests were widely seen as retaliation for the Canadian arrest of Chinese Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou. So too was the shock increase to the sentence of Canadian Robert Lloyd Schellenberg, who saw his drug smuggling penalty increase from 15 years to the death penalty during a one-day retrial in January 2019.

Canada's prime minister, Justin Trudeau, accused Beijing of arbitrarily applying the death penalty and its foreign ministry issued a travel warning to Canadian citizens.

Australians have also appeared to fall foul of Beijing's diplomatic rancour. In June, a Chinese court suddenly announced a death sentence for Australian man Karm Gilespie seven years after he was first imprisoned on a drug charge and five years after his trial.

China's foreign ministry denied it had anything to do with the bilateral relations, but it came at what was then a low point for Australia-China diplomacy. The sentence came soon after Australia's foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, took aim at China for spreading disinformation, citing Beijing's warnings that tourists and students should reconsider coming to Australia because of the risk of racism.

In his recently published memoir the former Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said he had "every reason to believe" that failure to complete a proposed extradition treaty with China - which Australia pulled in 2017 - "would make it harder for us to ensure China did not impose the death penalty on Australian citizens convicted of capital offence".

In a 2019 report on capital punishment, Amnesty International said the death penalty in Chinese drug-related cases "appeared to play a central role in the middle of political stand-offs with some foreign countries".

What Australia can do

The Australian government was able to visit Cheng via videolink last week, foreign minister Marise Payne said on Tuesday.

Payne - whose department historically favours private diplomatic entreaties in such cases - provided few details or criticisms, saying only that Cheng was "as well as can be expected".

"It's difficult for her family, and we are always concerned about Australians in consular situations such as this overseas," she said.

On Gilespie, the department says it has been providing consular assistance since his arrest and would continue to do so.

But experts question whether Australia's softly-softly approach is the best course of action when it comes to relations with China. Dahlin, for example, says the approach of the Australian government was "amateur" when it came to China.

"It has been proven quite conclusively to not really work across the board, this idea that you play along with their rules and get some concession in return," he said.

"Most of the victims ... have made it clear that when pressure is being exerted their treatment improves, not the other way around."

Similarly, Pearson says Australia's approach is not the most effective strategy. She says that extended to cases of Australians detained elsewhere overseas, including the academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert in Iran.

"It's unclear why the government still persists with the idea that quiet diplomacy is going to save the day," she said.

"Australia treats all these case like consular cases and I think that's a mistake when it's a political offence and someone's being arbitrarily detained. Where cases are political it really demands a political response, and we see other governments often sending in envoys or people who have clout ... and oftentimes that can bring results."

But with the China-Australia relationship at such a low point, there's going to be a greater effort required.

"This is also why Australia shouldn't just wait til Australians find themselves running afoul of problematic laws. They should be expressing human rights concerns about these laws that have been used for years to wrongfully detain [anyone]."

Strating though says she has not seen much evidence that anything worked particularly well.

"The real difficulty here, and I speak as an academic who likes evidence, [is] we don't have a lot of evidence in terms of what works in dealing with the PRC's hostage diplomacy," she says.

"Part of the problem we have in Australia is that we're not clear about what our end goal is, not just when it comes to specific cases like [Lei's] but also in terms of the relationship more generally.

"The Australian government is not consistent on China. The prime minister recently came out saying his doctrine towards China is based on strategic patience and consistency but it's not the actions of the government. You have some parts of the government calling for strategic patience and a pragmatism, then you have the [backbench group] 'wolverines' advocating a much harder line."