Television                                                           Dark

The time-contorting German sci-fi thriller starring Louis Hofmann and Lisa Vicari returns for its third and final season. Following season two's ludicrous mic drop moment involving multiple Marthas and a bemused Jonas, be prepared for anything. In any decade, in any world, and with many more "wait, what?" moments to come. Saturday 27 June, Netflix

Huey Morgan's Latin Music Adventure

Ready your dancing shoes as musician Huey Morgan begins a musical tour through Latin America by delving into the world of samba in Brazil. Tropicália pioneer Gilberto Gil joins him before he heads to the Rio carnival. Friday 3 July, 9.30pm, BBC Four

Welcome to Chechnya: The Gay Purge

Since 2017, the Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov has overseen a campaign to imprison and execute the Russian Federation republic's LGBTQ+ community. This unflinching Storyville film follows the brave people fighting to rescue them. Wednesday 1 July, 10pm, BBC Four

Hanna

The spin-off from Joe Wright's Saoirse Ronan-starring 2011 action thriller returns for a second series. How will the super soldier (played by Esme Creed-Miles) react to the truth about Utrax, the sinister CIA programme from which she was taken? And how many other trainees can she rescue before Mireille Enos's Marissa catches up with her? Friday 3 July, Amazon Prime Video

F*ck, That's Delicious

Do not watch this latest season of Action Bronson's travelling eating show on an empty stomach. Especially the series opener where Bronson revisits London and heads straight for Dalston's kebab houses, feasting on doner and marrow. Wednesday 1 July, 10pm, Vice

Deep in Vogue

This suitably fabulous documentary explores Manchester's annual Vogue ball, or "Paris fashion week on crack" as one veteran dancer puts it. Showcasing both voguing's origins in 1980s New York, as well as the participating queer heroes as they prepare for the event, it's a fleeting taste of freedom. Saturday 27 June, BBC Three

The Baby-Sitters Club

Ann M Martin's best-selling YA novel series gets another adaptation following a long-forgotten series in 1990 and a flop film five years later. Alicia Silverstone stars as Elizabeth, the mum of Kristy Thomas, an entrepreneurial pre-teen who, alongside her best friends, starts a babysitting business. Friday July 3, Netflix

Italy's Frontline: A Doctor's Diary

This hard-hitting documentary follows A&E doctor Francesca Mangiatordi as she deals with life on the Covid-19 centre point of northern Italy. While she faces gruelling choices at work, Mangiatordi also contends with the threat of infecting her vulnerable family. Monday 29 June, 9pm, BBC Two

The Glastonbury Experience Live

On what would have been the 50th anniversary of the musical extravaganza, Laurene Laverne and Clara Amfo present a selection of Worthy Farm's finest performances, from four-time headliners Coldplay in 2000 to Bruce Springsteen's marathon 2009 set with his E Street Band, and Dizzee Rascal's guest appearance in 2010. Saturday 27 June, 8pm, BBC Two

Unsolved Mysteries

Yet more scope for amateur sleuths in this reboot of the 90s show, originally hosted by Robert Stack. This 12-part series uses re-enactments and interviews to try to, well, solve unsolved mysteries, from UFO sightings to uninvestigated suicides. Wednesday 1 July, Netflix

Podcasts                                                           Revisionist History

Malcolm Gladwell returns for the fifth season of his prescient podcast re-examining our entrenched narratives of the past. Up first is the typically weird application of "dragon psychology" - hoarding treasure - to everything from the always-inflating art market to the economy. Along the way, Gladwell hears from accountants and a "hoarding expert". Apple Podcasts, weekly

The Audio Long Read

The Audio Long Read gives you the opportunity to enjoy the Guardian's varied long-form essays and in-depth reporting while going about your day. Recent stories to listen to while baking or preparing last-minute school lessons range from extremist cops to water lily theft, via the fallout of environmental catastrophe. The Guardian, weekly

Looking for LaToya

Fans of Issa Rae's deft comedy Insecure rejoice as this fictional podcast, which is featured in the show, now gets its own one-off scripted special. It's a true-crime deep dive as we learn about the disappearance of fictive character LaToya Johnson, featuring the voices of singers Ray J and SZA, as well as Insecure actor Terri J Vaughn. Widely available

Biscuits & Jam

American lifestyle hub Southern Living's podcast exploring the relationship between food and music continues. This week, Wyoming folk singer Scott Avett charts the twists and turns of his life via memorable family meals and the best places to eat on the road. Future guests include king of country Willie Nelson and soul star Gladys Knight. Southern Living, weekly

Servant of Pod

Given that there are podcasts on everything from gardening to taxidermy these days, a podcast about podcasts was inevitable. This effort, hosted by Nick Quah of the excellent Hot Pod newsletter, interviews podcast creators about the future of the medium, and what it's like to record shows in the middle of a planet-spanning pandemic. Widely available, weekly

Films                                                           Fanny Lye Deliver'd (18)

(Thomas Clay) 111 mins  For his first film in more than a decade, director Thomas Clay goes back to a 17th-century Shropshire in the grip of Cromwellian Puritanism. Maxine Peake is the woman whose household is disrupted by the arrival of mysterious strangers. Digital platforms

Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga (No cert)

(David Dobkin) 123 mins                      With Eurovision cancelled this year, addicts of high-camp ululation must seek their fix elsewhere. This Will Ferrell comedy, directed by David "Wedding Crashers" Dobkin, could do the trick. Ferrell and Rachel McAdams are the Icelandic duo vying for the prize, in a film that could finally break Eurovision in the US. Netflix

Irresistible (15)

(Jon Stewart) 102 mins                     Jon Stewart takes the director's chair again for another politically inflected film aimed very much at the American heartland. Steve Carell is the Democrat strategist who sees an opportunity to win an election in a conservative small town; Rose Byrne is his Republican rival who gets stuck in to thwart him. Digital platforms

On the Record (No cert)

(Kirby Dick, Amy Ziering) 95 mins                     This #MeToo doc accrued controversy when its backer, Oprah Winfrey, dropped out at the last minute and cancelled its release. The subject is music industry mogul Russell Simmons and the sexual assault allegations against him (which he denies). Digital platforms

Men & Chicken (15)

(Anders Thomas Jensen) 104 mins  In Anders Thomas Jensen's weird Danish comedy, Mads Mikkelsen and David Dencik are half-brothers who discover they are the offspring of an old stem-cell geneticist living on an island with their three half-siblings. And there, in a family mansion that is part sanatorium, part farmyard, all manner of tomfoolery unfolds. Monday 29 June, 1.45am, Film4