block-time published-time 10.22am BST

Hong Kong's sudden spike in coronavirus cases may have stemmed from its willingness to let seafarers skip quarantine while changing ships in the city, a leading health expert said.

After its previous success tackling the disease and ending local transmission, case numbers in the densely packed finance hub increased this month, sparking fears of a new outbreak spreading out of control.

The city reported 123 new infections Friday, a new daily record, bringing the total tally to 2,372 with 16 deaths. Most of the new cases were locally transmitted.

Professor Gabriel Leung, Founding Director of the WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, speaks during a news conference. Photograph: Kin Cheung/AP

Some health experts have blamed an exemption from the usual 14-day quarantine which the government granted to "essential personnel" including cross-boundary truckers, aircrew and sea crew.

But officials have said the arrangement was necessary, while insisting it was a "misunderstanding" that the new wave was attributable to the exemption.

After analysing virus samples from recent confirmed cases, Gabriel Leung, dean of the University of Hong Kong's medical school, said on Thursday the virus' resurgence most likely stemmed from such imported cases.

He said the wave was "probably because of the multiple imported (cases), it could be the crew members or sailors exempted from quarantine".

"When they entered Hong Kong, there were no immediate quarantine measures or testing arrangements. You could imagine, some of the crew members, the hotel they stay in maybe is downtown," he said.

block-time published-time 9.45am BST

The Afghan health ministry has urged people to stay indoors and avoid gatherings for the upcoming Eid celebrations as the number of confirmed coronavirus related deaths has reached 1,225.

Ahmad Jawad Osmani, the country's acting health minister told a press conference on Thursday that hospitals were filled with Covid-19 patients.

Osmai said that Afghanistan is still in the midst of the outbreak. "We are in a better position to fight with coronavirus because the percentage of people infected in Afghanistan is dropping. The number of people visiting hospitals has also decreased, but that does not mean that we will not follow medical instructions," he added.

The health ministry in the country recorded 14 new deaths from Covid-19 on Friday. In its latest update, it said the number of people who tested positive for the virus had reached 35,988, an increase of 60 on the day before.

Most new deaths were reported in Kabul. The capital is the country's worst affected area with 489 deaths and around 15,000 confirmed cases. Another death was reported in Helmand province.

The United States has allocated more than $36.7 million to help Afghanistan address the Covid-19 pandemic, and expedited $90 million through the World Bank to support Afghanistan's national health and education sectors and local government needs, the US embassy in Kabul announced Thursday.

block-time published-time 9.14am BST

Belgian government pauses easing of lockdown after rise in infections

The Belgian government has paused its planned easing of the country's lockdown and brought in new restrictive measures after the daily infection rate hit numbers not seen since mid-May.

Of the 370 people newly tested positive on Monday, 32% were in the city of Antwerp but the relatively small size of the country has forced the government to block plans to allow large gatherings.

Belgium's prime minister, Sophie Wilmés, said: "Since last week, the average infection rate has increased considerably. The reproduction number has also risen above 1 since last week. This indicates that the epidemic is flaring up again.

"Young adults between 20 and 30 are the most frequently affected. Although the number of infections is increasing throughout the country, we also see more local flare-ups".

From Saturday, wearing a face mask will be mandatory in an increased number of public places including busy shopping streets, markets and in public buildings. People in a restaurant will also need to use a mask when visiting the bathroom and they will be required to leave an email address or telephone number.

With the holiday season in full flow, all returning travellers will have to complete a form within 48 hours of arrival in Belgium.

Wilmes said: "It's a blow to our morale but we must take action today so that we have no regrets tomorrow. We must act collectively. Everyone is an actor in this crisis," said Wilmès.

She added: "These rules are not advice but instructions. And as always, take care of yourself, and take care of others. And the best way to do that is by following the measures."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.43am BST

block-time published-time 8.42am BST

At the Machakos Covid-19 field hospital, about an hour's drive from the Kenyan capital, workers struggle to put a giant metal tent frame in place to serve as a new ward.

Machakos county, which has 92 active cases of the virus, has already met the required minimum of 300 beds per county for Covid-19 patients, set by the national government.

But as national figures surge, Machakos is preparing for more infections. Positive cases in Kenya have nearly doubled in the last two weeks to 15,601, mirroring a continental surge. Africa topped 750,000 cases on Wednesday.

"When you see such numbers coming up that fast, you get worried," said David Mutunga, an official in the Machakos county's department of health emergency services.

"Before those numbers go out of hand, we are racing against time to ensure we have adequate capacity."

A covid-19 patient reacts after being tested inside a field hospital built on a soccer stadium in Machakos. Photograph: Baz Ratner/Reuters

It is not just officials in Machakos who are concerned by the rise in cases in Kenya and beyond.

President Uhuru Kenyatta, who opened movement into and out of Nairobi earlier this month and lifted a ban on international commercial passenger flights from 1 August has summoned top national and local government officials to a meeting on Monday, to discuss what to do about the recent surge.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.45am BST

block-time published-time 8.30am BST

There is a chink of hope in Ireland as the latest data on coronavirus has shown "the start of something positive", the state's acting chief medical officer has said.

The Irish Times reports that Dr Ronan Glynn said the spread of the virus had stabilised over the past week after transmission had increased over the previous two weeks.

Speaking at the National Public Health Emergency Team (NPHET) briefing on Thursday, he added: "It is absolutely early days. Last week we were uncertain and worried. The week before we were uncertain and pessimistic. This week we can be uncertain but optimistic."

Deputy chief medical officer Dr Ronan Glynn during a press conference at Department of Health in Dublin. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA

Dr Glynn said the latest data on Covid-19 in the state was "the start of something positive and we need to see it continue in the same way over the coming weeks".

He told the briefing it was too early to decide whether pubs that do not serve a substantial meal - so-called "wet pubs" - could reopen again on 10 August.

Asked whether he was fearful that reopening pubs first would prevent schools reopening, he said pubs were "one of the highest risk environments" and that a decision would have to be taken on whether to reopen them in two weeks' time based on where the virus was then.

"We can't do anything to jeopardise the overarching priorities," he said.

Dr Glynn said the country was "absolutely on track" for children to go back to school in September based on how the Covid-19 infection rate has stabilised.

Nine further coronavirus-related deaths and seven new confirmed cases of Covid-19 were reported in Ireland on Wednesday, bringing total deaths to 1,763. Dr Glynn pointed out that eight of the deaths were late notifications and had occurred in April, May and June.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47am BST

block-time published-time 7.52am BST

Some good news: Scientists in New Zealand say the country has the lowest Covid-19 death rate in the OECD group of wealthy nations, with four confirmed deaths from the virus per million inhabitants of the nation.

That compares with five deaths per million people in Australia, 666 deaths per million in the UK, and 428 deaths per million in the US. Belgium had the highest death rate, with 845 deaths per million population.

If New Zealand had reported the average death rate among the OECD's 37 member countries, the Otago University researchers say, 990 people would have died. The country's actual death toll was 22, with fewer than 1,500 confirmed cases.

New Zealand is the only OECD country that has recorded more than 28 days with no known community transmission of the virus. There are 21 active cases of the virus, all diagnosed in returning travelers, who are in managed isolation facilities.

Updated at 7.54am BST

7.38am BST

India's death toll from coronavirus overtook France on Friday with 30,601 fatalities and nearly 50,000 new cases overnight, official data showed.

The death toll is the sixth-biggest behind the US, Brazil, Britain, Mexico and Italy. It has the third-highest caseload with almost 1.3 million infections.

Covid 19 illustrations in Kolkata, IndiaPhotograph: Avishek Das/SOPA Images/REX/Shutterstock

In the past 24 hours the country recorded 740 new deaths from the virus and 49,310 fresh infections, according to the health ministry.

But many experts say that with testing levels low, the extent of the pandemic across the world's second-most populous country may be far worse than officially reported.

An antibody study commissioned by the government showed this week that almost a quarter of people in the capital New Delhi have had the virus - almost 40 times the official number.

Prime minister Narendra Modi's government imposed one of the world's strictest lockdowns in late March, but it has been steadily eased to lessen the devastating economic impact of the pandemic.

State governments have brought in fresh restrictions as cases soar in Bangalore and away from the big cities in Bihar, West Bengal, Kashmir and parts of Tamil Nadu.

Southern Kerala state, earlier hailed as a success story and which has already imposed partial restrictions, may decide on Monday to impose a full statewide lockdown, reports said.

Updated at 7.55am BST

7.33am BST

Vietnam, one of Asia's biggest consumers of wildlife products, has suspended all imports of wild animal species "dead or alive" and vowed to "eliminate" illegal markets across the country.

The directive signed by the leader of the Communist country follows an international scandal over the sale of wildlife, which has been blamed as the origin of the coronavirus pandemic in neighbouring China.

It is a major victory for conservation groups who have in the past accused Vietnamese authorities of turning a blind eye to the rampant trade in endangered species inside and across its borders.

In this photo taken in 2019, border patrol officials hold a confiscated tiger skin and bones while the suspect Pham Van Hiep looks on at a border guard station in northern Vietnam's Quang Ninh province.Photograph: AFP/Getty Images

"The prime minister orders the suspension of imports of wildlife - dead or alive - their eggs ... parts or derivatives," said the order released Thursday on the government website.

"All citizens, especially officials ... must not participate in illegal poaching, buying, selling, transporting ... of illegal wildlife."

Among the most frequently smuggled animal goods are tiger parts, rhino horn and pangolins used in traditional medicine.

Despite the high prices they command - with ingredients trafficked from as far as Africa - there is no scientific evidence of their health benefits in humans.

Vietnam locked down swiftly to dodge a major health crisis as Covid-19 emerged, but its economy has been hit hard.

Updated at 7.56am BST

7.14am BST

Morning. I will be updating the global blog for the next few hours. As ever, if you have any tips, stories or things you feel we should be covering please email me at nazia.parveen@theguardian.com or follow me on Twitter@NParveenG to send me a DM.

Updated at 7.56am BST

7.08am BST

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan for today. Thanks for following along - and stay tuned for more pandemic developments from around the world with my colleague Nazia Parveen.

6.55am BST

Global report: Red Cross warns of big post-Covid-19 migration as WHO hits back at US

The coronavirus crisis could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the  Red Cross has warned. It comes as the WHO's chief accused the US of making "untrue" and "unacceptable" claims against the global health body.

The head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), Jagan Chapagain, said he was deeply concerned about the secondary effects of the pandemic, as border closures and Covid-19 restrictions have driven millions into poverty.

"Increasingly we are seeing in many countries the impacts on the livelihoods and the food situation," he said in an interview with Agence France-Presse.

Many people are already faced with the choice of risking exposure to the novel coronavirus or going hungry, Chapagain said, warning that the desperation being generated could have far-reaching consequences.

"What we hear is that many people who are losing livelihoods, once the borders start opening, will feel compelled to move," he said. "We should not be surprised if there is a massive impact on migration in the coming months and years."

Related: Global report: Red Cross warns of big post-Covid-19 migration as WHO hits back at US

6.49am BST

A fund set up by 1917 director Sam Mendes to help theatre freelancers hit by the impact of Covid-19 has raised £1.6m, but industry figures have said more support is needed to avoid an exodus of workers from the sector.

The Theatre Artists Fund, which was launched at the start of July with a £500,000 donation from Netflix, has had more than 4,000 applications in less than a month and will provide one-off grants of £1,000.

Mendes said the fund had received donations from actors and writers including Michaela Coel, Armando Iannucci and Imelda Staunton, with £85,000 in donations coming - in part - from members of the public. But despite the support, Mendes said the grants would provide assistance to only a small fraction of the freelancers who made up 70% of theatre's workforce:

Related: Theatre Artists Fund set up by Sam Mendes raises £1.6m

6.37am BST

South Korea expected to report 100 new cases

South Korea's Yonhap News Agency is reporting that the country is expected to record 100 new coronavirus cases today, citing the Korea Centers for Disease Control.

The total would mark the first time that South Korea has reported more than 100 cases since 1 April, when 101 cases were recorded, according to figures on the Johns Hopkins University tracker.

People carry umbrellas while wearing rubber galoshes as they wade on a flooded street in Taean, South Korea, 23 July 2020.Photograph: YONHAP/EPA

6.16am BST

Vietnam bans wildlife trade

Vietnam's Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc has issued a directive to ban the Southeast Asian country's wildlife trade with immediate effect in order to reduce the risk of new pandemics, a government statement said. The directive bans imports of live wild animals and wildlife products, eliminates wildlife markets, and enforce prohibitions on illegal hunting and trading of wild animals, including online sales, according to the statement issued late on Thursday, Reuters reports. Vietnam is an important destination in the Asian region for illegal wildlife products such as pangolin scales and elephant ivory. There have also been seizures of rhino horns, which is believed to have medicinal value. The Southeast Asian country is reported to have many wildlife markets and also a booming online trade in animals, with existing laws often poorly enforced. Neighbouring China has also pledged to ban the trade and consumption of wild animals in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. Scientists suspect the virus passed to humans from animals and some of the earliest infections were found in people who had exposure to a wildlife market in Hubei's provincial capital Wuhan, where bats, snakes, civets and other animals were sold

5.50am BST

Summary

Here are the key developments from around the world for the last few hours:

•There nearly 15.5m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 632,000 deaths.•US cases passed 4 million. The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May. The United States on Thursday recorded more than 1,100 deaths from Covid-19, marking the third straight day the nation passed that grim milestone as the pandemic escalates in southern and western US states, according to Reuters analysis.•US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot.•Coronavirus crisis could spark 'massive' new migration: Red Cross. The devastating economic toll the coronavirus crisis is taking around the world could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross warned in an interview with AFP.•Rescheduled Tokyo Olympics must be simple and safe, says Games official. Senior Olympic official John Coates has reiterated that Tokyo must stage a simplified summer Games next year with the health and safety of athletes the most important consideration in the planning, Reuters reports.Australian Coates heads up the International Olympic Committee's coordination commission for the Tokyo 2020 Games, which have been postponed until 2021 because of the global Covid-19 pandemic.•Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated. He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it.•Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday.•South Africa'spresident Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions.•The Australian state of Victoria has reported 300 new coronavirus cases and six deaths, a record one-day number of fatalities for the state. All of the people who died were connected to aged care. Three were aged in their 90s, three were in their 80s. Twenty-two people have died in the past seven days.Yesterday's numbers were 484 new cases and five deaths, three of which were connected to aged care clusters.•Disney postponed the Mulan release indefinitely. Disney on Thursday postponed the debut of its movie "Mulan" indefinitely, Reuters reports. dealing a new blow to theatre operators that were counting on the live-action epic to help attract audiences during a pandemic. Paramount Pictures also said "Top Gun: Maverick", the much-awaited sequel to the Tom Cruise-starring "Top Gun", has been delayed to 2 July 2021 from 23 December 2020.

There nearly 15.5m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 632,000 deaths.

US cases passed 4 million. The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May. The United States on Thursday recorded more than 1,100 deaths from Covid-19, marking the third straight day the nation passed that grim milestone as the pandemic escalates in southern and western US states, according to Reuters analysis.

US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot.

Coronavirus crisis could spark 'massive' new migration: Red Cross. The devastating economic toll the coronavirus crisis is taking around the world could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross warned in an interview with AFP.

Rescheduled Tokyo Olympics must be simple and safe, says Games official. Senior Olympic official John Coates has reiterated that Tokyo must stage a simplified summer Games next year with the health and safety of athletes the most important consideration in the planning, Reuters reports.Australian Coates heads up the International Olympic Committee's coordination commission for the Tokyo 2020 Games, which have been postponed until 2021 because of the global Covid-19 pandemic.

Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated. He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it.

Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday.

South Africa'spresident Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions.

The Australian state of Victoria has reported 300 new coronavirus cases and six deaths, a record one-day number of fatalities for the state. All of the people who died were connected to aged care. Three were aged in their 90s, three were in their 80s. Twenty-two people have died in the past seven days.Yesterday's numbers were 484 new cases and five deaths, three of which were connected to aged care clusters.

Disney postponed the Mulan release indefinitely. Disney on Thursday postponed the debut of its movie "Mulan" indefinitely, Reuters reports. dealing a new blow to theatre operators that were counting on the live-action epic to help attract audiences during a pandemic. Paramount Pictures also said "Top Gun: Maverick", the much-awaited sequel to the Tom Cruise-starring "Top Gun", has been delayed to 2 July 2021 from 23 December 2020.

5.44am BST

Disney postpones Mulan release indefinitely

Disney on Thursday postponed the debut of its movie "Mulan" indefinitely, Reuters reports. dealing a new blow to theatre operators that were counting on the live-action epic to help attract audiences during a pandemic.

A poster of the Walt Disney Studios' "Mulan" movie towers over an empty Hollywood Boulevard during the coronavirus pandemic in California, US, 31 March 2020.Photograph: Lucy Nicholson/Reuters

ViacomCBS Inc's Paramount Pictures also said "Top Gun: Maverick", the much-awaited sequel to the Tom Cruise-starring "Top Gun", has been delayed to July 2, 2021 from December 23, 2020. "Mulan" was scheduled to reach theatres in March but its release has been postponed several times as many cinemas remain closed. The film had most recently been set to debut on Aug. 21 and theatre operators had hoped it would help spark a late-summer rebound for movie-going. Disney also said it had delayed the next film instalments from two of its biggest franchises, "Avatar" and "Star Wars," by one year as the novel coronavirus has disrupted production. The "Avatar" sequel is now set to debut in theatres in December 2022, and the next "Star Wars" movie in December 2023.

Updated at 5.44am BST

5.26am BST

Asian equities sank Friday, dragged by a worse-than-forecast US jobless claims report that fanned fears about the economic recovery, while the mood was also being darkened by China-US tensions, stalled stimulus talks in Washington and a surge in virus cases, AFP reports.

The losses come at the end of another tough week for markets, which have shown signs of stuttering after a months-long rally from their March trough, with Washington and Beijing butting heads again, this time over US claims of Chinese espionage.

And they looked set to finish with more losses following a sharp drop on Wall Street that came in response to news that 1.4 million Americans applied for jobless benefits last week, the first week-on-week rise since the start of the crisis.

The increase came as several states around the country were forced to reimpose containment measures soon after reopening from lockdown, forcing some to close bars, restaurants and other businesses key to the economy.

The reversion to such measures has come as a big blow to investors who had grown optimistic that the US economy was rebounding sharply from the collapse seen earlier in the year.

5.13am BST

China has announced a $1bn loan to make its coronavirus vaccine accessible for countries across Latin America and the Caribbean, Foreign Minister Wang Yi announced on Thursday.

In a statement on Wednesday, the Mexican ministry said China had made the pledge at a virtual meeting of ministers from some Latin American and Caribbean nations, Reuters reports.

"The Chinese foreign minister stressed that the vaccine developed in his country will be a public good of universal access, and that his country will provide a $1bn loan to support the access of the nations of the region," it said. It gave no details of when such a vaccine might be available or distributed.

Updated at 5.14am BST

5.01am BST

Hong Kong infections can be traced back to hotel quarantine exemptions, says health expert

Radio TelevisionHong Kong reports that a top health expert believes Hong Kong's new wave of infections can be traced back to people who were exempted from hotel quarantine by the government:

A top health expert says new analysis of recent coronavirus samples suggests that the current wave of Covid-19 infections was brought in from outside of Hong Kong, most likely by people exempted from mandatory quarantine.

The comments by Gabriel Leung, dean of the faculty of medicine at the University of Hong Kong, go against the government's position that the exemptions did not trigger the recent surge in infections.

...

"The current third wave seemed to have had multiple, new introductions that are unlinked to the previous local clusters," he said.

He says that means the current wave of infections was most likely brought in from imported cases by someone who was exempt from having to go into quarantine for two weeks.

Exemptions were put in place for those whose activities are considered essential to the SAR, such as aircrew and seamen, cross-border drivers and certain business people.

The government reported 118 new cases on Friday, as it continues to battle a third wave of infections.

4.38am BST

The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 815 to 204,183, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Friday. The reported death toll rose by 10 to 9,111, the tally showed.

4.33am BST

US records over 1,000 daily deaths for third day in a row

The United States on Thursday recorded more than 1,100 deaths from Covid-19, marking the third straight day the nation passed that grim milestone as the pandemic escalates in southern and western US states, according to Reuters analysis. Fatalities nationwide were recorded at 1,118 on Thursday. Deaths were 1,135 on Wednesday and 1,141 on Tuesday. Even though deaths are rising in the United States for a second week in a row, they remain well below levels seen in April, when 2,000 people a day on average died from the virus. The United States on Thursday also passed a total of more than 4 million coronavirus infections since the first US case was documented in January, according to a Reuters tally, reflecting a nationwide escalation of the pandemic. The United States took 98 days to reach one million confirmed cases of Covid-19 but just 16 days to increase from 3 million to 4 million, the tally showed. The total suggests at least one in 82 Americans have been infected at some point in the pandemic. The average number of new cases is now rising by more than 2,600 per hour nationwide, the highest rate in the world.

4.13am BST

The six deaths recorded in the Australian state of Victoria overnight are a record for the state. Here is the full story:

Related: Victoria reports record daily high of six coronavirus deaths, with 300 new cases

4.02am BST

Rescheduled Tokyo Olympics must be simple and safe, says Games official

Senior Olympic official John Coates has reiterated that Tokyo must stage a simplified summer Games next year with the health and safety of athletes the most important consideration in the planning, Reuters reports.

Australian Coates heads up the International Olympic Committee's coordination commission for the Tokyo 2020 Games, which have been postponed until 2021 because of the global Covid-19 pandemic.

"The good news is that all 42 Games venues... have been re-secured. The competition schedule is the same," the IOC vice president wrote in the Daily Telegraph on Friday, a day after the one-year countdown to the opening ceremony.

"But we must reduce the cost impact of postponement as well as simplify the Games to ensure they can be organised efficiently, safely and sustainably, in this new context.

"With one year to go, there is no clear picture of what shape the simplified Games will take. The situation with Covid-19, both domestically and internationally, is constantly changing."

Related: Rescheduled Tokyo Olympics must be simple and safe, says Games official

3.51am BST

Bolivia's general election will be pushed back until 18 October amid the coronavirus pandemic.

The decision could fan tensions between the interim conservative government and the socialist party of former President Evo Morales, Reuters reports. The head of the electoral tribunal said on Thursday that the vote would be postponed from the previously scheduled 6 September date to ensure the safety of voters, with hospitals and cemeteries straining under the impact of the virus.

Two firefighters spray water with disinfectant during a disinfection of the streets near a hospital on 23 July 2020 in La Paz, Bolivia.Photograph: Gaston Brito/Getty Images

"This election requires the highest possible health security measures to protect the health of Bolivians," tribunal President Salvador Romero told a news conference in La Paz. The vote is key to the political future of the Andean nation of 11.5 million people after a fraught election last year sparked widespread protests and led to the resignation of the country's long-term leftist leader Morales.

3.34am BST

Podcast: 'When Italy cried for Covid-19 help there was silence'

When coronavirus swept through the European Union, member states called on Brussels to help. But as Daniel Boffey discovered, the distress calls too often went unanswered:

Related: Covid-19 and the EU: 'When Italy cried for help there was silence' - podcast

3.10am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is addressing the media now following a cabinet meeting, and has announced that Australia has 'reaffirmed' its suppression strategy.

This has become a major ideological issue over the past few weeks - should Australia have adopted an elimination strategy instead of a suppression strategy on controlling the coronavirus?

Morrison said national cabinet today moved an "affirmation of the suppression strategy".

The goal of that is obviously, and has always been no community transmission. There will always be cases that come because Australia has not completely shut itself off from the world. To do so would be reckless, but that no community transmission, when the vast majority of states and territories have been at now effectively for some time. And that's certainly where we want to get back to in Victoria and New South Wales, and that's where our efforts are focused.

3.05am BST

Here is the full story on Dr Fauci's underwhelming first pitch at the Nationals-Yankees game on Thursday night:

The Nationals and Yankees knelt in unison before the first game of the baseball season as part of an opening day ceremony Thursday night that featured references to the Black Lives Matter movement, the coronavirus pandemic - including an off-the-mark first pitch by top US infectious diseases expert Dr Anthony Fauci - and the home team's 2019 championship.

Fauci was invited by the Nationals to throw out the ceremonial first pitch - a fitting choice during the current medical crisis. Wearing a mask on the mound, Fauci sent his toss well wide of home plate, and the ball bounced past his "catcher", Washington reliever Sean Doolittle.

Afterward, Fauci and Doolittle tapped gloves, instead of shaking hands.

Fauci's effort drew light-hearted comparisons to other public figures whose first pitches went awry through the years, including Cincinnati mayor Mark Mallory, rapper 50 Cent, Olympic hero Carl Lewis, Miss Texas 2014 and Canadian pop icon Carly Rae Jepsen :

Related: Fauci 'flattens curve' with ceremonial first pitch to open MLB season in DC

2.56am BST

Australia's National cabinet meets on Friday and is expected to discuss steps to combat the clusters as well as financial measures to shore up its economy. Reuters reports that Australia's budget is set to plunge into its biggest deficit since World War Two this year as the coronavirus crisis knocks the country into its first recession in three decades and forces policymakers to roll out hundreds of billions of dollars in stimulus. Meanwhile, a law firm on Friday said it has filed a class action in an Australian court against Carnival Corp's Ruby Princess cruise ship alleging mishandling of a coronavirus outbreak on board the ship. The cruise ship has also become part of a homicide investigation in Australia as one of the country's deadliest virus infection sources. "It is not our intention to respond to the assertions of class action lawyers," a Carnival Corp spokesman said in an emailed statement.

2.51am BST

Restrictions were reintroduced in Australia's most populous state of New South Wales on Friday as authorities battle to control fresh coronavirus clusters that have emerged in Sydney over the last several days, Reuters reports. Group bookings at restaurants, cafes and clubs will be limited to 10 people and patrons inside a venue will be capped to 300 in rules that take effect amid a growing cluster stemming from a restaurant in suburban Sydney.

A nurse makes her way towards a Covid-19 testing zone in Sydney, Australia.Photograph: Lisa Maree Williams/Getty Images

Wedding and corporate events will be limited to 150 people with strict social distancing rules including a ban on singing, dancing and mingling, while only 100 can attend funerals and places of worship. Australia has so far escaped the high Covid-19 casualty numbers of other nations, with just over 13,000 infections and 133 deaths from the virus as of Thursday. But a spike in community-transmitted cases in its two most populous states in recent weeks has alarmed authorities.

Updated at 2.55am BST

2.47am BST

Australian state of Victoria 300 new cases,

The Australian state of Victoria has reported 300 new coronavirus cases and six deaths, a record one-day number of fatalities for the state.

All of the people who died were connected to aged care. Three were aged in their 90s, three were in their 80s. Twenty-two people have died in the past seven days.

Yesterday's numbers were 484 new cases and five deaths, three of which were connected to aged care clusters.

There have been 2,240 cases of coronavirus recorded in Victoria since last Friday, 17 July.

There are now 206 people in hospital, Victorian premier Daniel Andrews said, and 41 are in intensive care.

A flare-up of infections in Melbourne, the state's largest city, prompted the government to enforce a six-week partial lockdown and make face masks mandatory for its residents or risk a AU$200 ($143) fine.

Updated at 5.48am BST

2.22am BST

Coronavirus crisis could spark 'massive' new migration: Red Cross

The devastating economic toll the coronavirus crisis is taking around the world could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross warned in an interview with AFP.

Jagan Chapagain, head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), told AFP he was deeply concerned about the secondary effects of the pandemic.

The pandemic and the lockdowns and border closures imposed to halt the spread of the virus have been destroying livelihoods around the planet and are expected to drive many millions more into poverty.

Many people are already faced with the choice of risking exposure to coronavirus or going hungry, Chapagain said, warning that the desperation being generated could have far-reaching consequences.

"What we hear is that many people who are losing livelihoods, once the borders start opening, will feel compelled to move," he said.

"We should not be surprised if there is a massive impact on migration in the coming months and years."

More migration forced on people by desperate circumstances, he said, will result in numerous "tragedies along the way", including more deaths at sea, human trafficking and exploitation.

Updated at 2.22am BST

2.12am BST

The Australian state of New South Wales, which borders Victoria, the state fighting an outbreak causing three-digit daily case rises, has confirmed just 7 new coronavirus cases overnight, the first the cases have been under double digits just over a week:

7 new cases of #COVID19 have been diagnosed in NSW between 8pm on 22 July and 8pm on 23 July. For the latest list of COVID-19 locations, visit: https://t.co/6PUOQ40ESo pic.twitter.com/Ty1BxiEM83

- NSW Health (@NSWHealth) July 24, 2020

1.49am BST

Still in the UK, longstanding under-investment in the NHS will hamper its ability to tackle the backlog of tests and required treatments that built up during the Covid-19 pandemic, research shows.

A new 31-country study found patients in the UK will face long waits for care and the rationing of treatment because the health service has so few staff and beds :

Related: Lack of beds and staff will hamper NHS in clearing backlog, says study

1.40am BST

Coronavirus will not be eliminated, warns Tony Blair

Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated and has urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.

In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment".

He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it.

"And when you look at what has been happening in other countries, as lockdown has been eased, then more and more problems have appeared and many countries, having gone into lockdown then easing it, are finding spikes in the disease.

"You can't be sure of this but there's at least a 50/50 chance that you have a resurgence of the disease in the autumn and that's why it is absolutely essential now to prepare for that."

Former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair.Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA

A new report by his think tank, the Tony Blair Institute, calls for public confidence to be rebuilt "on the knowledge that every possible step has been taken to mitigate risk" - requiring containment measures in the absence of a "game changer" vaccine or treatment.

It recommends the rollout of mass testing, mandated use of face masks in all enclosed public environments, and suggests introducing an individual risk categorisation - with A showing those most at risk, to people with low health risks and a low transmission risk in category D.

1.27am BST

The Guardian's Phillip Inman and Rob Davies report:

In the UK, fears of rising redundancies and concerns about the health risks of high street shopping have hit consumer confidence, according to a closely watched survey that flatlined last month.

The GfK barometer for July showed confidence petering out, despite rising in May and June. It came as a senior Bank of England policymaker warned Britain's recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic would be hampered while concerns about catching the virus and fears of redundancy limited spending.

In a message that casts doubt on a V-shaped recovery, Jonathan Haskell said a fear of redundancy was likely to prey on the minds of workers, meaning they will save vital funds and not spend them over the coming months:

Related: Consumer confidence survey casts doubt on V-shaped recovery

1.12am BST

Here is the full story on Trump cancelling Republican national convention events in Jacksonville, Florida:

Donald Trump has cancelled the part of the Republican national convention that had been due to take place in Jacksonville, Florida, his biggest public retreat yet from the ferocity of the coronavirus pandemic.

The US president's insistence on a packed crowd had forced the Republican National Committee to announce in June that it would move most of its agenda - including Trump's acceptance speech as nominee - to Jacksonville from Charlotte, North Carolina, where health guidelines are stricter.

But since then, virus infections have soared in Florida, including a record 173 deaths on Thursday, forcing Trump to reluctantly pull the plug.

The move is the latest and starkest example of Trump bowing to the scientific reality of the pandemic, which has now infected 4m Americans and killed more than 144,000. A campaign rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last month suffered a poor turnout, presumably in part because of fears that the virus would spread in the indoor arena. Another recent plan for an outdoor rally in New Hampshire was cancelled, ostensibly because of the weather.

Related: Trump cancels Republican national convention events in Jacksonville, Florida

1.00am BST

Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test

Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners on the grounds of his official residence without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. The far-right populist, whose dismissive response to the pandemic has been globally condemned, first announced he had been diagnosed with Covid-19 in early July, when Brazil had suffered more than 65,000 deaths and 1.6m confirmed cases. Since then Brazil's death toll has risen to nearly 83,000 - the second highest in the world - and the number of cases to 2.2m, a record 67,860 of which were recorded yesterday. Brazil's president again tested positive for the coronavirus on Wednesday and has supposedly been in isolation since 6 July. Despite that Bolsonaro - who has undermined social distancing efforts and repeatedly downplayed the illness as a "bit of a cold" - was on Thursday spotted by a Reuters photographer roaming the estate around Brasília's Palácio da Alvorada on a motorbike and talking to cleaners without gear to protect them.

12.50am BST

US infectious diseases expert Anthony Fauci has thrown out the first pitch at a Nationals-Yankees game, and it didn't go amazingly well, but it did lead to some okay Covid-19 jokes:

Fauci finally flattened the curve pic.twitter.com/I0zUwbl6OH

- Will Brinson (@WillBrinson) July 23, 2020

12.43am BST

US cases pass 4 million

The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May.

As states continue to dial back reopening efforts, nearly every metric for tracking the outbreak has shown a worsening spread.

"I don't see this disappearing," Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told tuberculosis researchers during a live stream on Wednesday. "It is so efficient in its ability to transmit from human to human that I think we ultimately will get control of it. I don't really see us eradicating it."

More than 915,000 new cases have been confirmed in just the past two weeks, totaling more than the entire month of June. The US has now exceeded 140,000 deaths, with Texas alone reporting a state record 197 new fatalities on Wednesday.

Hospitalizations have also increased and, the Associated Press reports, testing facilities have been overwhelmed by the surge, creating processing delays.

Related: US surpasses 4m Covid-19 cases as states dial back reopening

Updated at 5.46am BST

12.39am BST

WHO chief chides Pompeo for 'untrue' claims

The director-general of the World Health Organization has hit back at US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, after British media reported that Pompeo made a comment about the health agency chief having been bought by China, the AP reports. In one of his most stern responses to months of criticism from Washington, Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO was focused on saving lives.

"The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation for that matter," Tedros told reporters in Geneva. "If there is one thing that really matters to us and which should matter to the entire international community, it's saving lives. And WHO will not be distracted by these comments."

Critics say the Trump administration has been trying to distract attention from its own failings in managing the coronavirus outbreak in the United States, which has the most confirmed cases and virus-related deaths in the world. In recent months, the administration has repeatedly criticized WHOs handling of the pandemic and its alleged deference to Beijing. President Donald Trump has ordered the United States to withdraw next year from the agency it has bankrolled and supported for decades.

Pompeo was not asked about his reported comments at a news conference in Denmark on Wednesday. Before that appearance, The Times of London, citing unidentified attendees, reported he told a gathering of British lawmakers that the U.S. had intelligence suggesting Tedros had been bought by Chinas government and that his election as WHO chief in 2017 had led to the death of British nationals. The State Department did not immediately respond to queries from The Associated Press about the British reports and Tedros remarks, which included blaming partisan politics for worsening the pandemic.

12.37am BST

Trump cancels the Jacksonville Republican National Convention

US President Donald Trump cancelled the Jacksonville, Florida Republican National Convention on Thursday.

Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot.

The Republican National Committee had recently announced it would restrict attendance at its Jacksonville convention as Florida's coronavirus cases and deaths spiked, limiting the number of guests that delegates are able to bring and spreading the event across two venues.

Florida reported its largest number of deaths in a single day from the coronavirus today, and more than 10,000 Floridians have tested positive for Covid-19 so far.

The convention was originally meant to be held in Charlotte, but the RNC moved the location after North Carolina's governor Roy Cooper was reluctant about hosting large, crowded events amid the pandemic without distancing and safety measures.

"When we made these changes, we had hoped to be able to plan a traditional convention celebration to which we are all accustomed," RNC chair Ronna McDaniel wrote in a letter to committee members at the time. "However, adjustments must be made to comply with state and local health guidelines."

Updated at 12.38am BST

12.30am BST

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

I'll be bringing you the latest from around the world for the next few hours. As always, suggestions, questions and news from your part of the world are welcome.

Get in touch on Twitter@helenrsullivan or via email: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com

The director-general of the World Health Organization has hit back at US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, after British media reported that Pompeo made a comment about the health agency chief having been bought by China. In one of his most stern responses to months of criticism from Washington, Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO was focused on saving lives.

"The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation for that matter," Tedros told reporters in Geneva. "If there is one thing that really matters to us and which should matter to the entire international community, it's saving lives. And WHO will not be distracted by these comments." Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•There are 15.3m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 626,000 deaths.•US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot.•Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated.He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it.•Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday.•South Africa'spresident Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions.•Covid-19 cases in the US passed four million on Thursday according to Johns Hopkins University's tracker, the highest in the world. The US has confirmed 4,005,414 cases since the start of the pandemic.•Fresh coronavirus restrictions have been introduced in some areas of Spain amid surging infection rates. Murcia, in the south-east of Spain, sealed off 30,000 people in the town of Totana on Thursday, barring anyone from entering or leaving, while Madrid authorities have urged citizens to wear a mask even at home when they are with people they don't live with.•A French hospital is trialling a breathalyser-style coronavirus test. The National Centre of Scientific Research at la Croix-Rousse hospital in Lyon is testing patients with the machine that enables them to breathe into a tube to see if they have the virus in a matter of seconds.•Global cases of Covid-19 have passed 15.2m. According to the Johns Hopkins University coronavirus map, the total number of recorded global cases stands at 15,291,554, while global deaths total 624,742.•South Africa has recorded 60% more excess deaths than expected. The country saw about 17,000 extra deaths from natural causes - or 50% more than would normally be expected between early May and mid-July, scientists have said, suggesting many more people are dying of Covid-19 than shown in official figures.•Record 366 new coronavirus infections reported in Japan's capital. Thursday's figure took cumulative infections to more than 10,000 in Tokyo, topping a daily high of 293 cases last week, as the city's government declared its highest alert against the disease.74472020-07-23T23:30:05Zfalsefalse2020-07-24T09:27:24ZtrueAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/eczdnfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/7aec043b30de2e3da8ced13d1535e112032510e9/0_32_2484_1490/500.jpgfalseentrueHong Kong's sudden spike in coronavirus cases may have stemmed from its willingness to let seafarers skip quarantine while changing ships in the city, a leading health expert said. After its previous success tackling the disease and ending local transmission, case numbers in the densely packed finance hub increased this month, sparking fears of a new outbreak spreading out of control. The city reported 123 new infections Friday, a new daily record, bringing the total tally to 2,372 with 16 deaths. Most of the new cases were locally transmitted. Some health experts have blamed an exemption from the usual 14-day quarantine which the government granted to "essential personnel" including cross-boundary truckers, aircrew and sea crew. But officials have said the arrangement was necessary, while insisting it was a "misunderstanding" that the new wave was attributable to the exemption. After analysing virus samples from recent confirmed cases, Gabriel Leung, dean of the University of Hong Kong's medical school, said on Thursday the virus' resurgence most likely stemmed from such imported cases. He said the wave was "probably because of the multiple imported (cases), it could be the crew members or sailors exempted from quarantine". "When they entered Hong Kong, there were no immediate quarantine measures or testing arrangements. You could imagine, some of the crew members, the hotel they stay in maybe is downtown," he said. The Afghan health ministry has urged people to stay indoors and avoid gatherings for the upcoming Eid celebrations as the number of confirmed coronavirus related deaths has reached 1,225. Ahmad Jawad Osmani, the country's acting health minister told a press conference on Thursday that hospitals were filled with Covid-19 patients. Osmai said that Afghanistan is still in the midst of the outbreak. "We are in a better position to fight with coronavirus because the percentage of people infected in Afghanistan is dropping. The number of people visiting hospitals has also decreased, but that does not mean that we will not follow medical instructions," he added. The health ministry in the country recorded 14 new deaths from Covid-19 on Friday. In its latest update, it said the number of people who tested positive for the virus had reached 35,988, an increase of 60 on the day before. Most new deaths were reported in Kabul. The capital is the country's worst affected area with 489 deaths and around 15,000 confirmed cases. Another death was reported in Helmand province. The United States has allocated more than $36.7 million to help Afghanistan address the Covid-19 pandemic, and expedited $90 million through the World Bank to support Afghanistan's national health and education sectors and local government needs, the US embassy in Kabul announced Thursday. The Belgian government has paused its planned easing of the country's lockdown and brought in new restrictive measures after the daily infection rate hit numbers not seen since mid-May. Of the 370 people newly tested positive on Monday, 32% were in the city of Antwerp but the relatively small size of the country has forced the government to block plans to allow large gatherings. Belgium's prime minister, Sophie Wilmés, said: "Since last week, the average infection rate has increased considerably. The reproduction number has also risen above 1 since last week. This indicates that the epidemic is flaring up again. "Young adults between 20 and 30 are the most frequently affected. Although the number of infections is increasing throughout the country, we also see more local flare-ups". From Saturday, wearing a face mask will be mandatory in an increased number of public places including busy shopping streets, markets and in public buildings. People in a restaurant will also need to use a mask when visiting the bathroom and they will be required to leave an email address or telephone number. With the holiday season in full flow, all returning travellers will have to complete a form within 48 hours of arrival in Belgium. Wilmes said: "It's a blow to our morale but we must take action today so that we have no regrets tomorrow. We must act collectively. Everyone is an actor in this crisis," said Wilmès. She added: "These rules are not advice but instructions. And as always, take care of yourself, and take care of others. And the best way to do that is by following the measures." At the Machakos Covid-19 field hospital, about an hour's drive from the Kenyan capital, workers struggle to put a giant metal tent frame in place to serve as a new ward. Machakos county, which has 92 active cases of the virus, has already met the required minimum of 300 beds per county for Covid-19 patients, set by the national government. But as national figures surge, Machakos is preparing for more infections. Positive cases in Kenya have nearly doubled in the last two weeks to 15,601, mirroring a continental surge. Africa topped 750,000 cases on Wednesday. "When you see such numbers coming up that fast, you get worried," said David Mutunga, an official in the Machakos county's department of health emergency services. "Before those numbers go out of hand, we are racing against time to ensure we have adequate capacity." It is not just officials in Machakos who are concerned by the rise in cases in Kenya and beyond. President Uhuru Kenyatta, who opened movement into and out of Nairobi earlier this month and lifted a ban on international commercial passenger flights from 1 August has summoned top national and local government officials to a meeting on Monday, to discuss what to do about the recent surge. There is a chink of hope in Ireland as the latest data on coronavirus has shown "the start of something positive", the state's acting chief medical officer has said. The Irish Times reports that Dr Ronan Glynn said the spread of the virus had stabilised over the past week after transmission had increased over the previous two weeks. Speaking at the National Public Health Emergency Team (NPHET) briefing on Thursday, he added: "It is absolutely early days. Last week we were uncertain and worried. The week before we were uncertain and pessimistic. This week we can be uncertain but optimistic." Dr Glynn said the latest data on Covid-19 in the state was "the start of something positive and we need to see it continue in the same way over the coming weeks". He told the briefing it was too early to decide whether pubs that do not serve a substantial meal - so-called "wet pubs" - could reopen again on 10 August. Asked whether he was fearful that reopening pubs first would prevent schools reopening, he said pubs were "one of the highest risk environments" and that a decision would have to be taken on whether to reopen them in two weeks' time based on where the virus was then. "We can't do anything to jeopardise the overarching priorities," he said. Dr Glynn said the country was "absolutely on track" for children to go back to school in September based on how the Covid-19 infection rate has stabilised. Nine further coronavirus-related deaths and seven new confirmed cases of Covid-19 were reported in Ireland on Wednesday, bringing total deaths to 1,763. Dr Glynn pointed out that eight of the deaths were late notifications and had occurred in April, May and June. Some good news: Scientists in New Zealand say the country has the lowest Covid-19 death rate in the OECD group of wealthy nations, with four confirmed deaths from the virus per million inhabitants of the nation. That compares with five deaths per million people in Australia, 666 deaths per million in the UK, and 428 deaths per million in the US. Belgium had the highest death rate, with 845 deaths per million population. If New Zealand had reported the average death rate among the OECD's 37 member countries, the Otago University researchers say, 990 people would have died. The country's actual death toll was 22, with fewer than 1,500 confirmed cases. New Zealand is the only OECD country that has recorded more than 28 days with no known community transmission of the virus. There are 21 active cases of the virus, all diagnosed in returning travelers, who are in managed isolation facilities. India's death toll from coronavirus overtook France on Friday with 30,601 fatalities and nearly 50,000 new cases overnight, official data showed. The death toll is the sixth-biggest behind the US, Brazil, Britain, Mexico and Italy. It has the third-highest caseload with almost 1.3 million infections. In the past 24 hours the country recorded 740 new deaths from the virus and 49,310 fresh infections, according to the health ministry. But many experts say that with testing levels low, the extent of the pandemic across the world's second-most populous country may be far worse than officially reported. An antibody study commissioned by the government showed this week that almost a quarter of people in the capital New Delhi have had the virus - almost 40 times the official number. Prime minister Narendra Modi's government imposed one of the world's strictest lockdowns in late March, but it has been steadily eased to lessen the devastating economic impact of the pandemic. State governments have brought in fresh restrictions as cases soar in Bangalore and away from the big cities in Bihar, West Bengal, Kashmir and parts of Tamil Nadu. Southern Kerala state, earlier hailed as a success story and which has already imposed partial restrictions, may decide on Monday to impose a full statewide lockdown, reports said. Vietnam, one of Asia's biggest consumers of wildlife products, has suspended all imports of wild animal species "dead or alive" and vowed to "eliminate" illegal markets across the country. The directive signed by the leader of the Communist country follows an international scandal over the sale of wildlife, which has been blamed as the origin of the coronavirus pandemic in neighbouring China. It is a major victory for conservation groups who have in the past accused Vietnamese authorities of turning a blind eye to the rampant trade in endangered species inside and across its borders. "The prime minister orders the suspension of imports of wildlife - dead or alive - their eggs ... parts or derivatives," said the order released Thursday on the government website. "All citizens, especially officials ... must not participate in illegal poaching, buying, selling, transporting ... of illegal wildlife." Among the most frequently smuggled animal goods are tiger parts, rhino horn and pangolins used in traditional medicine. Despite the high prices they command - with ingredients trafficked from as far as Africa - there is no scientific evidence of their health benefits in humans. Vietnam locked down swiftly to dodge a major health crisis as Covid-19 emerged, but its economy has been hit hard. Morning. I will be updating the global blog for the next few hours. As ever, if you have any tips, stories or things you feel we should be covering please email me at nazia.parveen@theguardian.com or follow me on Twitter @NParveenG to send me a DM. That's it from me, Helen Sullivan for today. Thanks for following along - and stay tuned for more pandemic developments from around the world with my colleague Nazia Parveen. The coronavirus crisis could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross has warned. It comes as the WHO's chief accused the US of making "untrue" and "unacceptable" claims against the global health body. The head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), Jagan Chapagain, said he was deeply concerned about the secondary effects of the pandemic, as border closures and Covid-19 restrictions have driven millions into poverty. "Increasingly we are seeing in many countries the impacts on the livelihoods and the food situation," he said in an interview with Agence France-Presse. Many people are already faced with the choice of risking exposure to the novel coronavirus or going hungry, Chapagain said, warning that the desperation being generated could have far-reaching consequences. "What we hear is that many people who are losing livelihoods, once the borders start opening, will feel compelled to move," he said. "We should not be surprised if there is a massive impact on migration in the coming months and years." A fund set up by 1917 director Sam Mendes to help theatre freelancers hit by the impact of Covid-19 has raised £1.6m, but industry figures have said more support is needed to avoid an exodus of workers from the sector. The Theatre Artists Fund, which was launched at the start of July with a £500,000 donation from Netflix, has had more than 4,000 applications in less than a month and will provide one-off grants of £1,000. Mendes said the fund had received donations from actors and writers including Michaela Coel, Armando Iannucci and Imelda Staunton, with £85,000 in donations coming - in part - from members of the public. But despite the support, Mendes said the grants would provide assistance to only a small fraction of the freelancers who made up 70% of theatre's workforce: South Korea's Yonhap News Agency is reporting that the country is expected to record 100 new coronavirus cases today, citing the Korea Centers for Disease Control. The total would mark the first time that South Korea has reported more than 100 cases since 1 April, when 101 cases were recorded, according to figures on the Johns Hopkins University tracker. Vietnam's Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc has issued a directive to ban the Southeast Asian country's wildlife trade with immediate effect in order to reduce the risk of new pandemics, a government statement said. The directive bans imports of live wild animals and wildlife products, eliminates wildlife markets, and enforce prohibitions on illegal hunting and trading of wild animals, including online sales, according to the statement issued late on Thursday, Reuters reports. Vietnam is an important destination in the Asian region for illegal wildlife products such as pangolin scales and elephant ivory. There have also been seizures of rhino horns, which is believed to have medicinal value. The Southeast Asian country is reported to have many wildlife markets and also a booming online trade in animals, with existing laws often poorly enforced. Neighbouring China has also pledged to ban the trade and consumption of wild animals in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. Scientists suspect the virus passed to humans from animals and some of the earliest infections were found in people who had exposure to a wildlife market in Hubei's provincial capital Wuhan, where bats, snakes, civets and other animals were sold Here are the key developments from around the world for the last few hours: There nearly 15.5m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 632,000 deaths. US cases passed 4 million. The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May. The United States on Thursday recorded more than 1,100 deaths from Covid-19, marking the third straight day the nation passed that grim milestone as the pandemic escalates in southern and western US states, according to Reuters analysis. US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot. Coronavirus crisis could spark 'massive' new migration: Red Cross. The devastating economic toll the coronavirus crisis is taking around the world could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross warned in an interview with AFP. Rescheduled Tokyo Olympics must be simple and safe, says Games official. Senior Olympic official John Coates has reiterated that Tokyo must stage a simplified summer Games next year with the health and safety of athletes the most important consideration in the planning, Reuters reports.Australian Coates heads up the International Olympic Committee's coordination commission for the Tokyo 2020 Games, which have been postponed until 2021 because of the global Covid-19 pandemic. Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated. He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it. Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday. South Africa's president Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions. The Australian state of Victoria has reported 300 new coronavirus cases and six deaths, a record one-day number of fatalities for the state. All of the people who died were connected to aged care. Three were aged in their 90s, three were in their 80s. Twenty-two people have died in the past seven days.Yesterday's numbers were 484 new cases and five deaths, three of which were connected to aged care clusters. Disney postponed the Mulan release indefinitely. Disney on Thursday postponed the debut of its movie "Mulan" indefinitely, Reuters reports. dealing a new blow to theatre operators that were counting on the live-action epic to help attract audiences during a pandemic. Paramount Pictures also said "Top Gun: Maverick", the much-awaited sequel to the Tom Cruise-starring "Top Gun", has been delayed to 2 July 2021 from 23 December 2020. Disney on Thursday postponed the debut of its movie "Mulan" indefinitely, Reuters reports. dealing a new blow to theatre operators that were counting on the live-action epic to help attract audiences during a pandemic. ViacomCBS Inc's Paramount Pictures also said "Top Gun: Maverick", the much-awaited sequel to the Tom Cruise-starring "Top Gun", has been delayed to July 2, 2021 from December 23, 2020. "Mulan" was scheduled to reach theatres in March but its release has been postponed several times as many cinemas remain closed. The film had most recently been set to debut on Aug. 21 and theatre operators had hoped it would help spark a late-summer rebound for movie-going. Disney also said it had delayed the next film instalments from two of its biggest franchises, "Avatar" and "Star Wars," by one year as the novel coronavirus has disrupted production. The "Avatar" sequel is now set to debut in theatres in December 2022, and the next "Star Wars" movie in December 2023. Asian equities sank Friday, dragged by a worse-than-forecast US jobless claims report that fanned fears about the economic recovery, while the mood was also being darkened by China-US tensions, stalled stimulus talks in Washington and a surge in virus cases, AFP reports. The losses come at the end of another tough week for markets, which have shown signs of stuttering after a months-long rally from their March trough, with Washington and Beijing butting heads again, this time over US claims of Chinese espionage. And they looked set to finish with more losses following a sharp drop on Wall Street that came in response to news that 1.4 million Americans applied for jobless benefits last week, the first week-on-week rise since the start of the crisis. The increase came as several states around the country were forced to reimpose containment measures soon after reopening from lockdown, forcing some to close bars, restaurants and other businesses key to the economy. The reversion to such measures has come as a big blow to investors who had grown optimistic that the US economy was rebounding sharply from the collapse seen earlier in the year. China has announced a $1bn loan to make its coronavirus vaccine accessible for countries across Latin America and the Caribbean, Foreign Minister Wang Yi announced on Thursday. In a statement on Wednesday, the Mexican ministry said China had made the pledge at a virtual meeting of ministers from some Latin American and Caribbean nations, Reuters reports. "The Chinese foreign minister stressed that the vaccine developed in his country will be a public good of universal access, and that his country will provide a $1bn loan to support the access of the nations of the region," it said. It gave no details of when such a vaccine might be available or distributed. Radio TelevisionHong Kong reports that a top health expert believes Hong Kong's new wave of infections can be traced back to people who were exempted from hotel quarantine by the government: A top health expert says new analysis of recent coronavirus samples suggests that the current wave of Covid-19 infections was brought in from outside of Hong Kong, most likely by people exempted from mandatory quarantine. The comments by Gabriel Leung, dean of the faculty of medicine at the University of Hong Kong, go against the government's position that the exemptions did not trigger the recent surge in infections.... "The current third wave seemed to have had multiple, new introductions that are unlinked to the previous local clusters," he said. He says that means the current wave of infections was most likely brought in from imported cases by someone who was exempt from having to go into quarantine for two weeks. Exemptions were put in place for those whose activities are considered essential to the SAR, such as aircrew and seamen, cross-border drivers and certain business people. The government reported 118 new cases on Friday, as it continues to battle a third wave of infections. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 815 to 204,183, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Friday. The reported death toll rose by 10 to 9,111, the tally showed. The United States on Thursday recorded more than 1,100 deaths from Covid-19, marking the third straight day the nation passed that grim milestone as the pandemic escalates in southern and western US states, according to Reuters analysis. Fatalities nationwide were recorded at 1,118 on Thursday. Deaths were 1,135 on Wednesday and 1,141 on Tuesday. Even though deaths are rising in the United States for a second week in a row, they remain well below levels seen in April, when 2,000 people a day on average died from the virus. The United States on Thursday also passed a total of more than 4 million coronavirus infections since the first US case was documented in January, according to a Reuters tally, reflecting a nationwide escalation of the pandemic. The United States took 98 days to reach one million confirmed cases of Covid-19 but just 16 days to increase from 3 million to 4 million, the tally showed. The total suggests at least one in 82 Americans have been infected at some point in the pandemic. The average number of new cases is now rising by more than 2,600 per hour nationwide, the highest rate in the world. The six deaths recorded in the Australian state of Victoria overnight are a record for the state. Here is the full story: Senior Olympic official John Coates has reiterated that Tokyo must stage a simplified summer Games next year with the health and safety of athletes the most important consideration in the planning, Reuters reports. Australian Coates heads up the International Olympic Committee's coordination commission for the Tokyo 2020 Games, which have been postponed until 2021 because of the global Covid-19 pandemic. "The good news is that all 42 Games venues... have been re-secured. The competition schedule is the same," the IOC vice president wrote in the Daily Telegraph on Friday, a day after the one-year countdown to the opening ceremony. "But we must reduce the cost impact of postponement as well as simplify the Games to ensure they can be organised efficiently, safely and sustainably, in this new context. "With one year to go, there is no clear picture of what shape the simplified Games will take. The situation with Covid-19, both domestically and internationally, is constantly changing." Bolivia's general election will be pushed back until 18 October amid the coronavirus pandemic. The decision could fan tensions between the interim conservative government and the socialist party of former President Evo Morales, Reuters reports. The head of the electoral tribunal said on Thursday that the vote would be postponed from the previously scheduled 6 September date to ensure the safety of voters, with hospitals and cemeteries straining under the impact of the virus. "This election requires the highest possible health security measures to protect the health of Bolivians," tribunal President Salvador Romero told a news conference in La Paz. The vote is key to the political future of the Andean nation of 11.5 million people after a fraught election last year sparked widespread protests and led to the resignation of the country's long-term leftist leader Morales. Podcast: 'When Italy cried for Covid-19 help there was silence' When coronavirus swept through the European Union, member states called on Brussels to help. But as Daniel Boffey discovered, the distress calls too often went unanswered: Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is addressing the media now following a cabinet meeting, and has announced that Australia has 'reaffirmed' its suppression strategy. This has become a major ideological issue over the past few weeks - should Australia have adopted an elimination strategy instead of a suppression strategy on controlling the coronavirus? Morrison said national cabinet today moved an "affirmation of the suppression strategy". The goal of that is obviously, and has always been no community transmission. There will always be cases that come because Australia has not completely shut itself off from the world. To do so would be reckless, but that no community transmission, when the vast majority of states and territories have been at now effectively for some time. And that's certainly where we want to get back to in Victoria and New South Wales, and that's where our efforts are focused. Here is the full story on Dr Fauci's underwhelming first pitch at the Nationals-Yankees game on Thursday night: The Nationals and Yankees knelt in unison before the first game of the baseball season as part of an opening day ceremony Thursday night that featured references to the Black Lives Matter movement, the coronavirus pandemic - including an off-the-mark first pitch by top US infectious diseases expert Dr Anthony Fauci - and the home team's 2019 championship. Fauci was invited by the Nationals to throw out the ceremonial first pitch - a fitting choice during the current medical crisis. Wearing a mask on the mound, Fauci sent his toss well wide of home plate, and the ball bounced past his "catcher", Washington reliever Sean Doolittle. Afterward, Fauci and Doolittle tapped gloves, instead of shaking hands. Fauci's effort drew light-hearted comparisons to other public figures whose first pitches went awry through the years, including Cincinnati mayor Mark Mallory, rapper 50 Cent, Olympic hero Carl Lewis, Miss Texas 2014 and Canadian pop icon Carly Rae Jepsen: Australia's National cabinet meets on Friday and is expected to discuss steps to combat the clusters as well as financial measures to shore up its economy. Reuters reports that Australia's budget is set to plunge into its biggest deficit since World War Two this year as the coronavirus crisis knocks the country into its first recession in three decades and forces policymakers to roll out hundreds of billions of dollars in stimulus. Meanwhile, a law firm on Friday said it has filed a class action in an Australian court against Carnival Corp's Ruby Princess cruise ship alleging mishandling of a coronavirus outbreak on board the ship. The cruise ship has also become part of a homicide investigation in Australia as one of the country's deadliest virus infection sources. "It is not our intention to respond to the assertions of class action lawyers," a Carnival Corp spokesman said in an emailed statement. Restrictions were reintroduced in Australia's most populous state of New South Wales on Friday as authorities battle to control fresh coronavirus clusters that have emerged in Sydney over the last several days, Reuters reports. Group bookings at restaurants, cafes and clubs will be limited to 10 people and patrons inside a venue will be capped to 300 in rules that take effect amid a growing cluster stemming from a restaurant in suburban Sydney. Wedding and corporate events will be limited to 150 people with strict social distancing rules including a ban on singing, dancing and mingling, while only 100 can attend funerals and places of worship. Australia has so far escaped the high Covid-19 casualty numbers of other nations, with just over 13,000 infections and 133 deaths from the virus as of Thursday. But a spike in community-transmitted cases in its two most populous states in recent weeks has alarmed authorities. The Australian state of Victoria has reported 300 new coronavirus cases and six deaths, a record one-day number of fatalities for the state. All of the people who died were connected to aged care. Three were aged in their 90s, three were in their 80s. Twenty-two people have died in the past seven days. Yesterday's numbers were 484 new cases and five deaths, three of which were connected to aged care clusters. There have been 2,240 cases of coronavirus recorded in Victoria since last Friday, 17 July. There are now 206 people in hospital, Victorian premier Daniel Andrews said, and 41 are in intensive care. A flare-up of infections in Melbourne, the state's largest city, prompted the government to enforce a six-week partial lockdown and make face masks mandatory for its residents or risk a AU$200 ($143) fine. The devastating economic toll the coronavirus crisis is taking around the world could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross warned in an interview with AFP. Jagan Chapagain, head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), told AFP he was deeply concerned about the secondary effects of the pandemic. The pandemic and the lockdowns and border closures imposed to halt the spread of the virus have been destroying livelihoods around the planet and are expected to drive many millions more into poverty. Many people are already faced with the choice of risking exposure to coronavirus or going hungry, Chapagain said, warning that the desperation being generated could have far-reaching consequences. "What we hear is that many people who are losing livelihoods, once the borders start opening, will feel compelled to move," he said. "We should not be surprised if there is a massive impact on migration in the coming months and years." More migration forced on people by desperate circumstances, he said, will result in numerous "tragedies along the way", including more deaths at sea, human trafficking and exploitation. The Australian state of New South Wales, which borders Victoria, the state fighting an outbreak causing three-digit daily case rises, has confirmed just 7 new coronavirus cases overnight, the first the cases have been under double digits just over a week: Still in the UK, longstanding under-investment in the NHS will hamper its ability to tackle the backlog of tests and required treatments that built up during the Covid-19 pandemic, research shows. A new 31-country study found patients in the UK will face long waits for care and the rationing of treatment because the health service has so few staff and beds: Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated and has urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave. In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it. "And when you look at what has been happening in other countries, as lockdown has been eased, then more and more problems have appeared and many countries, having gone into lockdown then easing it, are finding spikes in the disease. "You can't be sure of this but there's at least a 50/50 chance that you have a resurgence of the disease in the autumn and that's why it is absolutely essential now to prepare for that." A new report by his think tank, the Tony Blair Institute, calls for public confidence to be rebuilt "on the knowledge that every possible step has been taken to mitigate risk" - requiring containment measures in the absence of a "game changer" vaccine or treatment. It recommends the rollout of mass testing, mandated use of face masks in all enclosed public environments, and suggests introducing an individual risk categorisation - with A showing those most at risk, to people with low health risks and a low transmission risk in category D. The Guardian's Phillip Inman and Rob Davies report: In the UK, fears of rising redundancies and concerns about the health risks of high street shopping have hit consumer confidence, according to a closely watched survey that flatlined last month. The GfK barometer for July showed confidence petering out, despite rising in May and June. It came as a senior Bank of England policymaker warned Britain's recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic would be hampered while concerns about catching the virus and fears of redundancy limited spending. In a message that casts doubt on a V-shaped recovery, Jonathan Haskell said a fear of redundancy was likely to prey on the minds of workers, meaning they will save vital funds and not spend them over the coming months: Here is the full story on Trump cancelling Republican national convention events in Jacksonville, Florida: Donald Trump has cancelled the part of the Republican national convention that had been due to take place in Jacksonville, Florida, his biggest public retreat yet from the ferocity of the coronavirus pandemic. The US president's insistence on a packed crowd had forced the Republican National Committee to announce in June that it would move most of its agenda - including Trump's acceptance speech as nominee - to Jacksonville from Charlotte, North Carolina, where health guidelines are stricter. But since then, virus infections have soared in Florida, including a record 173 deaths on Thursday, forcing Trump to reluctantly pull the plug. The move is the latest and starkest example of Trump bowing to the scientific reality of the pandemic, which has now infected 4m Americans and killed more than 144,000. A campaign rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma, last month suffered a poor turnout, presumably in part because of fears that the virus would spread in the indoor arena. Another recent plan for an outdoor rally in New Hampshire was cancelled, ostensibly because of the weather. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners on the grounds of his official residence without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. The far-right populist, whose dismissive response to the pandemic has been globally condemned, first announced he had been diagnosed with Covid-19 in early July, when Brazil had suffered more than 65,000 deaths and 1.6m confirmed cases. Since then Brazil's death toll has risen to nearly 83,000 - the second highest in the world - and the number of cases to 2.2m, a record 67,860 of which were recorded yesterday. Brazil's president again tested positive for the coronavirus on Wednesday and has supposedly been in isolation since 6 July. Despite that Bolsonaro - who has undermined social distancing efforts and repeatedly downplayed the illness as a "bit of a cold" - was on Thursday spotted by a Reuters photographer roaming the estate around Brasília's Palácio da Alvorada on a motorbike and talking to cleaners without gear to protect them. US infectious diseases expert Anthony Fauci has thrown out the first pitch at a Nationals-Yankees game, and it didn't go amazingly well, but it did lead to some okay Covid-19 jokes: The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May. As states continue to dial back reopening efforts, nearly every metric for tracking the outbreak has shown a worsening spread. "I don't see this disappearing," Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told tuberculosis researchers during a live stream on Wednesday. "It is so efficient in its ability to transmit from human to human that I think we ultimately will get control of it. I don't really see us eradicating it." More than 915,000 new cases have been confirmed in just the past two weeks, totaling more than the entire month of June. The US has now exceeded 140,000 deaths, with Texas alone reporting a state record 197 new fatalities on Wednesday. Hospitalizations have also increased and, the Associated Press reports, testing facilities have been overwhelmed by the surge, creating processing delays. The director-general of the World Health Organization has hit back at US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, after British media reported that Pompeo made a comment about the health agency chief having been bought by China, the AP reports. In one of his most stern responses to months of criticism from Washington, Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO was focused on saving lives. "The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation for that matter," Tedros told reporters in Geneva. "If there is one thing that really matters to us and which should matter to the entire international community, it's saving lives. And WHO will not be distracted by these comments." Critics say the Trump administration has been trying to distract attention from its own failings in managing the coronavirus outbreak in the United States, which has the most confirmed cases and virus-related deaths in the world. In recent months, the administration has repeatedly criticized WHOs handling of the pandemic and its alleged deference to Beijing. President Donald Trump has ordered the United States to withdraw next year from the agency it has bankrolled and supported for decades. Pompeo was not asked about his reported comments at a news conference in Denmark on Wednesday. Before that appearance, The Times of London, citing unidentified attendees, reported he told a gathering of British lawmakers that the U.S. had intelligence suggesting Tedros had been bought by Chinas government and that his election as WHO chief in 2017 had led to the death of British nationals. The State Department did not immediately respond to queries from The Associated Press about the British reports and Tedros remarks, which included blaming partisan politics for worsening the pandemic. US President Donald Trump cancelled the Jacksonville, Florida Republican National Convention on Thursday. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot. The Republican National Committee had recently announced it would restrict attendance at its Jacksonville convention as Florida's coronavirus cases and deaths spiked, limiting the number of guests that delegates are able to bring and spreading the event across two venues. Florida reported its largest number of deaths in a single day from the coronavirus today, and more than 10,000 Floridians have tested positive for Covid-19 so far. The convention was originally meant to be held in Charlotte, but the RNC moved the location after North Carolina's governor Roy Cooper was reluctant about hosting large, crowded events amid the pandemic without distancing and safety measures. "When we made these changes, we had hoped to be able to plan a traditional convention celebration to which we are all accustomed," RNC chair Ronna McDaniel wrote in a letter to committee members at the time. "However, adjustments must be made to comply with state and local health guidelines." Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. I'll be bringing you the latest from around the world for the next few hours. As always, suggestions, questions and news from your part of the world are welcome. Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan or via email: helen.sullivan@theguardian.com The director-general of the World Health Organization has hit back at US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, after British media reported that Pompeo made a comment about the health agency chief having been bought by China. In one of his most stern responses to months of criticism from Washington, Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO was focused on saving lives. "The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation for that matter," Tedros told reporters in Geneva. "If there is one thing that really matters to us and which should matter to the entire international community, it's saving lives. And WHO will not be distracted by these comments." Here are the key developments from the last few hours: There are 15.3m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 626,000 deaths. US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot. Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated.He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it. Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday. South Africa's president Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions. Covid-19 cases in the US passed four million on Thursday according to Johns Hopkins University's tracker, the highest in the world. The US has confirmed 4,005,414 cases since the start of the pandemic. Fresh coronavirus restrictions have been introduced in some areas of Spain amid surging infection rates. Murcia, in the south-east of Spain, sealed off 30,000 people in the town of Totana on Thursday, barring anyone from entering or leaving, while Madrid authorities have urged citizens to wear a mask even at home when they are with people they don't live with. A French hospital is trialling a breathalyser-style coronavirus test. The National Centre of Scientific Research at la Croix-Rousse hospital in Lyon is testing patients with the machine that enables them to breathe into a tube to see if they have the virus in a matter of seconds. Global cases of Covid-19 have passed 15.2m. According to the Johns Hopkins University coronavirus map, the total number of recorded global cases stands at 15,291,554, while global deaths total 624,742. South Africa has recorded 60% more excess deaths than expected. The country saw about 17,000 extra deaths from natural causes - or 50% more than would normally be expected between early May and mid-July, scientists have said, suggesting many more people are dying of Covid-19 than shown in official figures. Record 366 new coronavirus infections reported in Japan's capital. Thursday's figure took cumulative infections to more than 10,000 in Tokyo, topping a daily high of 293 cases last week, as the city's government declared its highest alert against the disease.46119falsefalseNazia Parveen (now) and Helen Sullivan (earlier)President Jair Bolsonaro with supporters in Brasilia, Brazil.Professor Gabriel Leung, Founding Director of the WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, speaks during a news conference.A covid-19 patient reacts after being tested inside a field hospital built on a soccer stadium in Machakos.Deputy chief medical officer Dr Ronan Glynn during a press conference at Department of Health in Dublin.Covid 19 illustrations in Kolkata, IndiaIn this photo taken in 2019, border patrol officials hold a confiscated tiger skin and bones while the suspect Pham Van Hiep looks on at a border guard station in northern Vietnam's Quang Ninh province.People carry umbrellas while wearing rubber galoshes as they wade on a flooded street in Taean, South Korea, 23 July 2020.A poster of the Walt Disney Studios' "Mulan" movie towers over an empty Hollywood Boulevard during the coronavirus pandemic in California, US, 31 March 2020.Two firefighters spray water with disinfectant during a disinfection of the streets near a hospital on 23 July 2020 in La Paz, Bolivia.A nurse makes her way towards a Covid-19 testing zone in Sydney, Australia.Former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair.

There are 15.3m known cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University, and over 626,000 deaths.

US President Donald Trump has cancelled the Jacksonville Republican national convention. Trump said that it is "not the right time" for a big convention in Jacksonville. Jacksonville, Florida residents filed a lawsuit against the city, the Republican National Committee and the Trump campaign earlier this month to stop the convention in August, concerned that a crowded event would accelerate the spread of disease in a state that is already a coronavirus hotspot.

Former UK prime minister Tony Blair believes coronavirus will not be eliminated.He urged the UK government to focus on containment measures to see the country through a second wave.In an interview with the PA news agency, Blair described the crisis as "the biggest challenge logistically and practically" a government has ever faced, but criticised ministers for not yet putting in place an "infrastructure of containment". He said: "The reality is that we're going to be living with Covid-19 - we're not really going to be able to eliminate it.

Bolsonaro criticised for lack of distancing, despite positive test. Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, is again coming under fire after being caught on camera chatting with cleaners without a mask - despite testing positive for the coronavirus only yesterday. Meanwhile Brazil's death toll passed 84,000. The country has registered 2,287,475 cases of the virus, up from 2,227,514 yesterday.

South Africa'spresident Cyril Ramaphosa says the country's coronavirus cases have risen to over 400,000. Ramaphosa said the cabinet has decided that all public schools should be closed for the next four weeks from Monday with some exceptions.

Covid-19 cases in the US passed four million on Thursday according to Johns Hopkins University's tracker, the highest in the world. The US has confirmed 4,005,414 cases since the start of the pandemic.

Fresh coronavirus restrictions have been introduced in some areas of Spain amid surging infection rates. Murcia, in the south-east of Spain, sealed off 30,000 people in the town of Totana on Thursday, barring anyone from entering or leaving, while Madrid authorities have urged citizens to wear a mask even at home when they are with people they don't live with.

A French hospital is trialling a breathalyser-style coronavirus test. The National Centre of Scientific Research at la Croix-Rousse hospital in Lyon is testing patients with the machine that enables them to breathe into a tube to see if they have the virus in a matter of seconds.

Global cases of Covid-19 have passed 15.2m. According to the Johns Hopkins University coronavirus map, the total number of recorded global cases stands at 15,291,554, while global deaths total 624,742.

South Africa has recorded 60% more excess deaths than expected. The country saw about 17,000 extra deaths from natural causes - or 50% more than would normally be expected between early May and mid-July, scientists have said, suggesting many more people are dying of Covid-19 than shown in official figures.

Record 366 new coronavirus infections reported in Japan's capital. Thursday's figure took cumulative infections to more than 10,000 in Tokyo, topping a daily high of 293 cases last week, as the city's government declared its highest alert against the disease.