Financially motivated actors from Kosovo, Albania and the Republic of North Macedonia used nationalistic and Islamophobic content to target and manipulate Australian Facebook users during the 2019 election, according to analysts from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI).

Ahead of public hearings on Monday scheduled by the Senate's select committee on foreign interference through social media, a submission from ASPI says it has found influence operations relating to Indonesia's West Papua independence movement, Kashmir, and People's Republic of China operations targeted at various political dissidents and the anti-extradition protests in Hong Kong.

"In the case of the Hong Kong protests, social media actions have ranged from vitriolic attacks on Twitter, to targeted harassment of key protest organisers including posting their personal details online to intimidate and deter," the submission says.

It also points to a Guardian Australia investigation that uncovered a social media operation run from Israel that used divisive Islamophobic content "to steer Facebook audiences to revenue-generating content farms".

"These activities have the potential to skew Australia's political discourse, influence voting behaviour and affect electoral outcomes," the thinktank warns.

The Senate inquiry was established last year to investigate            the risks posed to Australia's democracy by foreign interference through social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter and WeChat.

ASPI will give evidence to the inquiry on Monday and the committee will also hear from witnesses from the Stanford Internet Observatory which has studied interference operations from China and Russia. Both ASPI and the Stanford Internet Observatory have had access to a database created by Twitter to enable research around disinformation, and have published analysis.

The Labor senator Jenny McAllister, who is chairing the probe, has warned foreign interference through social media platforms represents a threat to democracy. She told Guardian Australia the first hearing of the committee would focus on gathering evidence about what has happened during the coronavirus crisis, both in Australia and internationally.

"The reason for that is Covid-19 has produced very significant social and economic disruption, and for malign actors that crisis obviously presents an opportunity to exploit, and that has been the case during the pandemic," McAllister said.

"We need to identify the nature of the interventions during that period, the nature of the actors who have been involved, and the impact of those interventions. The thinking around that is this is an opportunity to demonstrate in a concrete way what has happened in a discrete period of time and to use that case study to illuminate the broader problem."

She said regulatory remedies would ultimately be needed to counter the threat, but other strategies would also be required to help the public spot interference operations by malign actors.

The home affairs department has warned in a separate submission that foreign interference activity against Australian interests is occurring at an "unprecedented scale" and says measures to help people identify fake news could be one of the potential responses to defending sovereignty.

The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, used a major foreign policy speech last week to warn about the dangers of disinformation - a challenge she said was highlighted during the Covid-19 pandemic, when false information had the potential to cost lives.

Payne pointed to last week's report issued by the European Commission that concluded Russia and China had carried out targeted disinformation campaigns "seeking to undermine democratic debate and exacerbate social polarisation".

She said Twitter had disclosed the following day that more than 32,000 accounts had been identified as state-linked information operations which the company attributed to China, Russia and Turkey.

Australia would resist and counter efforts at disinformation, Payne said, "through facts and transparency, underpinned by liberal democratic values that we will continue to promote at home and abroad".

China has hit back at the criticism from Australia. At a press briefing in Beijing last Wednesday, the Chinese government spokesman, Zhao Lijian, accused Australian officials of undermining international efforts to combat the virus.

But ASPI warns that China is "leaning into Western social media platforms in order to shape the information environment".

"Its ambassadors, embassies, state media but also state-owned enterprises exploit the affordances of Western social media platforms - Twitter in particular - to which the Chinese population does not have access as a result of direct censorship," the submission says. "This allows the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to proactively shape the information environment in the west, while tightly controlling that of their own population."

The submission notes that the Chinese government's censorship of coronavirus content on Chinese-language social media platforms "may have limited the population's capacity for disease prevention, yet the reach of CCP officials and state media on western platforms allows the CCP to shape the narrative around its response to the outbreak in ways that favour its model of political power, obfuscate the origins of the virus and critique the responses of other governments".

ASPI recommends several responses to limit opportunities for malign actors to thrive in the social media ecosystem. It says social media companies should be required to make their content moderation policies and enforcement actions transparent.

It says the Morrison government should consider creating an independent statutory authority that is empowered to observe and report on how the incentives, policies, algorithms and enforcement actions of social media platforms are operating, "with the ultimate goal being to maximise benefits and reduce harm for society and its citizens".

It also suggests government funding of civil society groups that can provide "the in-depth publicly accessible research and tools to discover, track and make transparent and therefore deter malign influence operations".