Scott Morrison says he would be "extremely disappointed" if China's plan to impose tariffs on Australian barley imports were connected to the broader diplomatic dispute over an investigation into the coronavirus pandemic.

The Australian government has signalled it would consider taking the dispute to the World Trade Organisation should China follow through with the planned duties of around 80%.

China's commerce ministry is proposing to impose tariffs on barley imported from Australia after an 18-month investigation into claims the industry was "dumping" the product at a lower price that at home.

The move is also based on claims the Australian industry gains an advantage from government subsidies. The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, said he did not accept "that there is a prima facie case, let alone a conclusive case, to find dumping by or subsidy of Australian producers".

The two countries have been entangled in a messy dispute over Morrison's call for an independent international investigation into the origins and handling of the Covid-19 outbreak - a move Beijing had claimed was aimed against China.

The dispute intensified late last month when the Chinese ambassador, Cheng Jingye, had suggested that Chinese tourists and students may rethink their plans to visit Australia in the future "if the mood is going from bad to worse", while consumers may also decide against buying Australian wine and beef.

When asked on Monday whether the draft decision may be retribution for Australia pushing for the Covid-19 inquiry, Morrison said he did not believe that was the case.

"They certainly haven't raised it as connected to other issues. I would be extremely disappointed if it was," the prime minister told reporters in Canberra.

The value of Australian exports of barley to China had already fallen from $1.7bn in 2018 to $600m in 2019, Morrison noted.

He said trade was "incredibly important and beneficial for both countries". Australia respected anti-dumping regimes, he added, and had previously launched similar inquiries in relation to imports from China.

"Not all those decisions were well received," Morrison said. "They've been made on the merits and I would hope and expect China to do the same thing."

Australian grain industry groups have sounded the alarm over the potentially steep new tariffs, with China's commerce ministry expected to make a final decision by early next week.

The tariffs may include a dumping margin of up to 73.6% and a subsidy margin of up to 6.9% for barley imported from Australia, according to a statement issued by five groups including the Grains Industry Market Access Forum and the Australian Grain Exporters Council.

Australian barley exporters and the government were given 10 days to respond.

Birmingham said Australia would "reserve all rights" to defend the interest of its barley producers - a sign that the WTO may be asked to rule on the dispute.

"We will use the remaining time before China finalises its decision to continue our efforts to resolve this matter satisfactorily and will seek to uphold the integrity of our world-leading barley producers," he said.

Taking action through the WTO is not a quick fix, because such disputes can drag on for years and the top appellate body's functioning has been under strain as the US has blocked appointments.

The freeze had led Australia to work with China and the European Union in recent months to set up a temporary mechanism to rule on disputes, replicating the WTO's top umpire's functions.

China has been the third most active member in the WTO's dispute settlement system, having been involved in 65 disputes between 2002 and 2019. In two-thirds of those disputes, China was the respondent, according to analysis by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).

China had a high-profile victory late last year when an WTO arbitrator ruled China could impose tariffs on up to $3.6bn of American goods over a US failure to abide by anti-dumping rules.

But according to the CSIS ChinaPower Project, Beijing has a "mixed record of compliance with WTO dispute rulings" because in some cases it has found creative ways to demonstrate legal compliance "while sidestepping the spirit of certain decisions".

Labor called on the government "to show leadership on managing this important relationship at this difficult time".

"It's a difficult time for the barley growers now - many of them have already sowed their crops and now they've got this hanging over their heads, this ongoing dispute," the opposition's trade spokesperson, Madeleine King, told Sky News.

Mindful that China remains Australia's largest trading partner, the government hopes to avoid diplomatic tensions spilling over into the important economic relationship.

But some within Coalition ranks are pushing the government to take a harder line against China.

The Queensland Coalition MP George Christensen issued a threat on Sunday to try to summons the Chinese ambassador to answer questions before a trade-related parliamentary committee - a move that may inflame tensions but would likely fail due to diplomatic immunity.

Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, a NSW senator with a long record of taking a hard line on Beijing, told Guardian Australia last week the government should spell out a plan to "decouple from China" economically and even to seek compensation for the impact of the coronavirus.