block-time published-time 3.21am GMT

Japan's serious cases reache record levels

In Japan, the number of Covid-19 patients with serious symptoms has reached record levels, as the country battles a third wave of infections. The number of people with severe symptoms rose to 462 on Sunday, the health ministry said - an increase of 22 from the previous day. On Saturday, authorities reported a record 2,684 cases and 14 deaths in Japan, bringing the total to 146,214 cases and 2,123 deaths. The recent surge in infections prompted Tokyo and the central prefecture of Aichi to ask bars and restaurants to close early to prevent infections from spiraling out of control towards the end of the year. But the voluntary measure is due to end on 17 December, just as the bonenkai  season, when groups of colleagues traditionally eat and drink in large groups to “forget the year”, gets into full swing.

A staff member wearing protective mask disinfects a handrail in the Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium on 28 November 2020 in Kunigami, Japan. Photograph: Yuichi Yamazaki/Getty Images

To encourage compliance, the Tokyo metropolitan government will pay places that serve alcohol ¥400,000 yen ($3,800) if they close by 10 pm. The Aichi prefectural government is offering a similar financial incentive to businesses that close by 9 pm. Media reports said the sharp rise in serious cases is putting additional pressure on hospitals, particularly in the worst-affected cities of Tokyo and Osaka. The Asahi Shimbun said hospital beds for Covid-19 patients with severe symptoms are filling up at such a rate that health workers fear they may soon be unable to treat people with other illnesses that require urgent attention, including those needing emergency surgery. Just over half of the beds in Osaka reserved for Covid patients are occupied, along with 40% in Tokyo, the newspaper said. Occupancy rates for beds set aside for coronavirus patients have risen in 40 of Japan’s 47 prefectures over the past week, according to public broadcaster NHK.

block-time published-time 2.54am GMT

Swings and roundabouts in Australia:

Australians wasted more food during the Covid-19 pandemic, largely thanks to panic buying and food delivery services.

The annual bill for the country’s wasteful food choices skyrocketed to an estimated $10.3bn after the coronavirus reached our shores, according to Rabobank’s 2020 Food Waste Report.

That is an all-time annual high of $1,043 per household.

Before the pandemic, Australians were tracking towards $8.64bn in food waste , costing the average household about $170 less:

Related:  Australia’s food waste skyrockets amid Covid panic buying

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.54am GMT

block-time published-time 2.36am GMT

Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions fell 3% in the year to June due to the Covid-19 shutdown, the ongoing impact of drought and an influx of cheap solar and wind power, according to government figures.

The government said it meant Australia had beaten its international 2020 target – widely regarded among experts as an unambitious goal.

Experts said much of the fall in emissions over the year were unrelated to federal government action.

The quarterly update on emissions  released on Monday showed the pandemic had caused a sharp drop in transport emissions of 6.7% over the year to June as there were fewer cars on roads, and passenger flights dropped to almost nil in the early months of this year.

The Guardian’s Graham Readfearn  and Adam Morton  report:

Related:  Australia's emissions fell 3% in year to June amid Covid shutdown

block-time published-time 2.19am GMT

The world’s largest vaccine manufacturer by volume said Saturday it would apply for an emergency licence for a coronavirus vaccine within two weeks, and that confusion over the efficacy would not delay its distribution, AFP reports.

Serum Institute of India chief executive Adar Ponnawala also confirmed that the Pune-based giant would be able to produce at least 100 million doses a month from early 2021 of Covishield, which was developed by Astrazeneca and Oxford University.

Poonawalla said the institute was already producing 50-60 million doses a month and after January-February that will be scaled up to 100 million doses per month.

Serum Institute will concentrate first on production for India and the 150-plus countries in the Covax alliance that have agreed to work together on distributing the vaccine.

AstraZeneca and Oxford University have hailed its vaccine as being cheaper than rivals as well as easier to store and distribute because it can be handled at higher temperatures.

block-time published-time 1.52am GMT

Mexico reported 6,388 new confirmed coronavirus infections and 196 additional deaths on Sunday, health ministry data showed. The latest tally brought the official number of cases to 1,107,071 with a total death toll of 105,655. Health officials have said the real number of both is likely to be significantly higher due to little testing.

Cemetery workers wearing protective gear bury an unclaimed Covid-19 coronavirus victim, at the Municipal cemetery No. 13 in Tijuana, Baja California state, Mexico, on April 21, 2020. Photograph: Guillermo Arias/AFP/Getty Images

block-time published-time 1.27am GMT

Brazil has registered 51,922 additional coronavirus cases over the last 24 hours and 587 new deaths, the nation’s Health Ministry said on Saturday. The South American country has now registered 6,290,272 total confirmed coronavirus cases and 172,561 deaths.

block-time published-time 1.07am GMT

The United States passed four million cases of the coronavirus for November on Saturday, more than double the record 1.9 million cases set in October.

Airline and transportation authorities report Americans traveled by the millions  over the weekend, and amid Black Friday, retailers experienced large crowds and overnight lines despite government and merchant pleas to primarily shop online.

US surgeon general Jerome Adams acknowledged the surge on Sunday, adding that he expects the rise to continue. Covid-19 has now killed more than 265,000 people in America, with 1,192 new deaths from the virus reported on Saturday.

“I want to be straight with the American people, it’s gonna get worse over the next several weeks,” he told on Fox News Sunday. “The actions that we take in the next several days will determine how bad it is or whether or not we continue to flatten our curve.”

According to Covid-19 tracking data, more than 1.1 million people tested positive for the virus in the past week, an average of 170,000 people a day. On Saturday, public health officials reported a daily record of 91,635 hospitalisations:

Related:  US hits four million monthly Covid-19 cases as Fauci warns of holiday surge

block-time published-time 12.53am GMT

China reported 18 new Covid-19 cases on Nov. 29, up from 11 a day earlier, the national health authority said on Monday. The National Health Commission said in a statement 15 of the new cases were imported infections originating from overseas. It also reported three local infections in the Inner Mongolia region.

Fire fighters take part in an emergency drill against winter chemical hazards and accidents in Wuhai, north China’s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, 25 November, 2020. Photograph: Xinhua/REX/Shutterstock

The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, rose to 17 from 10 a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in mainland China now stands at 86,530, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.

block-time published-time 12.39am GMT

Coronavirus  infections in England have fallen by nearly a third since the country entered its second lockdown, swab tests on 105,000 volunteers have shown.

There was a 30% drop in cases across the country over almost a fortnight this month, with 96 people infected per 10,000 between 13-24 November, down from 132 per 10,000 between 26 October and 2 November.

The R number, which shows the level of transmission, is now 0.88. Any figure above 1 means the virus is growing exponentially.

The findings, from the government-funded React mass surveillance study, have been welcomed as proof that both the England-wide lockdown that began on 5 November , and the system of different tiered restrictions  that preceded it, succeeded in reducing transmission of the virus:

Related:  Covid infections in England down by nearly a third since second lockdown

block-time published-time 12.18am GMT

Dr Fauci also said the arrival of vaccines offers a “light at the end of the tunnel”, AP reports. This coming week, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices will meet with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to discuss a rollout of the vaccine, he said. He added that President-elect Joe Biden should focus on distributing vaccines in an “efficient and equitable way.” Fauci also said he planned to push the new administration for a rigorous testing program. Health care workers will likely be among the first to get the vaccine, with the first vaccinations happening before the end of December, followed by many more in January, February and March, he said. “So if we can hang together as a country and do these kinds of things to blunt these surges until we get a substantial proportion of the population vaccinated, we can get through this,” Fauci said.

block-time published-time 12.03am GMT

Fauci warns of 'surge upon surge' in US cases after Thanksgiving

Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told ABC’s “This Week” that the level of infection in the US. would not “all of a sudden turn around.” AP: “So clearly in the next few weeks, we’re going to have the same sort of thing. And perhaps even two or three weeks down the line... we may see a surge upon a surge,” he said. Fauci also appeared on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” where he made similar remarks, adding that it’s “not too late” for people traveling home after Thanksgiving to help curb the virus by wearing masks, staying distant from others and avoiding large groups of people.

‘’May The Fauci Be With You’’ Christmas Window, New York, USA, New York City, on 29 Nov 2020. Photograph: G Ronald Lopez/ZUMA Wire/REX/Shutterstock

The number of new Covid-19 cases reported in the United States topped 200,000 for the first time Friday, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Since January, when the first infections were reported in the US, the nation’s total number of cases has surpassed 13 million. More than 265,000 people have died.

Aside from the Thanksgiving holiday itself, anywhere from 800,000 to more than 1 million travellers made their way through US airport checkpoints on any day during the past week, according to Transportation Security Administration statistics.

That’s a far cry from the 2.3 to 2.6 million seen daily last year. But it far surpasses the number of travellers early in the pandemic, when daily totals fell below 100,000 on some spring days.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.04am GMT

block-time published-time 11.55pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.

My name is Helen Sullivan  and I’ll be bringing you the latest for the next few hours.

Get in touch on Twitter@helenrsullivan.

The US top infectious disease expert said Sunday that the country may see “surge upon a surge” of the coronavirus in the weeks after Thanksgiving, and he does not expect current recommendations around social distancing to be relaxed before Christmas.  Last week, the US, which has the highest number of cases and deaths of any country worldwide, reported more than 200,000 cases in a single day.

•Children in Iraq have started returning to school for the first time since late February, with social distancing measures in place and schools operating six days a week.•Lebanon will begin to slowly relax coronavirus restrictions imposed two weeks ago from Monday, as it looks to boost its struggling economy ahead of Christmas.•Turkey’s daily coronavirus death toll hit a record high for a seventh consecutive day on Sunday, with 185 fatalities in the last 24 hours.•The WHO delivered 15 ventilators to hospitals in Gaza on Sunday as the Palestinian territory suffered a rise in Covid-19 infections.•New York City’s state schools will start to reopen on 7 December, beginning with primary schools, the mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced on Sunday.•The top infectious disease expert in the US has warned that the country may record a “surge upon a surge” of the virus in coming weeks.•Greece announced 1,193 new coronavirus infections on Sunday, a significant decrease compared to recent figures and its lowest number since 2 November.•Doctors and nurses are protesting in Madrid, Spain against cuts that they say have left them struggling to cope with the Covid-19 pandemic.•France’shighest administrative court has ordered the government to loosen coronavirus rules allowing no more than 30 people at religious services, in the face of angry objections from church leaders.•There have been a further 12,155 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK, according to government data. This compares to 15,871 cases registered on Saturday.

Children in Iraq have started returning to school for the first time since late February, with social distancing measures in place and schools operating six days a week.

Lebanon will begin to slowly relax coronavirus restrictions imposed two weeks ago from Monday, as it looks to boost its struggling economy ahead of Christmas.

Turkey’s daily coronavirus death toll hit a record high for a seventh consecutive day on Sunday, with 185 fatalities in the last 24 hours.

The WHO delivered 15 ventilators to hospitals in Gaza on Sunday as the Palestinian territory suffered a rise in Covid-19 infections.

New York City’s state schools will start to reopen on 7 December, beginning with primary schools, the mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced on Sunday.

The top infectious disease expert in the US has warned that the country may record a “surge upon a surge” of the virus in coming weeks.

Greece announced 1,193 new coronavirus infections on Sunday, a significant decrease compared to recent figures and its lowest number since 2 November.

Doctors and nurses are protesting in Madrid, Spain against cuts that they say have left them struggling to cope with the Covid-19 pandemic.

France’shighest administrative court has ordered the government to loosen coronavirus rules allowing no more than 30 people at religious services, in the face of angry objections from church leaders.

There have been a further 12,155 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK, according to government data. This compares to 15,871 cases registered on Saturday.