block-time published-time 3.29pm GMT

The number of people in Ireland claiming temporary coronavirus-related jobless benefits fell for the first time since strict curbs were reintroduced in late December, dropping 0.8% week-on-week to just under 478,000, Reuters reports.

There are still 200,000 more Pandemic Unemployment Payment recipients than in December, when most building sites, shops and hospitality facilities shut. The government has said any re-opening from next month will be very gradual.

Social protections minister Heather Humphreys said the levelling-off was encouraging, noting that the highest number of people returning to work were in the construction, manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade sectors.

block-time published-time 3.10pm GMT

The Russian president Vladimir Putin has ordered a review of Russia's vaccines to be produced by 15 March, assessing their ability to protect people from new variants, the TASS news agency has cited the Kremlin as saying.

Russia has approved two vaccines, including Sputnik V, which has been deployed widely and also exported abroad.

block-time published-time 2.56pm GMT

Police in Rio de Janeiro have raided a series of illegal carnival parties taking place despite a prohibition designed to halt the spread of coronavirus.

Brazil is experiencing one of the worst moments of its epidemic, with the weekly average of deaths hitting a record high of 1,097 on Sunday. Nearly 240,000 people have now died here, second only to the US.

Authorities across Brazil have banned carnival festivities this year with Rio's official samba parades cancelled for the first time since they began in 1932.  One of Brazil's biggest samba stars, Neguinho da Beija-Flor, told one local newspaper that going ahead with carnival this year would have meant "parading on top of corpses".

But some have insisted on partying; including at Rio's sophisticated Jockey Club racetrack, which was raided on Saturday. Police caught 200 people attending an illicit carnival ball.  Black curtains and a metal fence had been erected to conceal the celebration.

Illegal shindigs have also been held in Rio's favelas. Hundreds of revellers reportedly turned out on Saturday night to see the pop star Belo perform on a stage in the Complexo da Maré, a sprawling community near Rio's international airport.

Floating all-night festivities have also been held on boats on Rio's Guanabara Bay at the foot of Sugarloaf Mountain.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.16pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.25pm GMT

Canadian universities are facing a financial crunch amid the Covid-19 crisis, as a drop in foreign enrolment and shuttered campuses dent the bottom line and the country's slow vaccine rollout weighs on the next school year.

Reuters reports:

Public universities have become increasingly dependent on foreign students, who pay far higher tuition than domestic students, to boost their profits. International enrolment jumped 45% over the last five years, advocacy group Universities Canada said, but it fell 2.1% this year amid coronavirus restrictions.

That decline, coupled with a sharp fall in revenues from campus services like conferences, dorms, food halls and parking, has hit the schools hard.

Canada's slow vaccine campaign - it currently lags well behind global peers on inoculations - and the emergence of new variants, could extend the slump in enrolment and campus revenues into the next year school, experts warn. [...]  It is still too soon to know the final impact of Covid-19 on the current year. The University of British Columbia, for example, is projecting a deficit of C$225 million ($177.2 million) this year compared with a C$60 million surplus budgeted pre-Covid-19. And the uncertainty will continue.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.15pm GMT

Israel  is considering a carrot and stick approach to persuade people to get vaccinated, including granting inoculated people access to restaurants, hotels and concerts, while forcing some vaccine refusers to get uncomfortable Covid tests every two days.

"Will you be eligible to enter gyms and cultural events, or will you be left behind?" tweeted  the health minister, Yuli Edelstein. "Go get vaccinated!"

Meanwhile, the health ministry has expanded a digital taskforce to combat anti-vax misinformation online, hoping to block false claims before they spread. Trackers now monitor social media daily, and in several languages.

Israel's vaccination campaign is being closely watched by other governments that see it as a test case for what lies ahead.

Although the country of 9 million has launched a world-leading vaccination drive, with more than 40% having received at least one dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech jab, a recent slowdown has concerned officials.

Full story here:

Related:  Israel battles Covid misinformation as vaccination drive slows

block-time published-time 2.07pm GMT

Spain plans to approve a new aid package to help companies hit by the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic by the end of March, the economy minister, Nadia Calviño, told reporters in Brussels on Monday.

The package will take the form of direct aid to viable companies that are struggling financially due to the pandemic, Calviño said.

The country's vaccination campaign meanwhile is showing its first signs of success, as infections in care homes are falling.

El País reports:

Spain's social service residences can breathe a little easier one year after being besieged by the coronavirus pandemic. The mass vaccination of care home [residents] - the first priority group of Spain's vaccination drive - is beginning to have an effect, with contagions falling.

According to the health ministry, last week 103 coronavirus outbreaks were reported in such residences, which include care homes for people with disabilities and senior residences. This is half the number recorded the previous week.

Data collected by El País shows that eight Spanish regions have registered this fall, which has been largely attributed to the vaccination campaign. Indeed, the regions - which are responsible for the vaccination drive and containing the coronavirus pandemic in their territories - have almost finished administering the second dose of the Covid vaccine  in care homes.

This has prompted some regional governments to consider easing restrictions to allow residents to receive visits and leave their centres. Experts, however, have called for caution.

Updated at 2.27pm GMT

2.02pm GMT

India could approve Russia's Sputnik V vaccine against Covid-19 within the next few weeks, the RIA news agency cited India's ambassador to Moscow as saying on Monday.

Small human trials of the Russian vaccine have been ongoing in India, conducted by India's Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd and supported by the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), Reuters reports.

According to Johns Hopkins University, India has recorded at least 155,732 Covid-19 deaths so far and over ten million infections.

The country of 1.36 billion people has administered about 8.2 million vaccines so far.

Despite India having the world's second highest number of overall infections and the fourth highest death toll, "life is almost back to normal", the Times of India reports.

"Shopping mall parking lots are full again. Stores are buzzing, and there are long lines for hair salons and restaurants."

A photograph taken with slow shutter speed shows people crowding a shopping market on the eve of Diwali festival in New Delhi, India, on 13 November 2020.Photograph: Rajat Gupta/EPAA health worker receives her second dose of Covid-19 vaccine at a government hospital in Hyderabad, India, on Monday.Photograph: Mahesh Kumar A/AP

Updated at 2.19pm GMT

1.34pm GMT

The US is facing a vaccine supply shortage as various states are gradually expanding eligibility for vaccinations, as the country is now administering up to an average of about 1.7m jabs a day.

The New York Times reports:

[S]tates are also steadily widening access beyond the most vulnerable groups, frontline health care workers and nursing home staff and residents. Now, some state officials say they are ready to administer thousands more shots every day - if they can get them.

Last week, California  announced that it would soon become one of just a handful of states to expand vaccine access to people of any age with underlying health issues or severe disabilities. But it has already used 72 percent of its doses and has shortages in some areas.

The mass vaccination site at Dodger Stadium shut over the weekend because Los Angeles had exhausted its supply, Mayor Eric Garcetti  said. He said the city received just 16,000 doses last week - roughly a day's worth.

[...]

Officials in Georgia say constrained supply is getting in the way of opening up eligibility. When the Atlanta Board of Education called on Gov. Brian Kemp earlier this month to start allowing teachers to be vaccinated, the governor said the state was not getting enough doses for residents who were already eligible.

Close to 700 doses of the Moderna Covid-19 Vaccine were set to be given out at Central Falls High School in Central Falls, Rhode Island, on 13 February, 2021. The city of Central Falls is currently offering Covid-19 vaccinations to any adult 18 years and older in contrast to the rest of the state which is following state guidelines and offering only to certain groups, frontline workers and people 75 years old and older. According to the US Census bureau, Central Falls is made up of over 66% Hispanic and almost 13% Black residents.Photograph: Joseph Prezioso/AFP/Getty Images

Updated at 2.04pm GMT

1.18pm GMT

Coronavirus case rates have fallen across nearly 95% of local authorities in the UK, new figures show.

PA Media reports:

Of the 380 local authorities areas across the UK, only 23 (6%) have seen a week-on-week increase in case rates compared with 354 (93%) where the rates have fallen.

The highest case rate in the UK was in Corby, Northamptonshire, with 277 new cases recorded in the seven days to February 10 - the equivalent of 383.6 cases per 100,000 people.

This was down from 468.0 cases per 100,000 people in the seven days to February 3.

The Scottish  government has met its target of offering the first dose of a coronavirus vaccine to everyone in the top four priority groups, Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said on Monday.

Scotland has recorded no deaths of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours for the first time since 18 January. Speaking during the Scottish government's daily briefing, Sturgeon said levels of uptake of the vaccine had so far been "significantly beyond" the target of 80% set out in the deployment plan.

Scotland's first minister Nicola Sturgeon at the Scottish Parliament in Holyrood, Edinburgh, Scotland.Photograph: Reuters

Updated at 2.04pm GMT

1.06pm GMT

Portugal's once-booming tourism sector suffered its worst results since the mid-1980s last year as the coronavirus pandemic and subsequent lockdowns worldwide grounded flights and kept visitors away, official data showed on Monday.

Reuters reports:

The National Statistics Institute (INE) said just under 4 million foreign tourists stayed in Portuguese hotels in 2020, a near 76% slump from a record 16.4 million in 2019, while the number of overnight stays by non-residents dropped 75% to 12.3 million, its lowest level since 1984.

Tourism played a crucial role in Portugal's recovery from the 2010 economic and debt crisis.

Overnight stays by Britons, one of the country's biggest foreign markets, fell by over 78% from a year ago. There was also a massive drop in the Chinese and American markets, decreasing 82% and 87% respectively.

Total hotel revenues dropped 66% last year, INE said, partly cushioned by local tourism.

The government has said it is preparing a support package for the sector, including delayed loan-repayment schedules, debt-to-equity instruments and grants after Portugal's hotel association warned a further 100,000 jobs could be lost in 2021 if it did not receive targeted support..

A country of just over 10 million people, Portugal fared better than other nations in Europe in the first wave of the pandemic, but 2021 brought a devastating surge in infections and deaths, forcing the imposition of a strict lockdown last month.

Nearly 15,321 people have died of Covid-19 in Portugal, with cumulative infections at 785,756.

Portugal on Saturday extended a suspension of flights to and from Brazil and Britain to March 1, with only humanitarian and repatriation flights allowed.

Updated at 2.05pm GMT

12.50pm GMT

Colombia's health ministry has recommended that incoming travellers adopt stricter measures to prevent importing new and more infectious coronavirus strains.

Colombia Reports writes:

Health minister Fernando Ruiz initially resisted stricter conditions, but changed his mind amid growing concerns over new strains from the United Kingdom, South Africa and Brazil that could reduce the effectiveness of vaccines.

The health ministry's chief epidemiologist, Julian Fernando Niño, said the minister issued a decree in which it, among other things "recommends, not obliges" the use of special N-95 facemasks for travelers older than 60 or suffering comorbidities.

Airlines must demand passengers wear facemasks before and during the flight, and after arriving in Colombia where they are mandatory in public spaces.

During flights, airlines are expected to request passengers to keep conversations to a minimum.

Colombia's first Covid-19 vaccines - a batch of 50,000 doses from Pfizer - will arrive in the Andean country on Monday afternoon, president Ivan Duque said.

The government is expecting to receive more than 5.7m doses of vaccines from different providers in February and March. It plans to administer its first dose on Saturday, and hopes to vaccinate 1 million Colombians in the first 30 days of the inoculation programme, Reuters reports.

Updated at 2.05pm GMT

12.43pm GMT

Cambodia reports first cases of UK virus variant

Cambodia reported on Monday its first cases of the highly contagious UK coronavirus variant, after three foreigners who arrived from overseas tested positive while in quarantine.

Reuters reports:

The south-east Asian nation of about 16 million people has reported among the lowest number of coronavirus cases, recording less than 500 infections and no deaths, although a rare cluster emerged in November. Most of its cases have been imported.

The health ministry said the cases with the UK variant were two people from India and one from China, all of whom had been isolated.

The B1.1.7 variant, first found in Britain, is highly transmissible and its discovery prompted a tightening of travel restrictions globally among countries keen to keep it at bay.

Cambodia's health ministry also warned the public against complacency, saying people "seem to forget the enormous risk of transmission" at mass gatherings like ceremonies, parties, weddings and festivals, where health measures were not being followed.

"Cambodians must not underestimate the potential for rapid transmission and severity caused by Covid-19 on the human body," it said.

"The high prevalence and severity of the disease can happen in our country at any time, any circumstance, anywhere if individuals do not protect themselves."

Devotees pray at a temple to mark the start of the lunar new year in Ta Khmao, Kandal province on 12 February.Photograph: Tang Chhin Sothy/AFP/Getty Images

Dr Takeshi Kasai,  the  WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, wrote in the Phnom Penh Post on Monday:

Although Cambodia has been relatively fortunate in so far preventing the large-scale community transmission seen elsewhere in our region, the impact here has still been devastating.

Many livelihoods have been lost, children have been unable to go to school, and life for many families continues to be difficult due to the ongoing uncertainty of the pandemic.

[...] the goal is to provide enough vaccine doses to cover at least 20 per cent of the population - including other priority groups, such as people with pre-existing illnesses which put them at higher risk of getting sick from Covid-19 - by the end of this year.

Updated at 2.06pm GMT

12.29pm GMT

France has scrapped a law banning workers from eating lunch at their desks in a bid to curb the spread of Covid-19, according to a decree published Sunday.

CNN reports:

The new rule temporarily overturns a longstanding law that protected what was once considered a sacrosanct part of the day, "la pause déjeuner" - the lunch break.

Employers were previously forbidden to allow their workers "to have their meals in the workplace", under the French labour code.

The temporary decree applies to offices with over 50 employees and where the layout of the canteen does not allow for social distancing.

People must be between one or two metres (around 6.6 feet) apart when not wearing a face mask.

Updated at 12.51pm GMT

12.22pm GMT

House sales in Spain tumbled 18% in 2020, the National Statistics Institute said on Monday, with tourist hotspots like the Balearic and Canary Islands hardest-hit.

Reuters reports:

A months-long home confinement last spring as well as restrictions on regional and global travel delivered hard blows to Spain's real estate market, which had only recently begun to recover from a crash in 2008.

Around 415,000 houses were sold in 2020, the lowest number in four years, while property transactions fell to lows not seen since 2011, though pent-up demand drove a modest recuperation in the second half. [...]  Regions blessed with beaches, plentiful natural space or a low population density like La Rioja, Galicia and Cantabria saw house sales soar between 37% and 28% in December compared with the same month in 2019, as buyers fled the cities seeking the green outdoors - and a lower infection risk.

The Balearics and Canary Islands, two archipelagos favoured by tourists and international investors, respectively lost 20% and 17% of their house sales volume in 2020 as local hospitality sectors suffered a coronavirus-induced paralysis.

The data also showed new-build, single-family properties equipped with terraces and gardens held up better against the downwards trend, as buyers sought to protect themselves from contagion and improve their quality of life in the face of remote working and future lockdowns.

Updated at 12.34pm GMT

12.10pm GMT

Malta's  nurses union has warned that its hospitals face a staffing crisis as the UK has enticed away a growing number of the island nation's foreign nurses with offers of better pay and conditions.

Reuters reports:

Some 600 third-country national nurses work in Malta, but roughly 150 have moved abroad or else handed in their resignation since December, union sources said.

"It is a crisis," the MUMN union said in a statement.

Other southern European countries have complained about nurse shortages during the coronavirus pandemic with wealthier northern nations able to offer better packages.

Foreign staffers, including Indians, Pakistanis  and Filipinos, make up around 15% of the total nursing staff in Malta, and the fact they speak English makes them especially attractive to the UK and Ireland.

Recruitment agencies in Britain and India have run Facebook adverts urging nurses in Malta to apply for jobs in the UK.

Sources in the nursing sector said nurses are being offered a basic starting salary of £32,000 or 36,000 ($44,500) compared with the current Malta salary of 18,722 for trainee nurses and 21,000 for qualified nurses.

But the nursing union said that better conditions rather than higher pay was proving especially attractive - particularly the offer of quicker routes to citizenship for them and their families.

Moreover, Britain is offering foreign nurses free accommodation for the first 12 months, MUMN said.

"The present nursing workforce is already working under a heavy workload with none of the wards... having the agreed nursing complement," nurses union leader Paul Pace said in a statement. "Losing 15% of the nursing workforce will literally bring the health service to a standstill."

Updated at 12.26pm GMT

11.42am GMT

UK  prime minister Boris Johnson has defended his administration's refusal to commit to an end of lockdown restrictions by May, saying the government did not want to be forced into a "reverse ferret" over lockdown easing.

Johnson said on Monday that his plan to lift the lockdown would be cautious but irreversible and would include the earliest possible dates for reopening the economy.

"We've got to be very prudent and what we want to see is progress that is cautious, but irreversible," Johnson told reporters.

Britain's prime minister Boris Johnson holds a vial of the AstraZeneca vaccine during a visit to a coronavirus vaccination centre at the Health and Well-being Centre in Orpington, south-east London, on Monday, 15 February, 2021.Photograph: Jeremy Selwyn/AP

Speaking to people waiting for a Covid-19 vaccine shot, Johnson said that the key question was working out to what extent a drop in infections was being caused by the vaccination programme.

"That's the data we're having to look at and really work out what is going on," Johnson said.

Asked about lifting lockdown, Johnson said: "The crucial thing is to make sure we just do sensible steps that are in proportion to where we are."

"What people don't want to see is you know just being forced into reverse - we don't want to do, you know, a reverse ferret - let's take it at the right pace," he said.

"Schools is the first priority obviously," he added.

Updated at 11.53am GMT

11.28am GMT

Intensified checks at Germany's borders meant to slow the spread of the pandemic are only temporary and a last resort, a German government spokesman said on Monday.

"A return to normal is in the interest of everyone involved," chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman, Steffen Seibert, told a regular news conference.

Since Sunday, stricter border regulations have been in place, stipulating that from the Czech Republic and the Austrian state of Tyrol only Germans and foreigners with a residence and residence permit in Germany are allowed to enter.

There are exceptions for health workers and truck drivers. All those entering the country have to present a negative Covid-19 test.

After the introduction of border controls, kilometre-long traffic jams formed at the crossings from the Czech Republic to Germany, public broadcaster Deutschlandfunk reports.

I'm Jedidajah Otte and will be taking over for the next few hours. As always, do feel free to get in touch with comments, updates or tips, you can reach me on Twitter@JedySays  or via email.

Updated at 12.20pm GMT

11.16am GMT

Cyprus and Israel sign vaccine travel deal

An agreement between Cyprus and Israel allowing vaccinated citizens of both countries to travel freely between them, has been hailed as a ground-breaking "first step" towards normalising tourism once flights resume, writes Helena Smith in Athens.

The accord, signed during a visit of the Cypriot president Nicos Anastasiades to Jerusalem on Sunday, is expected to go into effect in the next few weeks.

"When the world is in upheaval because of corona, the warm relations between our two countries are more important than ever," the Cypriot leader said.

Tourism is integral to the economy of both states with Israelis forming a large part of the market share in popular resorts such as Ayia Napa.

Under the agreement travellers in both directions will not be required to have undergone PCR tests nor will they have to endure periods of quarantine. "This is a first step in restoring the connectivity between the two countries," the Mediterranean island's transport minister, Yiannis Karousos, told the Cyprus news agency on Monday. "It is very important and will be combined with other support measures that will be announced soon."

Karousos did not rule out similar arrangements being made with other nations although he emphasised that the health ministry will "reserve the right to carry out tests on passengers" if deemed necessary.

Cyprus's deputy tourism minister, Savvas Perdios, described the accord as "a huge achievement".

More than 300,000 Israelis flew into the island in 2019, he said, with a further 40,000 arriving on cruise ships. "Israel is effectively one of the most important markets for us in terms of tourism and this agreement will certainly boost our economy," he said.

Last week Greece and Israel, also close allies, announced a similar agreement, with officials in Athens calling it vital for the revival of tourism already badly hit by the pandemic. With one in five Greeks working in the sector, it is regarded as the country's heavy industry.

Updated at 11.35am GMT

11.04am GMT

Russia has reported 14,207 new cases of coronavirus, including 1,818 in Moscow, taking the national infection tally to 4,086,090 since the pandemic began.

According to Reuters, the country's coronavirus taskforce said 394 people had died in the last 24 hours, pushing the official national death toll to 80,520.

10.45am GMT

Vietnam is to put 2 million people under new coronavirus restrictions from Tuesday after a new outbreak in a northern province of the country.

Residents of Hai Duong province have been ordered to stay at home for 15 days, state media reported, according to the French news agency AFP, as a nation widely praised for its handling of the pandemic struggles to extinguish a troubling new outbreak.

According to AFP:

Since late January, Vietnam has recorded 637 locally transmitted coronavirus cases, including 461 in Hai Duong province alone.

"People (in Hai Duong) are asked to stay at home and only go out when necessary, such as to buy food or medicine, or to work at factories or production establishments that are not being asked to close," said the official mouthpiece of Vietnam's health ministry, Suc Khoe Doi Song.

Gatherings of more than two people will be banned, while schools, bars, restaurants and karaoke parlours that were shut early ahead of the lunar new year holiday will remain closed.

When they must go outside their homes, residents are instructed to stay 2 metres from others.

Traffic through the province of 2 million will also be limited, state media reported, with only vehicles travelling on essential business allowed to enter.

In addition to the social distancing directive, Hai Duong authorities have asked that people quarantining at three centres in the province be relocated after infections recently began spreading at those sites, according to the government.

Updated at 11.07am GMT

10.36am GMT

Pakistan will allow private companies to import coronavirus vaccines and has exempted the vaccines from price caps in a divisive move that health experts fear will create vast inequalities in access, writes Shah Meer Baloch for the Guardian in Islamabad.

The country has been scrambling to secure vaccine supplies but so far only the Chinese-made Sinopharm treatment is being deployed. This month 500,000 doses were donated to Pakistan.

Like many other countries, Pakistan has been relying on the Gavi/World Health OrganizationCovax vaccine initiative , but has yet to receive any of the 17m doses it is expecting.

The cabinet granted permission for unlimited imports of coronavirus vaccines, which could be sold to customers. No price cap was set.

Fawad Chaudhry, a federal minister in the cabinet, said if the private sector was not included in the vaccination drive it would be impossible for Pakistan to vaccinate its population of more than 220 million.

Related: Pakistan to allow private firms to import coronavirus vaccines

Updated at 10.36am GMT

10.19am GMT

A British man has pleaded guilty to violating his coronavirus quaratine order in Singapore by sneaking out of his hotel room to visit his fiancée several times in another hotel room.

Nigel Skea, 52, admitted leaving his room three times on 21 September last year, one of which was to meet his Singaporean partner Agatha Maghesh Eyamalai, who was not in quarantine but had booked a room in the same hotel.

The couple will appear in court for sentencing on 26 February. They face a possible sentence of up to six years in jail and a fine of 10,000 Singapore dollars ($7,500) on each charge.

Nigel Skea, left, Agatha Maghesh Eyamalai, centre, and defence lawyer Dhillon Surinder Singh leave the State Courts in Singapore.Photograph: Annabelle Liang/AP

According to court documents, seen by the Associated Press, Skea climbed an emergency stairwell and entered a room that his Singaporean fiancée had booked. The two spent nine hours together.

The prosecution asked that Skea be jailed for four weeks and fined 1,000 Singapore dollars ($750).

Defence lawyer Dhillon Surinder Singh, who is also representing Eyamalai, asked for a fine or a one-week jail term "to give him a slap on a wrist".

Updated at 11.06am GMT

10.05am GMT

Malaysia has reported 2,176 new coronavirus cases, bringing the total number of infections from the pandemic to 266,445.

The health ministry also reported 10 new deaths, raising total fatalities to 975.

9.59am GMT

First guests check into UK's quarantine hotels

The first guests have checked into quarantine hotels in the UK, as tougher rules for international arrivals from 33 "red list" countries came into force on Monday morning. (The rule applies to people returning to Scotland from any destination.)

Passengers arriving at London's Heathrow airport were escorted by security personnel to coaches which took them to nearby hotels, the PA Media news agency reports.

Passengers arrive at London Heathrow on the first flight from one of 33 "red list" countries to which new mandatory coronavirus rules apply.Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA

A handful of people pulled up to the Radisson Blu Edwardian hotel shortly before 9am. One woman, who had flown in from Zambia, told PA: "I'm not happy, but you have to do it."

People required to enter the quarantine hotel programme must enter England or Scotland through a designated port and have pre-booked a package to stay at one of the government's managed facilities. No international flights are operating to Wales or Northern Ireland.

Updated at 10.17am GMT

9.47am GMT

Peru 's foreign minister has resigned amid uproar over government officials being secretly vaccinated against coronavirus before the country recently received 1m doses for health workers facing a resurgence in the pandemic, according to the Associated Press.

The president, Francisco Sagasti, confirmed that Elizabeth Astete had stepped down and told a local television channel that Peruvians should feel "outraged and angry about this situation that jeopardises the enormous effort of many Peruvians working on the frontline against Covid".

The scandal erupted on Thursday when the former president Martín Vizcarra, who was dismissed by Congress on 9 November  over a corruption allegation, confirmed a newspaper report that he and his wife had secretly received shots of a vaccine from the Chinese state pharmaceutical company Sinopharm in October. Pilar Mazzetti resigned as health minister on Friday after legislators accused her of concealing information.

Related: Peru's foreign minister resigns in scandal over early vaccination of officials

Updated at 10.11am GMT

9.41am GMT

People aged 65 and over in South Korea will not receive the Oxford/AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine, the Korea disease control and prevention agency has said.

The announcement reverses an earlier decision and came as the KDCA scaled back targets in its vaccination programme as a result of a delay to shipments from the Covax vaccine-sharing scheme, according to the Reuters news agency.

South Korea had said it would complete vaccinations on 1.3 million people by the first quarter of this year with AstraZeneca shots, but it slashed the target sharply to 750,000.

KDCA's director, Jeong Eun-kyeong, insisted that South Korea's plan to reach herd immunity by November remained intact, telling reporters:

We do not believe the adjustments in inoculations in February and March will impact our goal of herd immunity by November.

South Korea also said it would delay inoculation of elderly people using the AstraZeneca vaccine until more efficacy data becomes available.

Updated at 9.54am GMT

9.08am GMT

World Health Organization Covid-19 special envoy expects 'some sort' of vaccine passports

The World Health Organization special envoy for the global Covid-19 response has said he expects "some sort" of vaccine passport will be introduced in future.

Speaking on Sky News on Monday morning, David Nabarro said:

I am absolutely certain in the next few months we will get a lot of movement and what are the conditions around which people are easily able to move from place to place, so some sort of vaccine certificate no doubt will be important.

Nabarro said countries would only be able to form "bubbles" for travel purposes if they both had the same standards of coronavirus restrictions and similar levels of vaccination uptake. Transparency over Covid-19 measures between countries was key to keeping an eye out for new variants of the virus, he said.

That's going to be with us for the foreseeable future, because even when much higher proportions of the population are vaccinated, there are still going to be these worrying moments when perhaps a version of the virus appears that can break through the defences provided by the vaccine.

Vaccine passports are among the most controversial potential measures that have been mooted to contain the spread of coronavirus in the future, with apparent disagreements within the UK government over their implementation. Cabinet ministers have several times contradicted each other over whether there are plans to introduce the documents, and whether they will be in use only for international travel or also for civil society.

Updated at 9.54am GMT

8.46am GMT

A plane has landed in Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe, carrying the southern African country's first consignment of coronavirus vaccines, 200,000 doses donated by China.

A further 600,000 Chinese-made Sinopharm vaccines - this time paid for - are expected to arrive in early March.

Chinese Sinopharm vaccines arriving at Robert Mugabe airport in Harare, Zimbabwe.Photograph: Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi/AP

Constantino Chiwenga, the vice-president of Zimbabwe, who was with a delegation who came to meet the vaccines at Robert Mugabe airport, said frontline health workers would be the first to be vaccinated.

This is a timely donation... our people have suffered from this pandemic. The vaccine offers the possibility that our people who have borne the brunt of the economic ravages of the pandemic might finally turn a new page.

Zimbabwe has set aside $100m for vaccine procurement and is looking to buy 20 million doses in efforts to immunise about 60% of its population and achieve herd immunity, Reuters reports.

Updated at 9.20am GMT

8.38am GMT

Matt Hancock, the UK health secretary, is doing the customary early morning ministerial parade of London 's broadcast studios today, answering questions on the latest lines that the government has managed to brief into the national papers.

The vaccination of 15 million people has been an achievement of which the government is particularly proud and, after so many missteps to date in handling the coronavirus crisis, will be wanting to tout for all its worth.

On BBC Breakfast, Hancock gave a breakdown of what percentage of people in each of the top four priority groups had been vaccinated, adding that he believed that everyone in those groups had at least been offered the vaccine. He said:

The take-up is incredibly important - it's over 90% among the over 70s as a whole, so more than nine in 10 of everybody aged over 70 in the country has taken up that offer.

It is higher in some groups, so among the 75- to 79-year-olds, over 97% have taken up the offer and we obviously want to keep that proportion going up so anybody who hasn't yet been able to be vaccinated for whatever reason... then please do come forward.

Hancock said the figure among healthcare staff was "a little bit lower than 90%", with "around two-thirds" of social care staff jabbed and "four-fifths" of NHS staff receiving their first dose. In care home residents, among those eligible to be vaccinated, the percentage who had been given a jab was "over 90%".

The challenge there is that there are some care homes that have recently had an outbreak and you can't vaccinate people within 28 days of a positive test, so there are some people who have recently tested positive who aren't able to be vaccinated yet who we will make sure we go back to in the weeks to come to make sure they get their jab when they are clinically eligible for it.

There is still more work to do. Everyone eligible has been offered a [jab] and we've visited all of the elderly care homes in the country but clearly... there is still more to do to increase take-up.

Updated at 8.50am GMT

8.24am GMT

Not made it out to the shops this morning? Here is the front page of today's print edition of the Guardian, which is leading with a story about how ministers are resisting demands from Tory backbenchers to end the coronavirus lockdown by May.

Tomorrow's @Guardian  : No 10 resists Tory demands for end to lockdown by May  Read our story, by @peterwalker99 , @iansample  and @RichardA , here: https://t.co/Hj2eHjvC5G #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/pDWdUb7ZDN

- Richard Preston (@richardpreston_) February 14, 2021

Our reporters write:

Downing Street is pushing back against pressure from Conservative MPs to set a swift timetable to end the lockdown in England after meeting its first major vaccination target , saying any hastiness in reopening could risk undoing the progress made in combating the coronavirus pandemic.

In a sign of the likely battle ahead in the coming weeks, ministers and officials flatly ruled out a demand from Tory backbenchers for all Covid restrictions to be over by the start of May, saying any plan needed to be both more cautious and decided step by step.

But clamour for a more fixed schedule seems set to increase after Boris Johnson  announced the government had reached its target of offering at least a first vaccination to the top four most vulnerable groups in England by Monday.

Related: Ministers flatly reject Tory demands to end Covid controls by May

Most of our rivals are leading with more cheerful lines about a potential end to lockdown, or hailing the progress in the UK's vaccination programme.

The front page of tomorrow's Daily Telegraph: 'Meet grandchildren outdoors in March' #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/jxr3uTZrVY

- The Telegraph (@Telegraph) February 14, 2021

The Telegraph suggests that its readers will be able to meet their grandchildren - outdoors, mind - again as early as next month. It reports:

In the wake of vaccine success - which yesterday allowed the Government to announce that everyone in England in the four most vulnerable categories has now been offered the jab - ministers are looking to begin lifting restrictions from March 8.

Schools will be the first to return, with people also allowed to meet friends and family from other households outdoors, on a one-to-one basis.

Monday's Times: Johnson eyes Easter escape #TomorrowsPapersToday #TheTimes #Times pic.twitter.com/9tY0KPD7pu

- Tomorrows Papers Today (@TmorrowsPapers) February 14, 2021

The Times reports that ministers are looking at plans to allow people to go away on self-catering breaks by the time the Easter holidays arrive. It says:

The Times has been told that under one ambitious timeline being considered by the government families who live in the same household could be allowed to go on breaks together from April.

Monday's Daily MAIL: "Now It's Ready, Steady Shop!" #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/0uytehMS6R

- Allie Hodgkins-Brown (@AllieHBNews) February 14, 2021

According to the Daily Mail, shops could reopen within weeks, adding that "plans to ease lockdown were boosted yesterday by figures showing the dramatic impact vaccines are already having."

Monday's front page: The Road To Freedom. #tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/cafxRDqRi3 pic.twitter.com/hD9i5MErVZ

- Daily Mirror (@DailyMirror) February 14, 2021

The Mirror doesn't mince its words. It claims we're on the "road to freedom."

Boris Johnson today begins plotting a route out, and if all over-50s have the jab by then hospitality may restart.

He reveals his plan next week. With 15 million now vaccinated, the PM said: "We'll make clear our roadmap."

All in all it looks like there some hard briefing by Downing Street yesterday around the subject of when coronavirus lockdowns will end. The government appears to be in an increasingly difficult position with maintaining the strict curbs that its scientific advisers insist are necessary, in the face of widespread opposition from the Tory backbenches and some sections of the public.

8.07am GMT

It is too early to say whether the UK 's mass vaccination programme has had an impact on Covid-related deaths, the health secretary has said.

Matt Hancock said data was not yet available to suggest what the impact of the vaccination programme had been. Speaking on Sky News on Monday morning, the health secretary said:

The signs are that, thankfully, the number of deaths is falling and has been coming down for a few weeks. It is too early to say whether that is directly due to the vaccination programme yet.

It is too early to be able to measure the direct impact but of course we are looking at that and we can see overall that the number of cases is coming down sharply, the number in hospitals is coming down but it is still too high - at the latest count there were 23,000 people in hospital with Covid.

Hancock said the Government was looking to the next priority groups after meeting its target of vaccinating the top four groups by 15 February.

There is no rest for the wicked and we are straight on to the next groups, so the letters have already been sent to over a million over 65-year-olds asking them to come forward, and also the next group after that is those who have underlying health conditions and are carers.

There is a huge programme under way rolling out to invite the next group of people to be vaccinated and, at the same time, from next month we have the second jabs of all the people who have come since January to make sure they happen on time, because they have to be within a specific 12-week time period.

So there is still a huge amount of work to do but we have managed to vaccinate those who are most vulnerable.

7.59am GMT

Good morning, this is Damien Gayle picking up the blog in London, with the latest coronavirus-related news and updates from this side of the world.

If you have any comments, tips or suggestions for coverage then feel free to drop me a line, either via email to damien.gayle@theguardian.com , or via Twitter direct message to @damiengayle.

7.06am GMT

Summary

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•All UK nationals or residents arriving back in England from high-risk countries will begin checking into government-designated accommodation on Monday as the hotel quarantine regime to prevent the spread of new coronavirus cases begins.People returning to England from 33 "red list" countries - comprised of hotspots with Covid-19 variants in circulation - will be required to quarantine in hotels for 10 days.•UK variant hits New Zealand. Aucklanders awoke on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19. The prime minister said genomic testing had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country.•In the US, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily Covid case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer.•US daily Covid cases dropped below 100,000. Average daily new coronavirus cases in the US have dipped below 100,000 for the first time in months, but experts cautioned on Sunday that infections remain high and precautions to slow the pandemic must remain in place.•First vaccine doses arrive in Australia. Australia's coronavirus vaccine rollout will begin next week after the first doses of the Pfizer jab arrived in Sydney, AAP reports. More than 142,000 doses are being taken to a secure location and batches will be assessed for damage and quality in the coming days.•First vaccine doses arrive in New Zealand. Jacinda Ardern said the first vaccine doses arrived in the country on Monday morning. After being checked for quality assurance, inoculations will begin on Saturday, starting with border workers.•Japan to start vaccinations on Wednesday. Japanese prime minister Yoshide Suga announced on Monday that that coronavirus vaccinations will start on Wednesday this week.•South Korea to exclude people over 65 from AstraZeneca vaccines. South Korea will initially exclude people aged 65 years and older from inoculation with AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine because of a lack of data proving its efficacy in the elderly, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Monday.•Pfizer/BioNTech jab gives 94% protection, Israeli study suggests. An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider.•Australia suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases.•Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five.•Lebanonhas started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people.•Brazilhas confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil.•Rwandahas started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout.•There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data , and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings.•China reported 9 new Covid-19 cases vs 7 a day earlier. China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday. Of the cases, eight were imported infections originating overseas, while one case was recorded in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, the National Health Commission said in a statement.

All UK nationals or residents arriving back in England from high-risk countries will begin checking into government-designated accommodation on Monday as the hotel quarantine regime to prevent the spread of new coronavirus cases begins.People returning to England from 33 "red list" countries - comprised of hotspots with Covid-19 variants in circulation - will be required to quarantine in hotels for 10 days.

UK variant hits New Zealand. Aucklanders awoke on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19. The prime minister said genomic testing had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country.

In the US, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily Covid case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer.

US daily Covid cases dropped below 100,000. Average daily new coronavirus cases in the US have dipped below 100,000 for the first time in months, but experts cautioned on Sunday that infections remain high and precautions to slow the pandemic must remain in place.

First vaccine doses arrive in Australia. Australia's coronavirus vaccine rollout will begin next week after the first doses of the Pfizer jab arrived in Sydney, AAP reports. More than 142,000 doses are being taken to a secure location and batches will be assessed for damage and quality in the coming days.

First vaccine doses arrive in New Zealand. Jacinda Ardern said the first vaccine doses arrived in the country on Monday morning. After being checked for quality assurance, inoculations will begin on Saturday, starting with border workers.

Japan to start vaccinations on Wednesday. Japanese prime minister Yoshide Suga announced on Monday that that coronavirus vaccinations will start on Wednesday this week.

South Korea to exclude people over 65 from AstraZeneca vaccines. South Korea will initially exclude people aged 65 years and older from inoculation with AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine because of a lack of data proving its efficacy in the elderly, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Monday.

Pfizer/BioNTech jab gives 94% protection, Israeli study suggests. An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider.

Australia suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases.

Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five.

Lebanonhas started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people.

Brazilhas confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil.

Rwandahas started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout.

There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data , and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings.

China reported 9 new Covid-19 cases vs 7 a day earlier. China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday. Of the cases, eight were imported infections originating overseas, while one case was recorded in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, the National Health Commission said in a statement.

7.03am GMT

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan, and over to my colleagues in London.

Speaking of living in a confined space for long periods of time - this is quite the yarn:

Related: Four years at sea, now just metres from shore: 'living hell' of stranded UAE ship

6.22am GMT

In England, Middlesbrough council withheld potentially embarrassing details of how - against the advice of its own public health expert - it ordered £24,000 worth of Covid tests that it could not use, emails reveal.

The independent mayor of Middlesbrough, Andy Preston, spent £24,000 on pinprick antibody tests, disregarding concerns voiced by the region's director of public health, according to documents released under Freedom of Information laws:

Related: Middlesborough council withheld details of outlay on unusable Covid tests

6.04am GMT

The UK's equality watchdog is facing demands to investigate claims that ministers have sidelined key gender laws in their response to the Covid pandemic.

In the wake of a damning report from MPs that said the UK risked turning back the clock on gender equality , a coalition of organisations including the Trades Union Congress (TUC), Amnesty International, Save the Children and the Fawcett Society have accused the government of taking decisions that are deepening inequalities.

Two dozen signatories, including leading gender equality experts, signed a letter to the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) that argues that the government has failed in its duty to consider the impact of key policies on women and other groups protected under the Equality Act:

Related: EHRC urged to investigate ministers for 'equality failures' in Covid response

5.47am GMT

Japan to start vaccinations on Wednesday - reports

NHK  reports that Japanese prime minister Yoshide Suga has announced that coronavirus vaccinations will start on Wednesday this week.

From NHK:

Japanese Prime Minister Suga Yoshihide says coronavirus vaccinations will begin on Wednesday, starting with medical workers.

Suga spoke at a Lower House budget committee meeting on Monday. He said the government will do its utmost to deliver safe and effective vaccines to people as quickly as possible.

The government gave the greenlight to the vaccine developed by the US pharmaceutical company Pfizer on Sunday.

5.35am GMT

Here is the full story on Australia's vaccine rollout:

Australia will begin its Covid-19 vaccine rollout on Monday 22 February after 142,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine arrived on Monday the 15th.

"The eagle has landed," declared the health minister, Greg Hunt, ending weeks of doubt as to whether supply delays  could blow out the government's timeline to begin vaccinations in late February.

Of the first Pfizer shipment, 62,000 doses will be set aside as second doses in case of supply interruptions.

Of the first 80,000 doses available, 30,000 will be administered by the federal government in aged care, with the remaining 50,000 to be administered by state and territory governments to hotel quarantine and other frontline workers.

The first 1.4 million vaccine recipients will be quarantine and border workers, frontline healthcare workers, aged care and disability staff and residents - who will be given either the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccines.

Related: Australia's Covid vaccine rollout to begin next Monday as first Pfizer shipment arrives

Updated at 5.35am GMT

5.26am GMT

South Korea to exclude people over 65 from AstraZeneca vaccines

Reuters: South Korea will initially exclude people aged 65 years and older from inoculation with AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine because of a lack of data proving its efficacy in the elderly, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Monday. The decision threatens to derail the country's vaccination plans, which had called for healthcare workers and the elderly to be among the first to receive vaccinations starting on 26 February.

5.11am GMT

African countries may suffer in the global rush for vaccines because they are unable to gather statistics that reveal the true extent of the spread of Covid among their populations, epidemiologists and other experts fear.

According to data from Johns Hopkins university , there have been 3.7m confirmed cases in Africa, and the landmark figure of 100,000 confirmed deaths is likely to be reached within days.

A series of studies has raised fears that the official figures are a significant underestimate, raising the possibility that Africa  may not be seen as a priority for scarce global vaccine supplies despite the urgent need.

Many African countries are unable to afford mass testing and lack capacity to collect reliable data on cases and deaths, especially in remote areas. Stigma attached to the disease, a lack of information and victims' inability to either reach or pay for health facilities may also reduce reporting.

The World Health Organization has said the "unique socio-ecological make-up in a number of African countries means a slower rate of transmission, and fewer severe cases as compared to the hardest hit countries":

Related: Lack of Covid data may leave African countries behind in vaccine rush

4.42am GMT

Here is the full story on hotel quarantine starting in England:

All UK nationals or residents arriving back in England from high-risk countries will begin checking into government-designated accommodation on Monday as the hotel quarantine regime to prevent the spread of new coronavirus cases begins.

People returning to England from 33 "red list" countries  - comprised of hotspots with Covid-19 variants in circulation - will be required to quarantine in hotels for 10 days.

Anyone who has been in one of the high-risk destinations will have to enter England through a designated port and have pre-booked a quarantine package to stay at one of the government's managed quarantine facilities.

Hotel quarantine - too little too late? Politics Weekly podcastRead more

The government has struck deals with 16 hotels so far, providing 4,963 rooms, and a further 58,000 rooms are on standby, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said on Sunday.

Travellers arriving from Monday onwards that have not visited a red list country must still quarantine for 10 days at home and complete two mandatory Covid-19 tests on the second and eighth day after arriving:

Related: England hotel quarantine begins for arrivals from high-risk countries

3.48am GMT

First vaccine doses arrive in New Zealand

An update from New Zealand, where Jacinda Ardern is speaking at a press conference alongside Dr Ashley Bloomfield, the director general of health, after a cabinet meeting. The Guardian's Helen Livingstone reports: The prime minister says the first vaccine doses arrived in the country this morning. After being checked for quality assurance, inoculations will begin on Saturday, starting with border workers.

"This will be the largest full-scale vaccination campaign in this country's history," she says.

Bloomfield says it is encouraging that there were no further cases of Covid-19 in the community today, after the three which were reported on Sunday, all members of the same family, triggering the current lockdown in Auckland.

Investigations into the source of the family's infection are focusing on the mother and daughter as serology testing has indicated the father was more recently infected, Bloomfield says.

3.36am GMT

More on Australia's vaccine rollout:

Prime Minister Scott Morrison will receive the Pfizer vaccine early in the rollout in a bid to boost public confidence in the jab.

Two doses of the vaccine are needed, with a 21 day gap in between.

Mr Hunt said the first vials of locally made doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine were also being manufactured.

The vaccine is awaiting final regulatory approval from the Therapeutic Goods Administration.

Local manufacturing of the University of Oxford developed vaccine has been under way since late last year at biotechnology company CSL's manufacturing facility in Victoria.

3.28am GMT

First vaccine doses arrive in Australia

Australia's coronavirus vaccine rollout will begin next week after the first doses of the Pfizer jab arrived in Sydney, AAP reports.

"The eagle has landed," Health Minister Greg Hunt told reporters in Canberra on Monday.

More than 142,000 doses are being taken to a secure location and batches will be assessed for damage and quality in the coming days.

Mr Hunt said 60% of the shipment - 50,000 doses - would be given to the states to begin the process of vaccinating hotel quarantine staff, frontline health workers, and aged care workers and residents.

Hotel quarantine workers are considered the highest priority because they pose the greatest risk of spreading the virus to the community.

The federal government will have about 30,000 doses available for aged care facilities.

The government expects about 60,000 doses to have been administered by the end of February.

3.26am GMT

More on the UK hotel quarantine measures, from AFP:

"The rules coming into force today will bolster the quarantine system and provide another layer of security against new variants at the border," said Health Secretary Matt Hancock, adding that they would also protect the national vaccination programme as the country worked "towards restoring normal life".

The 11-night quarantine will cost people £1,750 ($2,420 or 2,000) and includes transport, food, accommodation and security costs, as well as other essential services and testing.

Passengers must have a negative Covid-19 test result from within three days of travel, and book and pay for the package before setting off for Britain.

They will then take further tests on day two and eight of their stays.

The hotel occupants will only be able to leave their rooms in "very limited circumstances", with exercise among them but requiring "special permission" from staff or security.

Anyone refusing to take tests risks a fine of between £1,000 and £2,000, while those who do not self-isolate could have to pay between £5,000 and £10,000.

A limited list of exemptions from the measures include hauliers travelling from Portugal, defence personnel, visiting forces, government contractors and diplomatic missions.

3.17am GMT

UK rolls out hotel quarantine for 'high risk' country returnees

The UK government will on Monday introduce mandatory hotel quarantine rules for arrivals from dozens of countries deemed "high risk" for coronavirus variants, as it tries to stop new strains spreading, AFP reports.

The new policy requires all UK citizens and permanent residents entering England from 33 countries on a wider travel ban list to self-isolate in approved hotels for 10 days and take several Covid-19 tests.

Other visitors from the countries currently on the so-called "red list", which includes all South American nations, South Africa and Portugal, are currently barred from visiting under lockdown rules.

Arrivals found to have given false information about being in one of the countries 10 days before travel could receive up to 10 years in prison - which has drawn criticism for being excessive.

The government says it has signed contracts with 16 hotels so far, securing nearly 5,000 rooms near English airports, with a further 58,000 rooms on standby.

3.13am GMT

Mexico's health ministry on Sunday reported 4,099 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the country and 436 more deaths, bringing its total to 1,992,794 infections and 174,207 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said.

2.41am GMT

In case you missed this earlier: Brazil has confirmed cases of the UK variant of the novel coronavirus in two states and in the federal district of Brasília, according to a statement from the health ministry on Sunday, Reuters reports. The government said it has not yet confirmed cases of the South African variant. Two of the confirmed cases of the UK variant were reported in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, according to the state's health department on Friday. In that statement, Goiás authorities said the two people who have caught the UK variant live on the outskirts of the federal capital Brasília. The World Health Organization has said the UK variant has now been found in more than 70 countries. Brazil has the world's highest number of coronavirus deaths after the United States and more than 9.8 million confirmed cases. A Brazilian variant of the virus is circulating in 10 states, the health ministry said. The two people in Goiás who caught the UK variant had contact with a relative who lives in England, traveled to Brazil for the holidays and had been diagnosed with Covid-19, the Goiás health department said. A genomic sequencing of the virus confirmed infection by the UK variant in Goiás.

Updated at 2.41am GMT

2.33am GMT

More on the upcoming G7, via Reuters.

"President Biden will also discuss the need to make investments to strengthen our collective competitiveness and the importance of updating global rules to tackle economic challenges such as those posed by China," the White House said. Trump challenged China over its trade policies by imposing punishing tariffs, an instrument he also used on traditional allies, drawing criticism for not taking a more unified approach with US friends to stand up to Beijing on issues such as intellectual property theft and other economic practices. Domestically, Biden is pressing Congress to pass a $1.9tn stimulus package to boost the US economy and provide relief for those suffering from the pandemic. The White House said he would discuss his economic agenda with G7 counterparts and encourage them and all industrialized countries to maintain "economic support for the recovery" and other collective measures. Climate change would also be on the agenda. US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen spoke to her G7 counterparts last week and called for continued fiscal support to secure the economic recovery.

2.11am GMT

US President Joe Biden will hold his first event with other leaders from the Group of Seven nations in a virtual meeting on Friday to discuss the coronavirus pandemic, the world economy and dealing with China, the White House said on Sunday, Reuters reports. The meeting is the first by top leaders from the G7 group of rich democracies since April, it said. "This virtual engagement with leaders of the world*s leading democratic market economies will provide an opportunity for President Biden to discuss plans to defeat the Covid-19 pandemic, and rebuild the global economy," the White House said in a statement. The White House said Biden would focus his remarks on a global response to Covid-19 vaccine production and distribution as well as "continued efforts to mobilise and cooperate against the threat of emerging infectious diseases by building country capacity and establishing health security financing." Biden, a Democrat who took over from Republican former President Donald Trump on Jan. 20, has sought to project a message of re-engagement with the world and with global institutions after four years of his predecessor's "America First" mantra. Trump withdrew the United States from the World Health Organization and the Paris climate accord and largely scoffed at multilateral organisations and groups. Biden brought the United States back into the WHO and rejoined the Paris accord and has signalled a desire to work with allies in confronting China on a host of thorny issues.

1.39am GMT

China reports 9 new Covid-19 cases vs 7 a day earlier

China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday. Reuters: Of the cases, eight were imported infections originating overseas, while one case was recorded in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, the National Health Commission said in a statement. New asymptomatic infections, which China does not classify as confirmed Covid-19 cases, fell to 10 from 17 a day earlier.

China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday.Photograph: Ng Han Guan/AP

China saw a resurgence of the disease in January, when a new cluster emerged in Hebei and later took hold in northeastern Heilongjiang and Jilin provinces, in the country's worst outbreak since March. Authorities in these provinces introduced lockdowns, travel curbs and mass testing in a bid to contain the disease. Data from recent days suggests that China has been able to avoid another full-blown Covid-19 crisis over the Lunar New Year Holiday. As of Sunday, mainland China had 89,772 confirmed coronavirus cases, the health authority said. The COVID-19 death toll remained at 4,636.

1.25am GMT

An influential group of British MPs has urged the government to spell out the impact its lockdown-easing measures would have on economic growth and the number of coronavirus infections.

Calling for evidence to be published alongside the government's reopening road map to be announced on 22 February, the Treasury select committee said it would help the public to better understand the implications of restrictions and the costs and benefits of making changes.

The UK has given more than 15m people  their first doses of Covid-19 vaccines, raising hopes that movement restrictions will be eased within weeks as the number of new infections and hospital admissions gradually fall.

Ministers have so far declined, however, to give details about the criteria for reopening the economy, to the alarm of business leaders. Some company bosses have said more transparency would help them to plan ahead, as firms run short of cash after months of restrictions on trade.

In an intervention as Boris Johnson prepares to announce which restrictions will be relaxed first, the committee said the lack of any official government economic analysis on the controls had been disappointing, especially as parliament needed to scrutinise the decision.

Jasper Jolly  and Richard Partington  report:

Related: MPs urge government to spell out economic and health impacts of easing lockdown

1.04am GMT

Here is a joyful break from pandemic news:

12.51am GMT

Pfizer/BioNTech jab gives 94% protection, Israeli study suggests

An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider.

Clalit Health Services said that its researchers tested 600,000 patients who had received the recommended two doses of the US-GermanPfizer/BioNTech vaccine and the same number of people who had not been inoculated.

"There was a 94% reduction in the rate of symptomatic infection and a 92 percent decrease in the rate of serious illness compared to 600,000 similar (subjects) who were not vaccinated," Clalit said in a Hebrew-language statement reported by Reuters.

"Vaccine efficacy is maintained in all age groups, including those aged 70+," it added.

Israel's vaccine drive has seen 3.8 million people receive a first dose, while 2.4 million have also received a second shot.

12.50am GMT

US daily Covid cases drop below 100,000

Average daily new coronavirus cases in the US have dipped below 100,000 for the first time in months, but experts cautioned on Sunday that infections remain high and precautions to slow the pandemic must remain in place, the Associated press reports.

The seven-day rolling average of new infections was well above 200,000 for much of December and went to roughly 250,000 in January, according to Johns Hopkins University. That average dropped below 100,000 on Friday for the first time since 4 November. It stayed below 100,000 on Saturday.

"We are still at about 100,000 cases a day," Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told NBC's Meet the Press. "We are still at around 1,500 to 3,500 deaths per day. The cases are more than two-and-a-half-fold times what we saw over the summer.

"It's encouraging to see these trends coming down, but they're coming down from an extraordinarily high place."

She added that new variants, including one first detected in the UK that appears to be more transmissible and has already been recorded in more than 30 states, will likely lead to more cases and more deaths:

Related: Daily new Covid cases in US dip below 100,000 for first time in months

12.36am GMT

Australia suspends quarantine-free travel with New Zealand

Australia has suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases.

Australia's chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, convened an urgent meeting late on Sunday and it was decided that all flights originating in New Zealand would be classified as "Red Zone" flights for an initial period of 72 hours from Monday, Reuters reports.

"As a result of this, all people arriving on such flights originating within this three-day period will need to go into 14 days of supervised hotel quarantine," Australia's Department of Health said on its website.

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday that genomic sequencing showed the new cases were the highly transmissible UK variant.

"We were absolutely right to make the decision to be extra cautious because we assumed it was going to be one of the more transmissible variants," Ardern said in a Facebook Live post.

12.20am GMT

UK variant hits New Zealand

Aucklanders are waking up on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19, AAP reports.

The prime minister said genomic testing  had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country, according to Yahoo News.

Those cases - from one Auckland family - mean 1.6 million Kiwis face bans on non-essential movement until midnight on Wednesday as part of alert level three restrictions.

The lockdown is the second time Auckland has undergone the emergency measures  since last year's more stringent 51-day nationwide lockdown  which helped New Zealand eliminate the virus.

The rest of New Zealand  has been placed at alert level two, which mandates social distancing, caps on gathering and increases mask wearing.

It is not yet clear whether the lockdown will extend beyond midnight on Wednesday.

That's because health authorities are yet to gain a full picture of the virus's spread.

On Monday morning, Ardern said genomic sequencing showed the virus was one of the slightly more infectious strains.

"We were right to take a cautious approach and focus on safety because we've confirmed it is the UK variant," she told Radio NZ.

"Based on that sequencing we haven't been able to link it to any of our managed isolation facilities... it wasn't someone who went from an airline into our managed isolation."

She said health officials were still trying to identify the source of infection, working on two main leads.

As one of the new community cases worked at a business servicing airlines at Auckland airport, officials are looking at whether the virus may have slipped out through a transit passenger, or via laundry of air crew:

Related: New Zealand's Auckland Covid outbreak is UK variant, says Ardern

12.05am GMT

CDC says 'absolutely' too soon to lift US mask mandate

The head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily coronavirus case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer, Reuters reports. Dr. Rochelle Walensky's warning that face-covering requirements are still critical came just days after governors in Iowa and Montana lifted long-standing mask mandates in their states. Appearing on NBC's "Meet the Press," Walensky said preventing further surges of infection is key to safely reopening schools and regaining some level of social normalcy until collective immunity can be achieved through mass vaccinations.

Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters

Whether Americans can look forward to walking down the street without wearing a mask by the end of the year "very much depends on how we behave right now," she said. Asked if it was still too early for states to eliminate rules requiring the use of face masks in public, Walensky replied, "Absolutely." While Covid-19 infection rates and hospitalisations appear to be waning, the United States has a long way to go before it can safely return to a mask-less normal, she said. "The cases are more than two-and-a-half-fold times what we saw over the summer," said Walensky, who was sworn in as CDC director last month after President Joe Biden took office. "It's encouraging to see these trends coming down but they're coming down from an extraordinarily high place."

11.58pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

I'll be bringing you the latest developments for the next few hours - you can get in touch with questions and comments on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

In New Zealand, Aucklanders awoke on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19.

The prime minister said genomic testing  had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country, according to Yahoo.

Meanwhile in the US, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily Covid case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer.

Here are the other key recent developments:

•Australia has suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases.•Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five.•Lebanonhas started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people.•Brazilhas confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil.•Rwandahas started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout.•The UK has reported a further 10,972 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases, according to government data - a fall from last Sunday's figure at 15,845. A total of 4,038,078 people have tested positive.•A total of 15,062,189 people in the UK have now had a first dose of Covid-19 vaccine, according to the latest government figures.•An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider.•There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data , and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings.

Australia has suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases.

Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five.

Lebanonhas started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people.

Brazilhas confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil.

Rwandahas started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout.

The UK has reported a further 10,972 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases, according to government data - a fall from last Sunday's figure at 15,845. A total of 4,038,078 people have tested positive.

A total of 15,062,189 people in the UK have now had a first dose of Covid-19 vaccine, according to the latest government figures.

An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider.

There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data , and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings.

Updated at 6.15am GMT

109692021-02-14T23:56:39Zfalsefalse2021-02-15T15:29:57ZtrueAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/gexgjfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/0d6445690714f4cd319da113021189f930cfbc7b/0_182_5472_3283/500.jpgfalseentrueThe number of people in Ireland claiming temporary coronavirus-related jobless benefits fell for the first time since strict curbs were reintroduced in late December, dropping 0.8% week-on-week to just under 478,000, Reuters reports. There are still 200,000 more Pandemic Unemployment Payment recipients than in December, when most building sites, shops and hospitality facilities shut. The government has said any re-opening from next month will be very gradual. Social protections minister Heather Humphreys said the levelling-off was encouraging, noting that the highest number of people returning to work were in the construction, manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade sectors. The Russian president Vladimir Putin has ordered a review of Russia's vaccines to be produced by 15 March, assessing their ability to protect people from new variants, the TASS news agency has cited the Kremlin as saying. Russia has approved two vaccines, including Sputnik V, which has been deployed widely and also exported abroad. Police in Rio de Janeiro have raided a series of illegal carnival parties taking place despite a prohibition designed to halt the spread of coronavirus. Brazil is experiencing one of the worst moments of its epidemic, with the weekly average of deaths hitting a record high of 1,097 on Sunday. Nearly 240,000 people have now died here, second only to the US. Authorities across Brazil have banned carnival festivities this year with Rio's official samba parades cancelled for the first time since they began in 1932. One of Brazil's biggest samba stars, Neguinho da Beija-Flor, told one local newspaper that going ahead with carnival this year would have meant "parading on top of corpses". But some have insisted on partying; including at Rio's sophisticated Jockey Club racetrack, which was raided on Saturday. Police caught 200 people attending an illicit carnival ball. Black curtains and a metal fence had been erected to conceal the celebration. Illegal shindigs have also been held in Rio's favelas. Hundreds of revellers reportedly turned out on Saturday night to see the pop star Belo perform on a stage in the Complexo da Maré, a sprawling community near Rio's international airport. Floating all-night festivities have also been held on boats on Rio's Guanabara Bay at the foot of Sugarloaf Mountain. Canadian universities are facing a financial crunch amid the Covid-19 crisis, as a drop in foreign enrolment and shuttered campuses dent the bottom line and the country's slow vaccine rollout weighs on the next school year. Reuters reports: Public universities have become increasingly dependent on foreign students, who pay far higher tuition than domestic students, to boost their profits. International enrolment jumped 45% over the last five years, advocacy group Universities Canada said, but it fell 2.1% this year amid coronavirus restrictions. That decline, coupled with a sharp fall in revenues from campus services like conferences, dorms, food halls and parking, has hit the schools hard. Canada's slow vaccine campaign - it currently lags well behind global peers on inoculations - and the emergence of new variants, could extend the slump in enrolment and campus revenues into the next year school, experts warn. [...] It is still too soon to know the final impact of Covid-19 on the current year. The University of British Columbia, for example, is projecting a deficit of C$225 million ($177.2 million) this year compared with a C$60 million surplus budgeted pre-Covid-19. And the uncertainty will continue. Israel is considering a carrot and stick approach to persuade people to get vaccinated, including granting inoculated people access to restaurants, hotels and concerts, while forcing some vaccine refusers to get uncomfortable Covid tests every two days. "Will you be eligible to enter gyms and cultural events, or will you be left behind?" tweeted the health minister, Yuli Edelstein. "Go get vaccinated!" Meanwhile, the health ministry has expanded a digital taskforce to combat anti-vax misinformation online, hoping to block false claims before they spread. Trackers now monitor social media daily, and in several languages. Israel's vaccination campaign is being closely watched by other governments that see it as a test case for what lies ahead. Although the country of 9 million has launched a world-leading vaccination drive, with more than 40% having received at least one dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech jab, a recent slowdown has concerned officials. Full story here: Spain plans to approve a new aid package to help companies hit by the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic by the end of March, the economy minister, Nadia Calviño, told reporters in Brussels on Monday. The package will take the form of direct aid to viable companies that are struggling financially due to the pandemic, Calviño said. The country's vaccination campaign meanwhile is showing its first signs of success, as infections in care homes are falling. El País reports: Spain's social service residences can breathe a little easier one year after being besieged by the coronavirus pandemic. The mass vaccination of care home [residents] - the first priority group of Spain's vaccination drive - is beginning to have an effect, with contagions falling. According to the health ministry, last week 103 coronavirus outbreaks were reported in such residences, which include care homes for people with disabilities and senior residences. This is half the number recorded the previous week. Data collected by El País shows that eight Spanish regions have registered this fall, which has been largely attributed to the vaccination campaign. Indeed, the regions - which are responsible for the vaccination drive and containing the coronavirus pandemic in their territories - have almost finished administering the second dose of the Covid vaccine in care homes. This has prompted some regional governments to consider easing restrictions to allow residents to receive visits and leave their centres. Experts, however, have called for caution. India could approve Russia's Sputnik V vaccine against Covid-19 within the next few weeks, the RIA news agency cited India's ambassador to Moscow as saying on Monday. Small human trials of the Russian vaccine have been ongoing in India, conducted by India's Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd and supported by the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), Reuters reports. According to Johns Hopkins University, India has recorded at least 155,732 Covid-19 deaths so far and over ten million infections. The country of 1.36 billion people has administered about 8.2 million vaccines so far. Despite India having the world's second highest number of overall infections and the fourth highest death toll, "life is almost back to normal", the Times of India reports. "Shopping mall parking lots are full again. Stores are buzzing, and there are long lines for hair salons and restaurants." The US is facing a vaccine supply shortage as various states are gradually expanding eligibility for vaccinations, as the country is now administering up to an average of about 1.7m jabs a day. The New York Times reports: [S]tates are also steadily widening access beyond the most vulnerable groups, frontline health care workers and nursing home staff and residents. Now, some state officials say they are ready to administer thousands more shots every day - if they can get them. Last week, California announced that it would soon become one of just a handful of states to expand vaccine access to people of any age with underlying health issues or severe disabilities. But it has already used 72 percent of its doses and has shortages in some areas. The mass vaccination site at Dodger Stadium shut over the weekend because Los Angeles had exhausted its supply, Mayor Eric Garcetti said. He said the city received just 16,000 doses last week - roughly a day's worth. [...] Officials in Georgia say constrained supply is getting in the way of opening up eligibility. When the Atlanta Board of Education called on Gov. Brian Kemp earlier this month to start allowing teachers to be vaccinated, the governor said the state was not getting enough doses for residents who were already eligible. Coronavirus case rates have fallen across nearly 95% of local authorities in the UK, new figures show. PA Media reports: Of the 380 local authorities areas across the UK, only 23 (6%) have seen a week-on-week increase in case rates compared with 354 (93%) where the rates have fallen. The highest case rate in the UK was in Corby, Northamptonshire, with 277 new cases recorded in the seven days to February 10 - the equivalent of 383.6 cases per 100,000 people. This was down from 468.0 cases per 100,000 people in the seven days to February 3. The Scottish government has met its target of offering the first dose of a coronavirus vaccine to everyone in the top four priority groups, Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said on Monday. Scotland has recorded no deaths of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours for the first time since 18 January. Speaking during the Scottish government's daily briefing, Sturgeon said levels of uptake of the vaccine had so far been "significantly beyond" the target of 80% set out in the deployment plan. Portugal's once-booming tourism sector suffered its worst results since the mid-1980s last year as the coronavirus pandemic and subsequent lockdowns worldwide grounded flights and kept visitors away, official data showed on Monday. Reuters reports: The National Statistics Institute (INE) said just under 4 million foreign tourists stayed in Portuguese hotels in 2020, a near 76% slump from a record 16.4 million in 2019, while the number of overnight stays by non-residents dropped 75% to 12.3 million, its lowest level since 1984. Tourism played a crucial role in Portugal's recovery from the 2010 economic and debt crisis. Overnight stays by Britons, one of the country's biggest foreign markets, fell by over 78% from a year ago. There was also a massive drop in the Chinese and American markets, decreasing 82% and 87% respectively. Total hotel revenues dropped 66% last year, INE said, partly cushioned by local tourism. The government has said it is preparing a support package for the sector, including delayed loan-repayment schedules, debt-to-equity instruments and grants after Portugal's hotel association warned a further 100,000 jobs could be lost in 2021 if it did not receive targeted support.. A country of just over 10 million people, Portugal fared better than other nations in Europe in the first wave of the pandemic, but 2021 brought a devastating surge in infections and deaths, forcing the imposition of a strict lockdown last month. Nearly 15,321 people have died of Covid-19 in Portugal, with cumulative infections at 785,756. Portugal on Saturday extended a suspension of flights to and from Brazil and Britain to March 1, with only humanitarian and repatriation flights allowed. Colombia's health ministry has recommended that incoming travellers adopt stricter measures to prevent importing new and more infectious coronavirus strains. Colombia Reports writes: Health minister Fernando Ruiz initially resisted stricter conditions, but changed his mind amid growing concerns over new strains from the United Kingdom, South Africa and Brazil that could reduce the effectiveness of vaccines. The health ministry's chief epidemiologist, Julian Fernando Niño, said the minister issued a decree in which it, among other things "recommends, not obliges" the use of special N-95 facemasks for travelers older than 60 or suffering comorbidities. Airlines must demand passengers wear facemasks before and during the flight, and after arriving in Colombia where they are mandatory in public spaces. During flights, airlines are expected to request passengers to keep conversations to a minimum. Colombia's first Covid-19 vaccines - a batch of 50,000 doses from Pfizer - will arrive in the Andean country on Monday afternoon, president Ivan Duque said. The government is expecting to receive more than 5.7m doses of vaccines from different providers in February and March. It plans to administer its first dose on Saturday, and hopes to vaccinate 1 million Colombians in the first 30 days of the inoculation programme, Reuters reports. Cambodia reported on Monday its first cases of the highly contagious UK coronavirus variant, after three foreigners who arrived from overseas tested positive while in quarantine. Reuters reports: The south-east Asian nation of about 16 million people has reported among the lowest number of coronavirus cases, recording less than 500 infections and no deaths, although a rare cluster emerged in November. Most of its cases have been imported. The health ministry said the cases with the UK variant were two people from India and one from China, all of whom had been isolated. The B1.1.7 variant, first found in Britain, is highly transmissible and its discovery prompted a tightening of travel restrictions globally among countries keen to keep it at bay. Cambodia's health ministry also warned the public against complacency, saying people "seem to forget the enormous risk of transmission" at mass gatherings like ceremonies, parties, weddings and festivals, where health measures were not being followed. "Cambodians must not underestimate the potential for rapid transmission and severity caused by Covid-19 on the human body," it said. "The high prevalence and severity of the disease can happen in our country at any time, any circumstance, anywhere if individuals do not protect themselves." Dr Takeshi Kasai, the WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, wrote in the Phnom Penh Post on Monday: Although Cambodia has been relatively fortunate in so far preventing the large-scale community transmission seen elsewhere in our region, the impact here has still been devastating. Many livelihoods have been lost, children have been unable to go to school, and life for many families continues to be difficult due to the ongoing uncertainty of the pandemic. [...] the goal is to provide enough vaccine doses to cover at least 20 per cent of the population - including other priority groups, such as people with pre-existing illnesses which put them at higher risk of getting sick from Covid-19 - by the end of this year. France has scrapped a law banning workers from eating lunch at their desks in a bid to curb the spread of Covid-19, according to a decree published Sunday. CNN reports: The new rule temporarily overturns a longstanding law that protected what was once considered a sacrosanct part of the day, "la pause déjeuner" - the lunch break. Employers were previously forbidden to allow their workers "to have their meals in the workplace", under the French labour code. The temporary decree applies to offices with over 50 employees and where the layout of the canteen does not allow for social distancing. People must be between one or two metres (around 6.6 feet) apart when not wearing a face mask. House sales in Spain tumbled 18% in 2020, the National Statistics Institute said on Monday, with tourist hotspots like the Balearic and Canary Islands hardest-hit. Reuters reports: A months-long home confinement last spring as well as restrictions on regional and global travel delivered hard blows to Spain's real estate market, which had only recently begun to recover from a crash in 2008. Around 415,000 houses were sold in 2020, the lowest number in four years, while property transactions fell to lows not seen since 2011, though pent-up demand drove a modest recuperation in the second half. [...] Regions blessed with beaches, plentiful natural space or a low population density like La Rioja, Galicia and Cantabria saw house sales soar between 37% and 28% in December compared with the same month in 2019, as buyers fled the cities seeking the green outdoors - and a lower infection risk. The Balearics and Canary Islands, two archipelagos favoured by tourists and international investors, respectively lost 20% and 17% of their house sales volume in 2020 as local hospitality sectors suffered a coronavirus-induced paralysis. The data also showed new-build, single-family properties equipped with terraces and gardens held up better against the downwards trend, as buyers sought to protect themselves from contagion and improve their quality of life in the face of remote working and future lockdowns. Malta's nurses union has warned that its hospitals face a staffing crisis as the UK has enticed away a growing number of the island nation's foreign nurses with offers of better pay and conditions. Reuters reports: Some 600 third-country national nurses work in Malta, but roughly 150 have moved abroad or else handed in their resignation since December, union sources said. "It is a crisis," the MUMN union said in a statement. Other southern European countries have complained about nurse shortages during the coronavirus pandemic with wealthier northern nations able to offer better packages. Foreign staffers, including Indians, Pakistanis and Filipinos, make up around 15% of the total nursing staff in Malta, and the fact they speak English makes them especially attractive to the UK and Ireland. Recruitment agencies in Britain and India have run Facebook adverts urging nurses in Malta to apply for jobs in the UK. Sources in the nursing sector said nurses are being offered a basic starting salary of £32,000 or 36,000 ($44,500) compared with the current Malta salary of 18,722 for trainee nurses and 21,000 for qualified nurses. But the nursing union said that better conditions rather than higher pay was proving especially attractive - particularly the offer of quicker routes to citizenship for them and their families. Moreover, Britain is offering foreign nurses free accommodation for the first 12 months, MUMN said. "The present nursing workforce is already working under a heavy workload with none of the wards... having the agreed nursing complement," nurses union leader Paul Pace said in a statement. "Losing 15% of the nursing workforce will literally bring the health service to a standstill." UK prime minister Boris Johnson has defended his administration's refusal to commit to an end of lockdown restrictions by May, saying the government did not want to be forced into a "reverse ferret" over lockdown easing. Johnson said on Monday that his plan to lift the lockdown would be cautious but irreversible and would include the earliest possible dates for reopening the economy. "We've got to be very prudent and what we want to see is progress that is cautious, but irreversible," Johnson told reporters. Speaking to people waiting for a Covid-19 vaccine shot, Johnson said that the key question was working out to what extent a drop in infections was being caused by the vaccination programme. "That's the data we're having to look at and really work out what is going on," Johnson said. Asked about lifting lockdown, Johnson said: "The crucial thing is to make sure we just do sensible steps that are in proportion to where we are." "What people don't want to see is you know just being forced into reverse - we don't want to do, you know, a reverse ferret - let's take it at the right pace," he said. "Schools is the first priority obviously," he added. Intensified checks at Germany's borders meant to slow the spread of the pandemic are only temporary and a last resort, a German government spokesman said on Monday. "A return to normal is in the interest of everyone involved," chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman, Steffen Seibert, told a regular news conference. Since Sunday, stricter border regulations have been in place, stipulating that from the Czech Republic and the Austrian state of Tyrol only Germans and foreigners with a residence and residence permit in Germany are allowed to enter. There are exceptions for health workers and truck drivers. All those entering the country have to present a negative Covid-19 test. After the introduction of border controls, kilometre-long traffic jams formed at the crossings from the Czech Republic to Germany, public broadcaster Deutschlandfunk reports. I'm Jedidajah Otte and will be taking over for the next few hours. As always, do feel free to get in touch with comments, updates or tips, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. An agreement between Cyprus and Israel allowing vaccinated citizens of both countries to travel freely between them, has been hailed as a ground-breaking "first step" towards normalising tourism once flights resume, writes Helena Smith in Athens. The accord, signed during a visit of the Cypriot president Nicos Anastasiades to Jerusalem on Sunday, is expected to go into effect in the next few weeks. "When the world is in upheaval because of corona, the warm relations between our two countries are more important than ever," the Cypriot leader said. Tourism is integral to the economy of both states with Israelis forming a large part of the market share in popular resorts such as Ayia Napa. Under the agreement travellers in both directions will not be required to have undergone PCR tests nor will they have to endure periods of quarantine. "This is a first step in restoring the connectivity between the two countries," the Mediterranean island's transport minister, Yiannis Karousos, told the Cyprus news agency on Monday. "It is very important and will be combined with other support measures that will be announced soon." Karousos did not rule out similar arrangements being made with other nations although he emphasised that the health ministry will "reserve the right to carry out tests on passengers" if deemed necessary. Cyprus's deputy tourism minister, Savvas Perdios, described the accord as "a huge achievement". More than 300,000 Israelis flew into the island in 2019, he said, with a further 40,000 arriving on cruise ships. "Israel is effectively one of the most important markets for us in terms of tourism and this agreement will certainly boost our economy," he said. Last week Greece and Israel, also close allies, announced a similar agreement, with officials in Athens calling it vital for the revival of tourism already badly hit by the pandemic. With one in five Greeks working in the sector, it is regarded as the country's heavy industry. Russia has reported 14,207 new cases of coronavirus, including 1,818 in Moscow, taking the national infection tally to 4,086,090 since the pandemic began. According to Reuters, the country's coronavirus taskforce said 394 people had died in the last 24 hours, pushing the official national death toll to 80,520. Vietnam is to put 2 million people under new coronavirus restrictions from Tuesday after a new outbreak in a northern province of the country. Residents of Hai Duong province have been ordered to stay at home for 15 days, state media reported, according to the French news agency AFP, as a nation widely praised for its handling of the pandemic struggles to extinguish a troubling new outbreak. According to AFP: Since late January, Vietnam has recorded 637 locally transmitted coronavirus cases, including 461 in Hai Duong province alone. "People (in Hai Duong) are asked to stay at home and only go out when necessary, such as to buy food or medicine, or to work at factories or production establishments that are not being asked to close," said the official mouthpiece of Vietnam's health ministry, Suc Khoe Doi Song. Gatherings of more than two people will be banned, while schools, bars, restaurants and karaoke parlours that were shut early ahead of the lunar new year holiday will remain closed. When they must go outside their homes, residents are instructed to stay 2 metres from others. Traffic through the province of 2 million will also be limited, state media reported, with only vehicles travelling on essential business allowed to enter. In addition to the social distancing directive, Hai Duong authorities have asked that people quarantining at three centres in the province be relocated after infections recently began spreading at those sites, according to the government. Pakistan will allow private companies to import coronavirus vaccines and has exempted the vaccines from price caps in a divisive move that health experts fear will create vast inequalities in access, writes Shah Meer Baloch for the Guardian in Islamabad. The country has been scrambling to secure vaccine supplies but so far only the Chinese-made Sinopharm treatment is being deployed. This month 500,000 doses were donated to Pakistan. Like many other countries, Pakistan has been relying on the Gavi/World Health Organization Covax vaccine initiative, but has yet to receive any of the 17m doses it is expecting. The cabinet granted permission for unlimited imports of coronavirus vaccines, which could be sold to customers. No price cap was set. Fawad Chaudhry, a federal minister in the cabinet, said if the private sector was not included in the vaccination drive it would be impossible for Pakistan to vaccinate its population of more than 220 million. A British man has pleaded guilty to violating his coronavirus quaratine order in Singapore by sneaking out of his hotel room to visit his fiancée several times in another hotel room. Nigel Skea, 52, admitted leaving his room three times on 21 September last year, one of which was to meet his Singaporean partner Agatha Maghesh Eyamalai, who was not in quarantine but had booked a room in the same hotel. The couple will appear in court for sentencing on 26 February. They face a possible sentence of up to six years in jail and a fine of 10,000 Singapore dollars ($7,500) on each charge. According to court documents, seen by the Associated Press, Skea climbed an emergency stairwell and entered a room that his Singaporean fiancée had booked. The two spent nine hours together. The prosecution asked that Skea be jailed for four weeks and fined 1,000 Singapore dollars ($750). Defence lawyer Dhillon Surinder Singh, who is also representing Eyamalai, asked for a fine or a one-week jail term "to give him a slap on a wrist". Malaysia has reported 2,176 new coronavirus cases, bringing the total number of infections from the pandemic to 266,445. The health ministry also reported 10 new deaths, raising total fatalities to 975. The first guests have checked into quarantine hotels in the UK, as tougher rules for international arrivals from 33 "red list" countries came into force on Monday morning. (The rule applies to people returning to Scotland from any destination.) Passengers arriving at London's Heathrow airport were escorted by security personnel to coaches which took them to nearby hotels, the PA Media news agency reports. A handful of people pulled up to the Radisson Blu Edwardian hotel shortly before 9am. One woman, who had flown in from Zambia, told PA: "I'm not happy, but you have to do it." People required to enter the quarantine hotel programme must enter England or Scotland through a designated port and have pre-booked a package to stay at one of the government's managed facilities. No international flights are operating to Wales or Northern Ireland. Peru's foreign minister has resigned amid uproar over government officials being secretly vaccinated against coronavirus before the country recently received 1m doses for health workers facing a resurgence in the pandemic, according to the Associated Press. The president, Francisco Sagasti, confirmed that Elizabeth Astete had stepped down and told a local television channel that Peruvians should feel "outraged and angry about this situation that jeopardises the enormous effort of many Peruvians working on the frontline against Covid". The scandal erupted on Thursday when the former president Martín Vizcarra, who was dismissed by Congress on 9 November over a corruption allegation, confirmed a newspaper report that he and his wife had secretly received shots of a vaccine from the Chinese state pharmaceutical company Sinopharm in October. Pilar Mazzetti resigned as health minister on Friday after legislators accused her of concealing information. People aged 65 and over in South Korea will not receive the Oxford/AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine, the Korea disease control and prevention agency has said. The announcement reverses an earlier decision and came as the KDCA scaled back targets in its vaccination programme as a result of a delay to shipments from the Covax vaccine-sharing scheme, according to the Reuters news agency. South Korea had said it would complete vaccinations on 1.3 million people by the first quarter of this year with AstraZeneca shots, but it slashed the target sharply to 750,000. KDCA's director, Jeong Eun-kyeong, insisted that South Korea's plan to reach herd immunity by November remained intact, telling reporters: We do not believe the adjustments in inoculations in February and March will impact our goal of herd immunity by November. South Korea also said it would delay inoculation of elderly people using the AstraZeneca vaccine until more efficacy data becomes available. The World Health Organization special envoy for the global Covid-19 response has said he expects "some sort" of vaccine passport will be introduced in future. Speaking on Sky News on Monday morning, David Nabarro said: I am absolutely certain in the next few months we will get a lot of movement and what are the conditions around which people are easily able to move from place to place, so some sort of vaccine certificate no doubt will be important. Nabarro said countries would only be able to form "bubbles" for travel purposes if they both had the same standards of coronavirus restrictions and similar levels of vaccination uptake. Transparency over Covid-19 measures between countries was key to keeping an eye out for new variants of the virus, he said. That's going to be with us for the foreseeable future, because even when much higher proportions of the population are vaccinated, there are still going to be these worrying moments when perhaps a version of the virus appears that can break through the defences provided by the vaccine. Vaccine passports are among the most controversial potential measures that have been mooted to contain the spread of coronavirus in the future, with apparent disagreements within the UK government over their implementation. Cabinet ministers have several times contradicted each other over whether there are plans to introduce the documents, and whether they will be in use only for international travel or also for civil society. A plane has landed in Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe, carrying the southern African country's first consignment of coronavirus vaccines, 200,000 doses donated by China. A further 600,000 Chinese-made Sinopharm vaccines - this time paid for - are expected to arrive in early March. Constantino Chiwenga, the vice-president of Zimbabwe, who was with a delegation who came to meet the vaccines at Robert Mugabe airport, said frontline health workers would be the first to be vaccinated. This is a timely donation... our people have suffered from this pandemic. The vaccine offers the possibility that our people who have borne the brunt of the economic ravages of the pandemic might finally turn a new page. Zimbabwe has set aside $100m for vaccine procurement and is looking to buy 20 million doses in efforts to immunise about 60% of its population and achieve herd immunity, Reuters reports. Matt Hancock, the UK health secretary, is doing the customary early morning ministerial parade of London's broadcast studios today, answering questions on the latest lines that the government has managed to brief into the national papers. The vaccination of 15 million people has been an achievement of which the government is particularly proud and, after so many missteps to date in handling the coronavirus crisis, will be wanting to tout for all its worth. On BBC Breakfast, Hancock gave a breakdown of what percentage of people in each of the top four priority groups had been vaccinated, adding that he believed that everyone in those groups had at least been offered the vaccine. He said: The take-up is incredibly important - it's over 90% among the over 70s as a whole, so more than nine in 10 of everybody aged over 70 in the country has taken up that offer. It is higher in some groups, so among the 75- to 79-year-olds, over 97% have taken up the offer and we obviously want to keep that proportion going up so anybody who hasn't yet been able to be vaccinated for whatever reason... then please do come forward. Hancock said the figure among healthcare staff was "a little bit lower than 90%", with "around two-thirds" of social care staff jabbed and "four-fifths" of NHS staff receiving their first dose. In care home residents, among those eligible to be vaccinated, the percentage who had been given a jab was "over 90%". The challenge there is that there are some care homes that have recently had an outbreak and you can't vaccinate people within 28 days of a positive test, so there are some people who have recently tested positive who aren't able to be vaccinated yet who we will make sure we go back to in the weeks to come to make sure they get their jab when they are clinically eligible for it. There is still more work to do. Everyone eligible has been offered a [jab] and we've visited all of the elderly care homes in the country but clearly... there is still more to do to increase take-up. Not made it out to the shops this morning? Here is the front page of today's print edition of the Guardian, which is leading with a story about how ministers are resisting demands from Tory backbenchers to end the coronavirus lockdown by May. Our reporters write: Downing Street is pushing back against pressure from Conservative MPs to set a swift timetable to end the lockdown in England after meeting its first major vaccination target, saying any hastiness in reopening could risk undoing the progress made in combating the coronavirus pandemic. In a sign of the likely battle ahead in the coming weeks, ministers and officials flatly ruled out a demand from Tory backbenchers for all Covid restrictions to be over by the start of May, saying any plan needed to be both more cautious and decided step by step. But clamour for a more fixed schedule seems set to increase after Boris Johnson announced the government had reached its target of offering at least a first vaccination to the top four most vulnerable groups in England by Monday. Most of our rivals are leading with more cheerful lines about a potential end to lockdown, or hailing the progress in the UK's vaccination programme. The Telegraph suggests that its readers will be able to meet their grandchildren - outdoors, mind - again as early as next month. It reports: In the wake of vaccine success - which yesterday allowed the Government to announce that everyone in England in the four most vulnerable categories has now been offered the jab - ministers are looking to begin lifting restrictions from March 8. Schools will be the first to return, with people also allowed to meet friends and family from other households outdoors, on a one-to-one basis. The Times reports that ministers are looking at plans to allow people to go away on self-catering breaks by the time the Easter holidays arrive. It says: The Times has been told that under one ambitious timeline being considered by the government families who live in the same household could be allowed to go on breaks together from April. According to the Daily Mail, shops could reopen within weeks, adding that "plans to ease lockdown were boosted yesterday by figures showing the dramatic impact vaccines are already having." The Mirror doesn't mince its words. It claims we're on the "road to freedom." Boris Johnson today begins plotting a route out, and if all over-50s have the jab by then hospitality may restart. He reveals his plan next week. With 15 million now vaccinated, the PM said: "We'll make clear our roadmap." All in all it looks like there some hard briefing by Downing Street yesterday around the subject of when coronavirus lockdowns will end. The government appears to be in an increasingly difficult position with maintaining the strict curbs that its scientific advisers insist are necessary, in the face of widespread opposition from the Tory backbenches and some sections of the public. It is too early to say whether the UK's mass vaccination programme has had an impact on Covid-related deaths, the health secretary has said. Matt Hancock said data was not yet available to suggest what the impact of the vaccination programme had been. Speaking on Sky News on Monday morning, the health secretary said: The signs are that, thankfully, the number of deaths is falling and has been coming down for a few weeks. It is too early to say whether that is directly due to the vaccination programme yet. It is too early to be able to measure the direct impact but of course we are looking at that and we can see overall that the number of cases is coming down sharply, the number in hospitals is coming down but it is still too high - at the latest count there were 23,000 people in hospital with Covid. Hancock said the Government was looking to the next priority groups after meeting its target of vaccinating the top four groups by 15 February. There is no rest for the wicked and we are straight on to the next groups, so the letters have already been sent to over a million over 65-year-olds asking them to come forward, and also the next group after that is those who have underlying health conditions and are carers. There is a huge programme under way rolling out to invite the next group of people to be vaccinated and, at the same time, from next month we have the second jabs of all the people who have come since January to make sure they happen on time, because they have to be within a specific 12-week time period. So there is still a huge amount of work to do but we have managed to vaccinate those who are most vulnerable. Good morning, this is Damien Gayle picking up the blog in London, with the latest coronavirus-related news and updates from this side of the world. If you have any comments, tips or suggestions for coverage then feel free to drop me a line, either via email to damien.gayle@theguardian.com, or via Twitter direct message to @damiengayle. Here are the key developments from the last few hours: All UK nationals or residents arriving back in England from high-risk countries will begin checking into government-designated accommodation on Monday as the hotel quarantine regime to prevent the spread of new coronavirus cases begins.People returning to England from 33 "red list" countries - comprised of hotspots with Covid-19 variants in circulation - will be required to quarantine in hotels for 10 days. UK variant hits New Zealand. Aucklanders awoke on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19. The prime minister said genomic testing had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country. In the US, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily Covid case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer. US daily Covid cases dropped below 100,000. Average daily new coronavirus cases in the US have dipped below 100,000 for the first time in months, but experts cautioned on Sunday that infections remain high and precautions to slow the pandemic must remain in place. First vaccine doses arrive in Australia. Australia's coronavirus vaccine rollout will begin next week after the first doses of the Pfizer jab arrived in Sydney, AAP reports. More than 142,000 doses are being taken to a secure location and batches will be assessed for damage and quality in the coming days. First vaccine doses arrive in New Zealand. Jacinda Ardern said the first vaccine doses arrived in the country on Monday morning. After being checked for quality assurance, inoculations will begin on Saturday, starting with border workers. Japan to start vaccinations on Wednesday. Japanese prime minister Yoshide Suga announced on Monday that that coronavirus vaccinations will start on Wednesday this week. South Korea to exclude people over 65 from AstraZeneca vaccines. South Korea will initially exclude people aged 65 years and older from inoculation with AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine because of a lack of data proving its efficacy in the elderly, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Monday. Pfizer/BioNTech jab gives 94% protection, Israeli study suggests. An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider. Australia suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases. Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five. Lebanon has started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people. Brazil has confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil. Rwanda has started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout. There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data, and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings. China reported 9 new Covid-19 cases vs 7 a day earlier. China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday. Of the cases, eight were imported infections originating overseas, while one case was recorded in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, the National Health Commission said in a statement. That's it from me, Helen Sullivan, and over to my colleagues in London. Speaking of living in a confined space for long periods of time - this is quite the yarn: In England, Middlesbrough council withheld potentially embarrassing details of how - against the advice of its own public health expert - it ordered £24,000 worth of Covid tests that it could not use, emails reveal. The independent mayor of Middlesbrough, Andy Preston, spent £24,000 on pinprick antibody tests, disregarding concerns voiced by the region's director of public health, according to documents released under Freedom of Information laws: The UK's equality watchdog is facing demands to investigate claims that ministers have sidelined key gender laws in their response to the Covid pandemic. In the wake of a damning report from MPs that said the UK risked turning back the clock on gender equality, a coalition of organisations including the Trades Union Congress (TUC), Amnesty International, Save the Children and the Fawcett Society have accused the government of taking decisions that are deepening inequalities. Two dozen signatories, including leading gender equality experts, signed a letter to the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) that argues that the government has failed in its duty to consider the impact of key policies on women and other groups protected under the Equality Act: NHK reports that Japanese prime minister Yoshide Suga has announced that coronavirus vaccinations will start on Wednesday this week. From NHK: Japanese Prime Minister Suga Yoshihide says coronavirus vaccinations will begin on Wednesday, starting with medical workers. Suga spoke at a Lower House budget committee meeting on Monday. He said the government will do its utmost to deliver safe and effective vaccines to people as quickly as possible. The government gave the greenlight to the vaccine developed by the US pharmaceutical company Pfizer on Sunday. Here is the full story on Australia's vaccine rollout: Australia will begin its Covid-19 vaccine rollout on Monday 22 February after 142,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine arrived on Monday the 15th. "The eagle has landed," declared the health minister, Greg Hunt, ending weeks of doubt as to whether supply delays could blow out the government's timeline to begin vaccinations in late February. Of the first Pfizer shipment, 62,000 doses will be set aside as second doses in case of supply interruptions. Of the first 80,000 doses available, 30,000 will be administered by the federal government in aged care, with the remaining 50,000 to be administered by state and territory governments to hotel quarantine and other frontline workers. The first 1.4 million vaccine recipients will be quarantine and border workers, frontline healthcare workers, aged care and disability staff and residents - who will be given either the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccines. Reuters: South Korea will initially exclude people aged 65 years and older from inoculation with AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine because of a lack of data proving its efficacy in the elderly, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said on Monday. The decision threatens to derail the country's vaccination plans, which had called for healthcare workers and the elderly to be among the first to receive vaccinations starting on 26 February. African countries may suffer in the global rush for vaccines because they are unable to gather statistics that reveal the true extent of the spread of Covid among their populations, epidemiologists and other experts fear. According to data from Johns Hopkins university, there have been 3.7m confirmed cases in Africa, and the landmark figure of 100,000 confirmed deaths is likely to be reached within days. A series of studies has raised fears that the official figures are a significant underestimate, raising the possibility that Africa may not be seen as a priority for scarce global vaccine supplies despite the urgent need. Many African countries are unable to afford mass testing and lack capacity to collect reliable data on cases and deaths, especially in remote areas. Stigma attached to the disease, a lack of information and victims' inability to either reach or pay for health facilities may also reduce reporting. The World Health Organization has said the "unique socio-ecological make-up in a number of African countries means a slower rate of transmission, and fewer severe cases as compared to the hardest hit countries": Here is the full story on hotel quarantine starting in England: All UK nationals or residents arriving back in England from high-risk countries will begin checking into government-designated accommodation on Monday as the hotel quarantine regime to prevent the spread of new coronavirus cases begins. People returning to England from 33 "red list" countries - comprised of hotspots with Covid-19 variants in circulation - will be required to quarantine in hotels for 10 days. Anyone who has been in one of the high-risk destinations will have to enter England through a designated port and have pre-booked a quarantine package to stay at one of the government's managed quarantine facilities. Hotel quarantine - too little too late? Politics Weekly podcastRead more The government has struck deals with 16 hotels so far, providing 4,963 rooms, and a further 58,000 rooms are on standby, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said on Sunday. Travellers arriving from Monday onwards that have not visited a red list country must still quarantine for 10 days at home and complete two mandatory Covid-19 tests on the second and eighth day after arriving: An update from New Zealand, where Jacinda Ardern is speaking at a press conference alongside Dr Ashley Bloomfield, the director general of health, after a cabinet meeting. The Guardian's Helen Livingstone reports: The prime minister says the first vaccine doses arrived in the country this morning. After being checked for quality assurance, inoculations will begin on Saturday, starting with border workers. "This will be the largest full-scale vaccination campaign in this country's history," she says. Bloomfield says it is encouraging that there were no further cases of Covid-19 in the community today, after the three which were reported on Sunday, all members of the same family, triggering the current lockdown in Auckland. Investigations into the source of the family's infection are focusing on the mother and daughter as serology testing has indicated the father was more recently infected, Bloomfield says. More on Australia's vaccine rollout: Prime Minister Scott Morrison will receive the Pfizer vaccine early in the rollout in a bid to boost public confidence in the jab. Two doses of the vaccine are needed, with a 21 day gap in between. Mr Hunt said the first vials of locally made doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine were also being manufactured. The vaccine is awaiting final regulatory approval from the Therapeutic Goods Administration. Local manufacturing of the University of Oxford developed vaccine has been under way since late last year at biotechnology company CSL's manufacturing facility in Victoria. Australia's coronavirus vaccine rollout will begin next week after the first doses of the Pfizer jab arrived in Sydney, AAP reports. "The eagle has landed," Health Minister Greg Hunt told reporters in Canberra on Monday. More than 142,000 doses are being taken to a secure location and batches will be assessed for damage and quality in the coming days. Mr Hunt said 60% of the shipment - 50,000 doses - would be given to the states to begin the process of vaccinating hotel quarantine staff, frontline health workers, and aged care workers and residents. Hotel quarantine workers are considered the highest priority because they pose the greatest risk of spreading the virus to the community. The federal government will have about 30,000 doses available for aged care facilities. The government expects about 60,000 doses to have been administered by the end of February. More on the UK hotel quarantine measures, from AFP: "The rules coming into force today will bolster the quarantine system and provide another layer of security against new variants at the border," said Health Secretary Matt Hancock, adding that they would also protect the national vaccination programme as the country worked "towards restoring normal life". The 11-night quarantine will cost people £1,750 ($2,420 or 2,000) and includes transport, food, accommodation and security costs, as well as other essential services and testing. Passengers must have a negative Covid-19 test result from within three days of travel, and book and pay for the package before setting off for Britain. They will then take further tests on day two and eight of their stays. The hotel occupants will only be able to leave their rooms in "very limited circumstances", with exercise among them but requiring "special permission" from staff or security. Anyone refusing to take tests risks a fine of between £1,000 and £2,000, while those who do not self-isolate could have to pay between £5,000 and £10,000. A limited list of exemptions from the measures include hauliers travelling from Portugal, defence personnel, visiting forces, government contractors and diplomatic missions. The UK government will on Monday introduce mandatory hotel quarantine rules for arrivals from dozens of countries deemed "high risk" for coronavirus variants, as it tries to stop new strains spreading, AFP reports. The new policy requires all UK citizens and permanent residents entering England from 33 countries on a wider travel ban list to self-isolate in approved hotels for 10 days and take several Covid-19 tests. Other visitors from the countries currently on the so-called "red list", which includes all South American nations, South Africa and Portugal, are currently barred from visiting under lockdown rules. Arrivals found to have given false information about being in one of the countries 10 days before travel could receive up to 10 years in prison - which has drawn criticism for being excessive. The government says it has signed contracts with 16 hotels so far, securing nearly 5,000 rooms near English airports, with a further 58,000 rooms on standby. Mexico's health ministry on Sunday reported 4,099 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the country and 436 more deaths, bringing its total to 1,992,794 infections and 174,207 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said. In case you missed this earlier: Brazil has confirmed cases of the UK variant of the novel coronavirus in two states and in the federal district of Brasília, according to a statement from the health ministry on Sunday, Reuters reports. The government said it has not yet confirmed cases of the South African variant. Two of the confirmed cases of the UK variant were reported in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, according to the state's health department on Friday. In that statement, Goiás authorities said the two people who have caught the UK variant live on the outskirts of the federal capital Brasília. The World Health Organization has said the UK variant has now been found in more than 70 countries. Brazil has the world's highest number of coronavirus deaths after the United States and more than 9.8 million confirmed cases. A Brazilian variant of the virus is circulating in 10 states, the health ministry said. The two people in Goiás who caught the UK variant had contact with a relative who lives in England, traveled to Brazil for the holidays and had been diagnosed with Covid-19, the Goiás health department said. A genomic sequencing of the virus confirmed infection by the UK variant in Goiás. More on the upcoming G7, via Reuters. "President Biden will also discuss the need to make investments to strengthen our collective competitiveness and the importance of updating global rules to tackle economic challenges such as those posed by China," the White House said. Trump challenged China over its trade policies by imposing punishing tariffs, an instrument he also used on traditional allies, drawing criticism for not taking a more unified approach with US friends to stand up to Beijing on issues such as intellectual property theft and other economic practices. Domestically, Biden is pressing Congress to pass a $1.9tn stimulus package to boost the US economy and provide relief for those suffering from the pandemic. The White House said he would discuss his economic agenda with G7 counterparts and encourage them and all industrialized countries to maintain "economic support for the recovery" and other collective measures. Climate change would also be on the agenda. US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen spoke to her G7 counterparts last week and called for continued fiscal support to secure the economic recovery. US President Joe Biden will hold his first event with other leaders from the Group of Seven nations in a virtual meeting on Friday to discuss the coronavirus pandemic, the world economy and dealing with China, the White House said on Sunday, Reuters reports. The meeting is the first by top leaders from the G7 group of rich democracies since April, it said. "This virtual engagement with leaders of the world*s leading democratic market economies will provide an opportunity for President Biden to discuss plans to defeat the Covid-19 pandemic, and rebuild the global economy," the White House said in a statement. The White House said Biden would focus his remarks on a global response to Covid-19 vaccine production and distribution as well as "continued efforts to mobilise and cooperate against the threat of emerging infectious diseases by building country capacity and establishing health security financing." Biden, a Democrat who took over from Republican former President Donald Trump on Jan. 20, has sought to project a message of re-engagement with the world and with global institutions after four years of his predecessor's "America First" mantra. Trump withdrew the United States from the World Health Organization and the Paris climate accord and largely scoffed at multilateral organisations and groups. Biden brought the United States back into the WHO and rejoined the Paris accord and has signalled a desire to work with allies in confronting China on a host of thorny issues. China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday. Reuters: Of the cases, eight were imported infections originating overseas, while one case was recorded in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, the National Health Commission said in a statement. New asymptomatic infections, which China does not classify as confirmed Covid-19 cases, fell to 10 from 17 a day earlier. China saw a resurgence of the disease in January, when a new cluster emerged in Hebei and later took hold in northeastern Heilongjiang and Jilin provinces, in the country's worst outbreak since March. Authorities in these provinces introduced lockdowns, travel curbs and mass testing in a bid to contain the disease. Data from recent days suggests that China has been able to avoid another full-blown Covid-19 crisis over the Lunar New Year Holiday. As of Sunday, mainland China had 89,772 confirmed coronavirus cases, the health authority said. The COVID-19 death toll remained at 4,636. An influential group of British MPs has urged the government to spell out the impact its lockdown-easing measures would have on economic growth and the number of coronavirus infections. Calling for evidence to be published alongside the government's reopening road map to be announced on 22 February, the Treasury select committee said it would help the public to better understand the implications of restrictions and the costs and benefits of making changes. The UK has given more than 15m people their first doses of Covid-19 vaccines, raising hopes that movement restrictions will be eased within weeks as the number of new infections and hospital admissions gradually fall. Ministers have so far declined, however, to give details about the criteria for reopening the economy, to the alarm of business leaders. Some company bosses have said more transparency would help them to plan ahead, as firms run short of cash after months of restrictions on trade. In an intervention as Boris Johnson prepares to announce which restrictions will be relaxed first, the committee said the lack of any official government economic analysis on the controls had been disappointing, especially as parliament needed to scrutinise the decision. Jasper Jolly and Richard Partington report: Here is a joyful break from pandemic news: An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider. Clalit Health Services said that its researchers tested 600,000 patients who had received the recommended two doses of the US-GermanPfizer/BioNTech vaccine and the same number of people who had not been inoculated. "There was a 94% reduction in the rate of symptomatic infection and a 92 percent decrease in the rate of serious illness compared to 600,000 similar (subjects) who were not vaccinated," Clalit said in a Hebrew-language statement reported by Reuters. "Vaccine efficacy is maintained in all age groups, including those aged 70+," it added. Israel's vaccine drive has seen 3.8 million people receive a first dose, while 2.4 million have also received a second shot. Average daily new coronavirus cases in the US have dipped below 100,000 for the first time in months, but experts cautioned on Sunday that infections remain high and precautions to slow the pandemic must remain in place, the Associated press reports. The seven-day rolling average of new infections was well above 200,000 for much of December and went to roughly 250,000 in January, according to Johns Hopkins University. That average dropped below 100,000 on Friday for the first time since 4 November. It stayed below 100,000 on Saturday. "We are still at about 100,000 cases a day," Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told NBC's Meet the Press. "We are still at around 1,500 to 3,500 deaths per day. The cases are more than two-and-a-half-fold times what we saw over the summer. "It's encouraging to see these trends coming down, but they're coming down from an extraordinarily high place." She added that new variants, including one first detected in the UK that appears to be more transmissible and has already been recorded in more than 30 states, will likely lead to more cases and more deaths: Australia has suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases. Australia's chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, convened an urgent meeting late on Sunday and it was decided that all flights originating in New Zealand would be classified as "Red Zone" flights for an initial period of 72 hours from Monday, Reuters reports. "As a result of this, all people arriving on such flights originating within this three-day period will need to go into 14 days of supervised hotel quarantine," Australia's Department of Health said on its website. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday that genomic sequencing showed the new cases were the highly transmissible UK variant. "We were absolutely right to make the decision to be extra cautious because we assumed it was going to be one of the more transmissible variants," Ardern said in a Facebook Live post. Aucklanders are waking up on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19, AAP reports. The prime minister said genomic testing had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country, according to Yahoo News. Those cases - from one Auckland family - mean 1.6 million Kiwis face bans on non-essential movement until midnight on Wednesday as part of alert level three restrictions. The lockdown is the second time Auckland has undergone the emergency measures since last year's more stringent 51-day nationwide lockdown which helped New Zealand eliminate the virus. The rest of New Zealand has been placed at alert level two, which mandates social distancing, caps on gathering and increases mask wearing. It is not yet clear whether the lockdown will extend beyond midnight on Wednesday. That's because health authorities are yet to gain a full picture of the virus's spread. On Monday morning, Ardern said genomic sequencing showed the virus was one of the slightly more infectious strains. "We were right to take a cautious approach and focus on safety because we've confirmed it is the UK variant," she told Radio NZ. "Based on that sequencing we haven't been able to link it to any of our managed isolation facilities... it wasn't someone who went from an airline into our managed isolation." She said health officials were still trying to identify the source of infection, working on two main leads. As one of the new community cases worked at a business servicing airlines at Auckland airport, officials are looking at whether the virus may have slipped out through a transit passenger, or via laundry of air crew: The head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily coronavirus case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer, Reuters reports. Dr. Rochelle Walensky's warning that face-covering requirements are still critical came just days after governors in Iowa and Montana lifted long-standing mask mandates in their states. Appearing on NBC's "Meet the Press," Walensky said preventing further surges of infection is key to safely reopening schools and regaining some level of social normalcy until collective immunity can be achieved through mass vaccinations. Whether Americans can look forward to walking down the street without wearing a mask by the end of the year "very much depends on how we behave right now," she said. Asked if it was still too early for states to eliminate rules requiring the use of face masks in public, Walensky replied, "Absolutely." While Covid-19 infection rates and hospitalisations appear to be waning, the United States has a long way to go before it can safely return to a mask-less normal, she said. "The cases are more than two-and-a-half-fold times what we saw over the summer," said Walensky, who was sworn in as CDC director last month after President Joe Biden took office. "It's encouraging to see these trends coming down but they're coming down from an extraordinarily high place." Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. I'll be bringing you the latest developments for the next few hours - you can get in touch with questions and comments on Twitter @helenrsullivan. In New Zealand, Aucklanders awoke on Monday to a new lockdown, hoping the short and sharp three-day restrictions ordered by Jacinda Ardern arrest the spread of Covid-19. The prime minister said genomic testing had shown that the three community cases were the UK variant of Covid-19, the first to be detected in the country, according to Yahoo. Meanwhile in the US, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday it is "absolutely" too soon to lift mask mandates, citing daily Covid case numbers that despite recent declines remain more than double the levels seen last summer. Here are the other key recent developments: Australia has suspended quarantine-free travel with New Zealand after it locked down Auckland following the detection of three new community cases. Around 1,000 people have been caught flouting restrictions in a Belgrade nightclub, Serbia's interior ministry said on Sunday. The country's coronavirus restrictions allow gatherings of up to five. Lebanon has started vaccinating high-risk groups, including healthcare workers and elderly people. Brazil has confirmed two cases of the UK variant in the state of Goiás after sequencing test samples taken on 31 December, Reuters reports, citing the state's health department. It did not say if these are the first cases of the variant detected in Brazil. Rwanda has started vaccinating healthcare workers and other high-risk groups, its health ministry has said, making it the first country in east Africa to start its rollout. The UK has reported a further 10,972 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases, according to government data - a fall from last Sunday's figure at 15,845. A total of 4,038,078 people have tested positive. A total of 15,062,189 people in the UK have now had a first dose of Covid-19 vaccine, according to the latest government figures. An Israeli study of more than half a million fully vaccinated people indicated the Pfizer/BioNTech jab offered 94% protection against Covid-19, according to the country's largest healthcare provider. There is growing controversy over a World Health Organization investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic after one of its members said China had refused to hand over key data, and the US national security adviser said he had "deep concerns" about the initial findings.68265falsefalseJedidajah Otte (now); Damien Gayle and Helen Sullivan (earlier)Motorists wait for a coronavirus test at Papatoetoe High School after a pupil tested positive and Auckland in New Zealand, enters a level 3 lockdown.A photograph taken with slow shutter speed shows people crowding a shopping market on the eve of Diwali festival in New Delhi, India, on 13 November 2020.A health worker receives her second dose of Covid-19 vaccine at a government hospital in Hyderabad, India, on Monday.Close to 700 doses of the Moderna Covid-19 Vaccine were set to be given out at Central Falls High School in Central Falls, Rhode Island, on 13 February, 2021. The city of Central Falls is currently offering Covid-19 vaccinations to any adult 18 years and older in contrast to the rest of the state which is following state guidelines and offering only to certain groups, frontline workers and people 75 years old and older. According to the US Census bureau, Central Falls is made up of over 66% Hispanic and almost 13% Black residents.Scotland's first minister Nicola Sturgeon at the Scottish Parliament in Holyrood, Edinburgh, Scotland.Devotees pray at a temple to mark the start of the lunar new year in Ta Khmao, Kandal province on 12 February.Britain's prime minister Boris Johnson holds a vial of the AstraZeneca vaccine during a visit to a coronavirus vaccination centre at the Health and Well-being Centre in Orpington, south-east London, on Monday, 15 February, 2021.Nigel Skea, left, Agatha Maghesh Eyamalai, centre, and defence lawyer Dhillon Surinder Singh leave the State Courts in Singapore.Passengers arrive at London Heathrow on the first flight from one of 33 "red list" countries to which new mandatory coronavirus rules apply.Chinese Sinopharm vaccines arriving at Robert Mugabe airport in Harare, Zimbabwe.China reported nine new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 14 February, compared to seven a day earlier, the health commission said on Monday.Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.