Welcome to another special edition of the Guardian Weekly. The decade following the financial crash led to rising nationalism and authoritarian leaders - what will be the global response to the societal and economic shock of Covid-19? That's the question posed by Simon Tisdall, beginning on page 6. Is this, like 9/11 and the fall of the Berlin Wall, a moment in history that will cause the world as we know it to change? And could that change be positive, or reinforce those negative post-2008 trends? One man who exploited that drift towards isolationism and nationalism is US president Donald Trump. Despite flailing during the biggest crisis of his presidency - and possibly his lifetime - Trump's popularity with his base remains. But could the scrambled US approach to the pandemic be his downfall? Guardian US reporters            Ed Pilkington and            Tom McCarthy look back at the crucial six weeks that followed the first reported case in the US. Mistakes made during that time have led to the US leading the world in the number of infections, and as the top US government infectious disease expert warned last weekend, the risk of 200,000 deaths. Elsewhere,            Ashifa Kassam reports from Spain, which has become a key frontline of the global emergency, while            Richard Orange tastes the mood in Sweden, which, with its relaxed rules on movement and public closures, is proving an outlier compared with the rest of Europe.

On the scientific side, Laura Spinney - who wrote our recent cover story about the race for a cure - goes back to the origins of Covid-19 and looks at the outsized role that industrial chicken farming plays in the creation of virulent illnesses. Is factory farming to blame? Then science correspondent            Hannah Devlin lays out all that we've learned over the past week or two. Finally, on page 18,            Jack Shenker looks back in history at how pandemics have previously altered and reshaped urban lives and asks what will the coronavirus do the modern city? In our opinion pages, we feature David Runciman on how the virus has exposed the Hobbesian nature of politics in an emergency, and Italian novelist Francesca Melandri writes a moving message from Italy, a nation that offers a scary glimpse into the future for many countries approaching the peak of their crises. There's more beyond the outbreak towards the back of the magazine, too. Including            Steve Rose on how Disney took over the entertainment world and            Sean O'Hagan on the inspiring legacy of young journalist Lyra McKee, who was killed in Northern Ireland last year.

Subscribe here.