block-time published-time 8.31am GMT

End-of-day summary

We are going to wrap up the live blog for today, but we will be back again for Friday. In case you missed it, here’s some of what made the news this Thursday 17 December:

•There was a dramatic increase in Covid-19 cases in New South Wales connected to Sydney’s northern beaches, with the total now standing at 17. Fifteen more tested positive on Thursday, including a man in his 60s from Frenchs Forest. The man played at Avalon RSL on 11 December in a band called Nothing Too Serious.•People north of the Spit Bridge are being asked to stay home for the next three days, as contact tracers work to find all close contacts and potential hotspots.•The origin of this outbreak is still unknown, but contact tracers are still working.•Queensland could reimpose border restrictions on NSW in the next 24 hours in the wake of the outbreak, with North Sydney potentially declared a hotspot. Those who have been in the northern beaches area will not be able to visit aged care, hospitals or correctional facilities in Queensland from midday tomorrow.•Western Australia now requires anyone who has arrived in WA from NSW since 11 December to get tested and isolate for 24 hours until results come back.•In the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook released today, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said unemployment would return to pre-Covid levels in four years, with 85% of those who lost their job during the worst of the lockdowns in Australia back in work.•Close to 60 refugees and asylum seekers who had been held in the Mantra hotel in Preston for over a year were moved by Australian border force to a hotel in the Melbourne CBD which was the location where Covid outbreaks occurred from hotel quarantine.•The Victorian government has refused to apologise for the lockdown of public housing towers in July following an ombudsman report that found the government had breached the human rights of the more than 3,000 residents of the towers by immediately locking down the towers.•Mining giant Rio Tinto announced its chief financial officer, Jakob Stausholm, will be the new chief executive of the company, after the former CEO resigned over the company’s decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia’s Pilbara region.

There was a dramatic increase in Covid-19 cases in New South Wales connected to Sydney’s northern beaches, with the total now standing at 17. Fifteen more tested positive on Thursday, including a man in his 60s from Frenchs Forest. The man played at Avalon RSL on 11 December in a band called Nothing Too Serious.

People north of the Spit Bridge are being asked to stay home for the next three days, as contact tracers work to find all close contacts and potential hotspots.

The origin of this outbreak is still unknown, but contact tracers are still working.

Queensland could reimpose border restrictions on NSW in the next 24 hours in the wake of the outbreak, with North Sydney potentially declared a hotspot. Those who have been in the northern beaches area will not be able to visit aged care, hospitals or correctional facilities in Queensland from midday tomorrow.

Western Australia now requires anyone who has arrived in WA from NSW since 11 December to get tested and isolate for 24 hours until results come back.

In the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook released today, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said unemployment would return to pre-Covid levels in four years, with 85% of those who lost their job during the worst of the lockdowns in Australia back in work.

Close to 60 refugees and asylum seekers who had been held in the Mantra hotel in Preston for over a year were moved by Australian border force to a hotel in the Melbourne CBD which was the location where Covid outbreaks occurred from hotel quarantine.

The Victorian government has refused to apologise for the lockdown of public housing towers in July following an ombudsman report that found the government had breached the human rights of the more than 3,000 residents of the towers by immediately locking down the towers.

Mining giant Rio Tinto announced its chief financial officer, Jakob Stausholm, will be the new chief executive of the company, after the former CEO resigned over the company’s decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia’s Pilbara region.

Until tomorrow, stay safe.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.38am GMT

block-time published-time 8.12am GMT

We have basically quoted it in full already but here’s the release about the northern beaches.

undltr pic.twitter.com/Pa42fJy7gZ

— Gladys Berejiklian (@GladysB) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.19am GMT

block-time published-time 8.00am GMT

The stay-at-home request for people on Sydney’s northern beaches is three days, just to confirm.

The NSW Health alert says:

To assist contact tracing and to contain any potential spread of Covid-19, we ask that for the next three days, people residing in the northern beaches local government area take the following steps:

•Work from home and remain at home as much as possible•Do not visit friends or relatives in aged care facilities or hospitals unless essential•Avoid unnecessary gatherings•Keep to your household group•Avoid visiting high-risk venues including clubs, restaurants, places of worship and gyms•Avoid unnecessary travel outside the northern beaches area

Work from home and remain at home as much as possible

Do not visit friends or relatives in aged care facilities or hospitals unless essential

Avoid unnecessary gatherings

Keep to your household group

Avoid visiting high-risk venues including clubs, restaurants, places of worship and gyms

Avoid unnecessary travel outside the northern beaches area

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.20am GMT

block-time published-time 7.55am GMT

Emergency services are dealing with dozens of calls for help after severe storms crossed Melbourne, bringing down trees and causing minor flooding, AAP reports.

The SES has received more than 40 calls for assistance, as households deal with minor flooding, fallen trees and building damage, but it’s expecting more calls as the storms move into Gippsland on Thursday night.

The Bureau of Meteorology’s Richard Russell says much of the Gippsland region will see heavy rain and large hail.

It’s been pretty significant through that part of the world.

The storm that hit Melbourne intensified around Melton on Thursday afternoon and tracked through the western suburbs before moving east.

Several suburbs including Gardiners Creek and Keilor received more than 10mm of rain in under 15 minutes.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.14am GMT

block-time published-time 7.46am GMT

It is not yet a public health order, but late on Thursday afternoon the New South Wales  health department issued an urgent request for the entire northern beaches area, from the Spit to Palm Beach, to stay at home.

The health department also warned others to avoid visiting the area. It said in the alert:

As a number of new cases are currently being interviewed, it is likely that a number of new venues will be identified and that people in the northern beaches may have attended these venues.

For that reason, it urged people in the region to work from home, and remain at home “as much as possible”.

People are being urged to avoid unnecessary travel outside of the northern beaches, and to not visit friends or relatives in aged care homes, avoid unnecessary gatherings, to keep to household groups and avoid high-risk venues such as gyms or restaurants and places of worship.

Manly wharf. Northern beaches residents are being urged to stay at home after a new outbreak of Covid. Photograph: The Guardian

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.16am GMT

block-time published-time 7.40am GMT

Queensland is also imposing new restrictions on New South Wales, announcing anyone who was at the Avalon Beach RSL on 11 December must isolate immediately for 14 days and get tested.

People who have been in the northern beaches region since 11 December are also being told to monitor symptoms, but from noon tomorrow, anyone who has been in that region who is in Queensland cannot visit residential aged care, hospitals or correctional facilities.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.42am GMT

block-time published-time 7.37am GMT

Sydney is in the grips of a major new Covid-19 outbreak and residents of the city’s northern beaches are being urged to stay at home after the number of new cases rose from five to 17 on Thursday.

Late on Thursday afternoon the New South Wales health department confirmed that testing had uncovered 17 cases of the virus.

It marks a dramatic escalation of the outbreak, with health authorities putting the number of positive cases at five earlier in the day.

The health department is now urging people who live on the northern beaches to stay at home, as it tries to grapple with the extent of the outbreak.

We’ll have more as it comes.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.38am GMT

block-time published-time 7.30am GMT

Sydney's northern beaches cluster grows to 17

People north of the Spit Bridge to Palm Beach in northern Sydney are being told to stay home after the northern beaches cluster increased from five to 17.

NSW Health has confirmed there have been 12 new cases this afternoon.

People are being advised to work from home where possible, remain at home as much as possible, not visit hospitals or aged care facilities and avoid unnecessary gatherings or high-risk locations.

enltr #BREAKING  : There are 17 new #COVID19  cases in Sydney's Northern Beaches cluster. NSW Government has issued a stay at home order from The Spit to Palm Beach. #9News pic.twitter.com/z3dwVfLhlQ

— 9News Sydney (@9NewsSyd) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.43am GMT

block-time published-time 7.19am GMT

WA requires NSW visitors to isolate and test

Western Australia has introduced a new requirement for anyone who arrived from NSW since 11 December to immediately isolate and get tested for Covid-19 in the next 24 hours.

Anyone arriving after this point will need to get tested on arrival and isolate.

enltrBreaking: new isolate & testing rules for NSW arrivals in WA due to sydney covid cluster @7NewsPerth pic.twitter.com/eRDZsdtdxW

— Jessica Page (@JessicaPage7) December 17, 2020

block-time published-time 7.05am GMT

In classic Melbourne style, the storms have passed but may not have passed for long.

enltrSevere thunderstorms in the warning area have temporarily eased. However, the redevelopment of severe thunderstorms remains likely. The situation is being closely monitored and further detailed warnings will be issued as necessary. Stay Informed: https://t.co/T05ONtObdB

— VicEmergency (@vicemergency) December 17, 2020

block-time published-time 6.48am GMT

Still severe storm warnings for Melbourne:

enltrSEVERE THUNDERSTORM WARNING - Melbourne Area For DAMAGING WINDS, LARGE HAILSTONES and HEAVY RAINFALL For people in South East and parts of Port Phillip waters, Western Port, Inner East, Inner and Outer East Local Warning Areas. Stay Informed: https://t.co/T05ONtObdB pic.twitter.com/RayXArCuiD

— VicEmergency (@vicemergency) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.50am GMT

block-time published-time 6.35am GMT

BOM advice for flash flooding in Tallebudgera Creek:

enltr??UPDATE: #SevereThunderstormWarning  in #SEQ  ?? Severe storms are producing heavy rain that may lead to flash flooding. 190mm rain since 9am has been reported at Tallebudgera Creek. Flood warning also current. Warnings: https://t.co/1HUhlxIf9E #GoldCoast #ScenicRim pic.twitter.com/A1E6dg8DHx

— Bureau of Meteorology, Queensland (@BOM_Qld) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.37am GMT

block-time published-time 6.08am GMT

If you want to read more on the Rio Tinto Juukan Gorge scandal, my colleagues Lorena Allam  and Calla Wahlquist wrote this on the weekend on the significance of the site that was destroyed:

“This rock pool is a very spiritual place, which is still visited by the spirits of our people,” Burchell Hayes, a spokesman for the PKKP, told a parliamentary committee in October. The committee had travelled from Canberra to the remote Western Australian site to look at the damage first-hand.

“The Juukan Gorge is known to be a place where the spirits of our relatives who have passed away, even recently, have come to rest. It is a place that the very, very old people still occupy,” Hayes told them.

“Purlykuti has been specifically referred to by the old people as a place of pardu, which refers to the special language only spoken during ceremonies in the Pilbara. Our elders state that it is certain that the spirits are very disturbed, and their living relatives are also upset at this.”

Related:  'Gobsmacked': how to stop a disaster like Juukan Gorge happening again

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.09am GMT

block-time published-time 5.54am GMT

There is a severe thunderstorm warning for the Melbourne area.

It was heavy rain where I am before, but it seems to have eased for the time being. Not that that means much in Melbourne.

enltrSEVERE THUNDERSTORM WARNING - Melbourne Area For DAMAGING WINDS, LARGE HAILSTONES and HEAVY RAINFALL For people in Inner East, Outer East and parts of Inner, South East and Northern Local Warning Areas. Stay Informed: https://t.co/T05ONtObdB pic.twitter.com/54TPvf7acI

— VicEmergency (@vicemergency) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.55am GMT

block-time published-time 5.49am GMT

Rio Tinto appoints new CEO

Mining giant Rio Tinto has just announced its chief financial officer, Jakob Stausholm, will be the new chief executive of the company, after the former CEO resigned over the company’s decision to blow up 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in Western Australia’s Pilbara region.

The company’s former chief executive  Jean-Sébastien Jacques and two other senior executives left the global miner in September  after its board bowed to intense investor pressure for strong action over the debacle.

The iron ore head, Chris Salisbury, and the corporate affairs boss, Simone Niven, also left at the same time.

Stausholm will commence as CEO from 1 January 2021.

The company’s group controller, Peter Cunningham, will become interim CFO from the same date.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.52am GMT

block-time published-time 5.41am GMT

enltr?? Major #Flood  Warning issued for the #Gwydir  River at #YarramanBridge.  Moderate flooding at #Gravesend.  Minor flooding for #Pallamallawa  and #Moree.  See https://t.co/VzIkpMw1bI  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES.  #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/FsPSO8mRAW

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 17, 2020

block-time published-time 5.22am GMT

The shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, is on just after his Liberal counterpart, and says jobkeeper should be kept in line with the economic recovery.

He also says Labor wants the jobseeker rate to stay higher permanently, but will not say at what rate it should be. He says Labor is prepared to work with the government on the level at which it should be set.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.24am GMT

block-time published-time 5.19am GMT

Frydenberg was also asked if he had “kissed and made up” with the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, over his criticism of the lockdown in Victoria.

He said they’ve had “a constructive discussion” but doesn’t take back the comments, despite the lockdown leading to the elimination of Covid-19 in Victoria (48 days of no cases):

We sat opposite each other at the lunch last week with the premiers and the treasurers and, in fact, sat next to each other for part of the flight home from Canberra to Melbourne, and we discussed the importance of the commonwealth and Victoria working together.

I’m a very proud Victorian and I don’t regret anything that I said during the lockdown, and, certainly, much of the correspondence coming back to me was from Victorians who were deeply concerned about not just the economic impact but the human impact the lockdown was having on them.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.20am GMT

block-time published-time 5.14am GMT

The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is on ABC TV discussing today’s Myefo announcement.

He was asked about the missing figures around the future of the extra money for jobseeker, and said the government was watching what would happen after March, when the current supplement is due to end:

We will obviously continue to monitor the labour market but the best thing that we can do for those people who are on jobseeker are to get them into work.

One example of the programs that we’ve announced to do exactly that is the jobmaker hiring credit, which is focused on young people aged 15 to 34 who have been unemployed, but who do need that additional incentive to an employer to take them on, and we are providing up to $200 a week for an employer who takes one of those workers on and that can help reduce the number of people who are on jobseeker.

He was pushed to say what would happen after March, but said he wasn’t going to make policy pronouncements today, despite the uncertainty it creates for the millions on jobseeker.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.18am GMT

block-time published-time 4.54am GMT

And some more on the NSW rain situation from AAP:

Residents around the northern NSW town of Murwillumbah are being warned to prepare to evacuate for the second time in three days after a week of unrelenting rain.

The Bureau of Meteorology is again predicting possible flooding of the Tweed River at Tumbulgum, Condong and surrounding areas.

The State Emergency Service says people in the area should prepare to leave now.

BOM is predicting moderate flooding will begin late on Thursday night.

Residents in the area who were evacuated on Tuesday were only permitted to return home on Wednesday evening.

A flood watch is also current for Gravesend, east of Moree.

Moderate flooding is expected there, and major flooding downstream at Yarraman Bridge.

Minor flooding is also possible along the Mehi River at Moree on Saturday.

The bureau says thunderstorms that have soaked northern NSW and south-east Queensland for a week will continue for days.

Severe thunderstorms are likely to hit parts of the Hunter, mid-north coast and northern rivers on Thursday afternoon, with Taree and Scone joining the Tweed in the firing line.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.57am GMT

block-time published-time 4.48am GMT

The Law Council of Australia has welcomed the government’s moves to require more checks on warrants to find journalists’ sources, and the acknowledgement that journalists need more protections from secrecy offences.

But the council’s president, Pauline Wright, has said the government needs to immediately implement the recommendations made by the joint standing committee on intelligence and security, and not wait for yet another review:

While the government will be reviewing whether public interest journalism is adequately protected under commonwealth legislation, immediate reforms are required to amend the elements of secrecy and disclosure offences (requiring proof of harm or likely harm caused by a disclosure) and to enact broader public interest disclosure defences, not merely for journalists.

The Law Council urges the government to promptly implement the committee’s recommendations, particularly the recommended amendments requiring the independent issuing of warrants, record-keeping and reporting on those warrants, and the appointment of public interest advocates.

Action on these matters need not, and should not, await the completion of any further reviews into other laws.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.51am GMT

block-time published-time 4.38am GMT

Aveo has confirmed that a staff member at Pittwater Palms retirement village in Avalon on Sydney’s northern beaches has tested positive for Covid-19.

The company has said the staff member is well and containment procedures have been put in place to reduce exposure to staff and residents, including:

•Isolating the staff member at home•Asking residents who were a close contact of the staff member, or were in hotspots to get tested and isolate•Asking staff members who were close contacts of the infected staff member to get tested and isolate

Isolating the staff member at home

Asking residents who were a close contact of the staff member, or were in hotspots to get tested and isolate

Asking staff members who were close contacts of the infected staff member to get tested and isolate

Community facilities in the village have been closed but essential services remain operational.

No other staff members have tested positive nor do any others have symptoms.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.40am GMT

block-time published-time 4.25am GMT

AAP is reporting that anti-Adani activists have staged sit-ins at two Queensland bank branches over the Indian miner’s controversial coal project.

About 20 protesters waving placards took over the foyer of HSBC Australia on Queen Street in Brisbane about 10.30am, police said on Thursday.

Another eight entered HSBC’s Gold Coast branch on Scarborough Street about the same time, also holding signs.

The activists are demanding the global banking giant use its influence over the State Bank of India to block a proposed $1bn loan to Adani.

They say the money will be used to finish building the Carmichael project in the resource-rich Galilee Basin and HSBC is one of the few major SBI investors not publicly condemning the loan.

“HSBC, stop greenwashing,” one placard said.

“Rule out support for Adani,” another urged.

Queensland police said both protests were largely peaceful and the activists left the Gold Coast branch about 12.30pm.

Three people were arrested in Brisbane.

In a statement, HSBC said it prioritised financing and investment that supports the transition to a net-zero global economy.

It declined to comment about the loan, saying it was a matter for the State Bank of India.

Adani changed its Australian business name from Adani Australia to Bravus in November.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.28am GMT

block-time published-time 4.11am GMT

Heavy rainfall and rising flood waters are causing havoc on parts of the Gold Coast, with at least one person rescued after their car was submerged, AAP reports.

Emergency services rescued the occupant of a vehicle trapped in rising flood waters at Tallebudgera at around 10.50am on Thursday.

An emergency alert has been issued by the city of Gold Coast for properties in Tallebudgera and Currumbin in the region’s south.

The advice is that due to ongoing heavy rainfall, catchments may be impacted by floodwater in coming hours.

RACQ is advising motorists to stay at home with flash flooding closing several roads.

The Bureau of Meteorology has warned dangerous thunderstorms had been detected near Coolangatta and Miami in the Gold Coast region on Thursday morning.

Rainfall in excess of 100mm had been observed in the two hours to 10.30am in the area.

Residents in the Wide Bay, Burnett and Southeast Coast areas have been warned that storms producing heavy rain are likely.

Almost 60mm was reported in an hour to 9.30am at Oyster Creek, south of Gladstone and there was 33mm in 30 minutes at Bundaberg South.

The bureau advised that a coastal trough moving ashore is responsible for the slow moving thunderstorms.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.22am GMT

block-time published-time 4.02am GMT

Just on the man shot by police in Logan in Queensland this morning: the Courier-Mail is reporting  the man was on bail on charges of being an Islamic State supporter.

Guardian Australia has not confirmed the claim, yet.

The man died on the scene.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.07am GMT

block-time published-time 3.38am GMT

And with that, my time on today’s busy blog comes to an end, and I will leave you with Josh Taylor to take you through the rest of the day’s news.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41am GMT

block-time published-time 3.31am GMT

South Australian authorities are closely monitoring the evolving situation in Sydney.

The SA police commissioner, Grant Stevens, has said that if contact tracers in NSW don’t find the source of the outbreak, the state would consider shutting its borders again.

“We would anticipate that they would be able to identify the source of that particular infection. If that’s not the case and we see a continuing spread of Covid-19 in the NSW community then we will reassess our border arrangements.”

South Australian police commissioner Grant Stevens. Photograph: Kelly Barnes/Getty Images

Stevens said the outbreak was a warning for communities to remain vigilant.

“It’s a stark reminder to everyone that even though we’ve effectively eliminated Covid-19 from within our communities, it can find its way back in,” Stevens said.

“We need to be in a position to respond quickly if that does occur.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.47am GMT

block-time published-time 3.14am GMT

So I’m just going to list in one place all of the venues of concern, as of 2pm today.

Anyone who visited the following venues during these times is considered a close contact and needs to immediately get tested and isolate for 14 days:

•Female change rooms at Palm Beach, 13 December, 9am-9.15am.•Coast Palm Beach cafe 13 December, 10am-11am.•Avalon Bowlo on 13 December, 5-7pm and 15 December, 3-5pm.•Hungry Ghost cafe at Avalon on 14 December, 9.30am-11am.•Sneaky Grind cafe at Avalon Beach on 14 December, 10.30am-11am.•Barramee Thai Massage and Spa at Avalon Beach, 14 December, 2-3.30pm.•Bangkok Sidewalk restaurant at Avalon Beach, 14 December, 7-8pm.

Female change rooms at Palm Beach, 13 December, 9am-9.15am.

Coast Palm Beach cafe 13 December, 10am-11am.

Avalon Bowlo on 13 December, 5-7pm and 15 December, 3-5pm.

Hungry Ghost cafe at Avalon on 14 December, 9.30am-11am.

Sneaky Grind cafe at Avalon Beach on 14 December, 10.30am-11am.

Barramee Thai Massage and Spa at Avalon Beach, 14 December, 2-3.30pm.

Bangkok Sidewalk restaurant at Avalon Beach, 14 December, 7-8pm.

Anyone who visited the following venues at these times should get tested and isolate until a negative result returns and until they have been contacted by NSW Health:

•Avalon RSL club, 11 December, all day until close.•Penrith RSL club, 13 December, 1-6pm.•Kirribilli club, 14 December, noon-3pm.

Avalon RSL club, 11 December, all day until close.

Penrith RSL club, 13 December, 1-6pm.

Kirribilli club, 14 December, noon-3pm.

Anyone who visited the following locations at the listed times is considered a casual contact and is advised to monitor for symptoms and get tested immediately if they present.

•Little Rangers session at Gannons Park in Peakhurst on 11 December, 4.30-5.30pm. Any adults who were present should get tested immediately and self-isolate until they receive a negative result.•Woolworths at Avalon Beach, 13 December, noon-5pm, and 15 December, noon-12.30pm.•Oliver’s Pie at Avalon Beach on 14 December, 9-9.15am.•Bing Lee at Mona Vale 14 December, 4.30-4.45pm.

Little Rangers session at Gannons Park in Peakhurst on 11 December, 4.30-5.30pm. Any adults who were present should get tested immediately and self-isolate until they receive a negative result.

Woolworths at Avalon Beach, 13 December, noon-5pm, and 15 December, noon-12.30pm.

Oliver’s Pie at Avalon Beach on 14 December, 9-9.15am.

Bing Lee at Mona Vale 14 December, 4.30-4.45pm.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.30am GMT

block-time published-time 3.10am GMT

The Business Council of Australia is also very happy with the full federal court’s decision handing Qantas a win in the jobkeeper case.

From the chief executive, Jennifer Westacott:

“This decision will be a great relief to many businesses across the economy that applied the jobkeeper rules in accordance with advice provided by the Australian Tax Office. These arrangements had been thrown into great uncertainty by the initial court decision.

“Today’s ruling will give businesses the certainty they need to get on with our biggest challenge, getting people back to work and creating new jobs for Australians.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.11am GMT

block-time published-time 3.05am GMT

The pop-up clinic in Avalon has opened, with NSW Health urging anyone who has even the slightest symptoms to come forward and get tested.

enltrA new pop up clinic has been rapidly established at Avalon and will open for high volume testing at midday today, 17 December. NSW Health has also increased staffing and extended hours at other Northern Beaches testing locations, including Mona Vale. pic.twitter.com/elXofFBC5U

— NSW Health (@NSWHealth) December 17, 2020

The other testing centres on the northern beaches are at:

• Mona Vale hospital, Gate 3, Coronation Street, Mona Vale: walk-in clinic open 8am-10pm seven days a week

• Brookvale Community Health Centre, 612-624 Pittwater Road, Brookvale: open 8am-10pm seven days a week

• Northern Beaches hospital, 105 Frenchs Forest Road (West), Frenchs Forest, (rear of emergency department): open 8am-5pm seven days a week

• Manly Histopath drive-through, Old Manly Hospital, 150 Darley Road, Manly: open 9am-4pm Monday to Friday

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.08am GMT

block-time published-time 2.57am GMT

Qantas has returned fire at unions over the airline’s jobkeeper situation.

To recap, as we reported this morning, Qantas won its appeal against a ruling that it had to backpay workers after a stoush with the unions over how jobkeeper was calculated.

Unions said the decision allowed Qantas “to continue underpaying workers and manipulating their rosters to pay them not a cent more than the wage subsidy of $600 a week for full-time and $375 a week for part-time workers before tax”.

But Qantas says there have been no such shenanigans.

“We have always paid penalty rates and overtime in the same way – this is not something we just started doing during Covid,” a spokesman said.

“Rostering arrangements during the stand-down period was done in consultation with unions.”

He said “tens of thousands” of other businesses made jobkeeper payments in the same way as Qantas.

“It’s time for these unions to stop making false claims and misleading our employees,” he said

“The court has found we are administering jobkeeper as the government intended.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.59am GMT

block-time published-time 2.52am GMT

In the meantime, no new cases in South Australia:

enltrSouth Australian COVID-19 update 17/12/20. For more information, go to https://t.co/mYnZsGpayo  or contact the South Australian COVID-19 Information Line on 1800 253 787. pic.twitter.com/Mm2mqDLZD4

— SA Health (@SAHealth) December 17, 2020

block-time published-time 2.42am GMT

A protester has been arrested as police cleared a rally outside a Melbourne hotel set to house about 60 asylum seekers and refugees.

The men were moved from the Mantra Hotel in Preston in Melbourne’s north to the Park Hotel in Carlton, a site that previously served as a hotel quarantine facility.

Protesters took to Swanston Street for about 45 minutes before they were cleared by police.

One protester was arrested amid minor scuffles with police.

One refugee, Mostafa “Moz” Azimitabar, told Guardian Australia about midday the men were yet to receive any further information.

He was hopeful conditions would be better at the new site.

enltrA man has been arrested pic.twitter.com/M4LhjS3u8i

— Luke Henriques-Gomes (@lukehgomes) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44am GMT

block-time published-time 2.41am GMT

A discussion at the end of that press conference got a little combative, as Hazzard returned serve on questions about the divorced couple who tested positive yesterday.

A reporter asks why there was still a shroud of privacy around them, when earlier in the pandemic, police would normally update the public on who breached public health orders.

However, Hazzard shot down the suggestion, saying the government was still unsure on the details of their infection and whether they actually spread the virus.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.45am GMT

block-time published-time 2.26am GMT

One of the people who tested positive today is a man in his 60s who lives in Frenchs Forest at the southern end of the northern beaches. The man, who is now isolating, had been working in a band called Nothing Too Serious (not joking) that performed at the Avalon RSL on 11 December.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.38am GMT

block-time published-time 2.23am GMT

Dr Chant says she is relatively confident this is a new outbreak, and not an ongoing outbreak that has only been caught now.

She referred to sewage surveillance from 10 December, saying it had come back negative, giving her confidence this is a new outbreak.

block-time published-time 2.15am GMT

The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has identified the Avalon RSL club as the potential source for the cluster, asking anyone who was at the club, at any time on 11 December, to come forward for testing.

She also listed the Penrith RSL Club on 13 December from 1pm to 6pm and the Kirribilli Club on 14 December, from 12pm to 3pm  as venues of concern.

Dr Chant said the lady who tested positive yesterday crossed over with the aged care worker at the Avalon bowling club on Sunday.

She said an unknown person is the source of the outbreak at the Avalon RSL club.

Genomic sequencing results will be available from 7pm tonight, where we could know where this outbreak has come from.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.55am GMT

block-time published-time 2.10am GMT

Another Covid case added to Sydney's northern beaches cluster

The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, has announced another positive case as part of the northern beaches cluster: a partner to one of the positive cases announced this morning.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.35am GMT

block-time published-time 2.07am GMT

The WA premier, Mark McGowan,  has said his government “will not hesitate” to put in a harder border “if they have to”.

“If we need to, we’ll put up a hard border with NSW – if we need to do that we won’t hesitate to do that,” he said.

“If the medical advice says that’s what we need to do to protect West Australians, then we will do it immediately.”

He said his chief health officer had been liaising with his counterpart in NSW, with an emergency meeting scheduled for later today.

McGowan has indicated that there appears to be a low risk at this point, but was seeking greater clarity.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.10am GMT

block-time published-time 1.50am GMT

It is now time for the trade and finance minister, Simon Birmingham, to also add to this update, saying that the budget deficit is now being revised down by $24bn based on better-than-expected economic performance.

“This year’s deficit will now come in at under $200bn at $197bn, as the treasurer said, or 9.9% of GDP. The economic lifelines provided through Covid and through the economic recovery plan outlined in the budget are working.”

He also outlined a $6.8bn investment into Covid “economic and health support”, which will include: “$1.6bn of investment in our vaccine strategy, $500m towards vaccinations across our region, $3.2bn in extension of the temporary coronavirus supplement, $306m to further boost infrastructure investment, $241m of extension to the homebuilder program, and $128m in targeted support to travel agents”.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.00am GMT

block-time published-time 1.45am GMT

Frydenberg: unemployment to return to pre-Covid levels in four years

The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is speaking now on the mid-year budget update. It is positively glowing as he lists off the ways in which the Australian economy is recovering.

“Eighty-five per cent of the 1.3 million Australians who either lost their jobs or saw their working hours reduced to zero at the start of the crisis are now back at work. The September quarter saw an increase in GDP of 3.3% – the biggest quarterly increase since 1976.

“Australia’s economic recovery from the Covid crisis is now expected to be faster than our recovery from previous recessions. The unemployment rate is expected to recover to pre-Covid levels in around four years.”

The government was absolutely going to claim this economic recovery as their own, and here we are.

“This improved outlook is off the back of unprecedented levels of economic support. The Morrison government has committed $251bn in direct economic support. Already over $138bn has flowed to households and businesses.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.50am GMT

block-time published-time 1.37am GMT

Some incredible aerial footage captures the extent of flooding in northern NSW:

block-time published-time 1.31am GMT

An update on the refugees detained at the Mantra Hotel in Prestons: it is now understood that police will be moving them to the Park Royal hotel in Carlton.

enltrPolice present at the Park Royal hotel in Carlton where’s it’s believed detainees have been moved. This is believed to be the bus they were transported in pic.twitter.com/9hlknTc8tO

— Luke Henriques-Gomes (@lukehgomes) December 17, 2020

An enormous police presence seems to be escorting the refugees from one hotel detention to another, with protesters demanding the men be freed.

caltrExtraordinary scenes at Mantra pic.twitter.com/84JKhUOUVY

— Bianca Hall (@_Biancah) December 17, 2020

enltrAll #refugee  men were moved from #Mantra  today in convoy of buses. #Police  said they had no idea where. Riot police & #publicorder  response team present. Road block at Bell Street. #GameOver @ANZSOC_Borders pic.twitter.com/9WUBQdTGNK

— Claire Loughnan (@claire_loughnan) December 17, 2020

You can read more on the story here:

Related:  Refugees and asylum seekers moved from Mantra hotel in Melbourne

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34am GMT

block-time published-time 1.25am GMT

Lunchtime summary

It has been a breathless morning so far. Let’s just quickly go through everything that has happened:

•Two further cases have been recorded on Sydney’s northern beaches, bringing that cluster up to four. The two additional cases, one a member of a band and another an aged care worker, are joined by the two cases reported yesterday.•The Victorian ombudsman has found that there were human rights breaches in the detention and treatment of Melbourne public housing residents at the onset of the state’s second wave. The Victorian housing minister, however, rejected calls to apologise to the residents.•Unemployment has dropped by 0.2% in November, as the ABS revealed labour force statistics for the month – 90,000 new jobs were added in the month, but youth unemployment rose by 0.1% to 15,6%.•Victoria and Queensland both recorded zero new locally acquired infections today.•A man in Killarney was killed after flash flooding swept him away overnight. Much of northern NSW and southern Queensland was inundated overnight, with severe thunderstorm warnings in place for much of northern NSW for this afternoon.

Two further cases have been recorded on Sydney’s northern beaches, bringing that cluster up to four. The two additional cases, one a member of a band and another an aged care worker, are joined by the two cases reported yesterday.

The Victorian ombudsman has found that there were human rights breaches in the detention and treatment of Melbourne public housing residents at the onset of the state’s second wave. The Victorian housing minister, however, rejected calls to apologise to the residents.

Unemployment has dropped by 0.2% in November, as the ABS revealed labour force statistics for the month – 90,000 new jobs were added in the month, but youth unemployment rose by 0.1% to 15,6%.

Victoria and Queensland both recorded zero new locally acquired infections today.

A man in Killarney was killed after flash flooding swept him away overnight. Much of northern NSW and southern Queensland was inundated overnight, with severe thunderstorm warnings in place for much of northern NSW for this afternoon.

We expect further updates on the situation in NSW in the next hour or so, with the hope for good news this time.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.59am GMT

block-time published-time 1.06am GMT

NT records two new Covid cases in quarantine

The Northern Territory government has announced two new positive cases in overseas arrivals the past 24 hours.

A two-year-old and a 16-year-old both arrived on a repatriation flight from Chennai, India, and remain in quarantine.

The total number of cases diagnosed in the Northern Territory is 69. All cases have been related to international or interstate travel, with no cases of community transmission.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.09am GMT

block-time published-time 1.01am GMT

A quick update on the new cases reported in NSW: one of the two people actually worked at an aged care facility.

Pittwater Palms is actually a “retirement community” in Avalon and not a beach resort as I had actually assumed when I first read that. It would also explain the NSW Health directive to close aged care facilities in the are.

We are expecting more updates on the situation at 1pm.

People line up for Covid-19 testing at Mona Vale hospital’s walk-in clinic in Sydney. Photograph: Dean Lewins/EPA      Long lines formed at the clinic as people responded to the news by getting tested. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP      NSW broke its 12-day streak without locally acquired coronavirus cases. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.27am GMT

block-time published-time 12.53am GMT

Queensland warns it may impose border restrictions on NSW

The Queensland acting premier, Steven Miles, has warned the state could reimpose border restrictions if a new coronavirus outbreak in Sydney’s northern beaches was not contained.

Miles told reporters in Cairns this morning the state’s chief health officer, Jeanette Young, was likely to make a decision on possible new restrictions based on information available during the next 24 hours.

He said that could mean declaring areas of northern Sydney a Covid “hotspot”, but that would depend on whether authorities in NSW were able to contain the outbreak and determine the origin of cases.

The Queensland acting premier Steven Miles. Photograph: Jono Searle/Getty Images

“Obviously there’s a lot of concern about this emerging outbreak in Sydney and they are monitoring it very closely.”

“We will over the next 24 hours monitor that very closely. We would urge anyone in Queensland who has been in that northern beaches region [in the past week]... to go to NSW Health Alerts to see if they have been in any of those locations.”

Miles said any Queenslanders intending to travel to those areas of Sydney should “consider waiting out that 24-hour period” as restrictions could be reimposed.

Over that 24 hour period the chief health officer will need to work out whether other measures need to be put in place. “That may involve naming geographic hotspots but it is too early to say whether that will be the case.”

“We hope they will get on top of this very quickly, but this is early days, this is new information and over the next 24 hours we will be monitoring it very very closely.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.02am GMT

block-time published-time 12.45am GMT

Unemployment down by 0.2% in November

The Australian Bureau of Statistics has revealed  that unemployment has fallen by 0.2% to 6.8% in the month of November.

Labour force statistics show that by a number of metrics the job market has improved in the last month:

•90,000 jobs were added in November in seasonally adjusted terms. There are now 12,860,700 people in work•The employment-to-population ratio increased by 0.4 points to 61.6%•Monthly hours worked increased by 43m hours•The underemployment rate decreased by 1% to 9.4%•The participation rate increased to 66.1%

90,000 jobs were added in November in seasonally adjusted terms. There are now 12,860,700 people in work

The employment-to-population ratio increased by 0.4 points to 61.6%

Monthly hours worked increased by 43m hours

The underemployment rate decreased by 1% to 9.4%

The participation rate increased to 66.1%

Encouragingly, most of the new jobs created were full-time (84,200) not part-time (5,800). Women recorded the biggest gains in participation, up 0.4% to 61.4% compared with men’s participation up 0.2% to 71%.

The rebound was led by Victoria, with the number of employed persons up by 2.2% in November, followed by Tasmania and WA (both up 0.8%) and NSW (up 0.6%).

Employment slumped in the ACT (-2.3%), the NT (-1%) and Queensland (-0.8%).

It’s not all rosy though – youth unemployment edged up by less than 0.1% to 15.6% and increased by 4.1% over the year to November 2020.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.49am GMT

block-time published-time 12.45am GMT

The ATP has announced an update to the start of the 2021 calendar, confirming the Australian Open will go ahead this year.

enltrThe ATP has today announced an update to the 2021 ATP Tour calendar, outlining a revised schedule for the first seven weeks of the season.

— ATP Tour (@atptour) December 17, 2020

The Australian Open is now scheduled to be held between on 8-21 February, to incorporate earlier events, travelling and quarantine for players.

Andrea Gaudenzi, the ATP chairman, said in a statement that the reconfigured calendar was developed in collaboration with different stakeholders.

“Health and safety will continue to be paramount as we navigate the challenges ahead, and I want to thank everyone involved for their commitment to finding solutions to launch our 2021 season.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.46am GMT

block-time published-time 12.26am GMT

Qantas has won an appeal against a court decision that would have required it to backpay workers who claimed they did not receive their full jobkeeper payments.

Unions had publicly accused Qantas of moving shifts around in an effort to trouser jobkeeper money, but in the end the case before the courts was run on the narrower issue of how to figure out the payments due for each fortnight of work.

The full court of the federal court this morning found in favour of Qantas’s preferred measure, saving the company from having to make backpay and setting a precedent that will apply across the economy.

“We welcome the decision,” a Qantas spokesman said. “We have always made jobkeeper payments to our employees according to advice from the Australian Tax Office.”

Unions representing workers at the airline – the TWU, ASU and FAAA – were furious, saying the decision allowed Qantas “to continue underpaying workers and manipulating their rosters to pay them not a cent more than the wage subsidy of $600 a week for full-time and $375 a week for part-time workers before tax”.

Qantas ground staff operating at the Brisbane domestic terminal. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.42am GMT

block-time published-time 12.21am GMT

The Morrison government is giving $50m in grants to accelerate exploration for fossil fuels in the Northern Territory.

Keith Pitt, the minister for resources, water and Northern Australia, has announced the grants to hurry up development of gas projects in the NT’s Beetaloo sub-basin before June 2022. They are available only until that date.

Pitt said the Beetaloo Basin  had been described as “the hottest play on the planet” in gas, with the potential to transform the NT economy and create 6,000 jobs over the next 20 years.

He said it was “a key early step” in the government’s “gas-fired recovery agenda”, which received $28.3m in the October budget.

The release does not mention the expected greenhouse gas emissions from the proposed development, or the government’s commitments on climate change.

Gas is often described as having half the emissions of coal, but studies have suggested it could be significantly more  due to methane – a potent but short-lived greenhouse gas – leaking during extraction and transportation.

Scott Morrison was last week refused a speaking slot  at a global climate ambition summit hosted by Britain, France and the UN due to a lack of commitments to tackle the climate crisis.

The government this week announced $2.5bn in taxpayers’ support for struggling oil refineries , and MPs flagged they may set up an inquiry to grill financial regulators and banks over plans to pull back on lending or insuring mining projects considered an investment risk in a low emissions world. The push was backed by the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, but opposed by some backbenchers.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.24am GMT

block-time published-time 12.18am GMT

NSW Health has provided some new updates on Twitter, but the two new cases mentioned today will be included in tomorrow’s numbers:

enltrNSW recorded three locally acquired cases of #COVID19  in the 24 hours to 8pm last night. Two additional new locally acquired cases were notified this morning in the Northern Beaches area in a man in his 60s and a woman in her 50s. pic.twitter.com/ZSYEDejbRg

— NSW Health (@NSWHealth) December 17, 2020

It also announced a rapidly set up pop-up testing site at Avalon that will open at noon:

enltrA new pop up clinic has been rapidly established at Avalon and will open for high volume testing at midday. NSW Health has also increased staffing and extended hours at other Northern Beaches testing locations, including Mona Vale. Further details will be provided shortly.

— NSW Health (@NSWHealth) December 17, 2020

Long lines from early in the morning appeared at a testing site at Mona Vale hospital, as people respond to the new cases by getting tested.

enltrLong lines for COVID-19 testing at #MonaVale  Hospital after confirmation of two more cases on Sydney's Northern Beaches today, in addition to the three new cases from yesterday. Contact tracing alerts: https://t.co/hlJZHd7WUD #COVID19 #9News pic.twitter.com/8fjq653uTh

— 9News Sydney (@9NewsSyd) December 17, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.19am GMT

block-time published-time 12.01am GMT

For those keeping track, we’re expecting a NSW Health update from the minister, Brad Hazzard, and the chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, at 1pm.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.15am GMT

block-time published-time 12.00am GMT

And breathe. Things will surely pick up any time, but I’d like to take this moment and share with you all a hilarious clip:

enltrIt’s the 2020 Closing Down Sale! Everything 2020-related must go! pic.twitter.com/j2ArXGG1km

— Mark Humphries (@markhumphries) December 16, 2020

Although I do feel personally attacked by the most overused phrases of 2020. I, for one, won’t apologise for writing shortcuts.

block-time published-time 11.55pm GMT

Queensland records no new locally acquired Covid cases

Meanwhile, up in Queensland, they have had another day of zero locally acquired cases, but have recorded a single case in overseas arrivals.

enltrThursday, 17 December – coronavirus cases in Queensland: • 0 locally acquired cases, 1 new case acquired overseas • 15 active cases • 1,230 total confirmed cases • 1,404,793 tests Sadly, six Queenslanders with COVID-19 have died. 1,209 patients have recovered. #covid19 pic.twitter.com/JehleSCwcN

— Annastacia Palaszczuk (@AnnastaciaMP) December 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.49pm GMT

Aged care facilities across northern beaches to be locked down – report

The ABC is reporting aged care facilities across the northern beaches will be locked down as a result of the outbreak there.

NSW Health is set to issue a directive to a number of “vulnerable” aged care facilities advising they should prohibit visitors.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.51pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.44pm GMT

Thunderstorm asthma alert issued for parts of Victoria

An alert has been issued for epidemic thunderstorm asthma for the West and South Gippsland weather districts in Victoria.

People with asthma or hay fever, or those who experience wheezing, breathlessness or a persistent cough, should try and stay indoors and close windows and doors. They are also advised to keep their medication on hand.

The combination of forecast high grass pollen levels and an unexpected thunderstorm with strong winds means that there is a chance that a large number of people may develop asthma symptoms over a short period of time.

Health and emergency services have said they are monitoring the situation closely and are ready to respond.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.52pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.40pm GMT

Victorian housing minister says 'we make no apology for saving people’s lives' by shutting down towers

Victorian housing minister, Richard Wynne, is speaking now and has bullishly rejected the idea that the government should apologise for shutting down the public housing towers in July.

“We make no apology for saving people’s lives. Absolutely no apology for saving people’s lives.”

“The primary objective of government is to protect the community. In this context, protecting some of the most vulnerable people in our community who live in those public housing towers is my responsibility as a minister, but also the government’s responsibility as well.”

He’s said the advice to close down the towers was base on health experts advice, although has not addressed the key point in the ombudsman’s report, which was that the timing led to the human rights breaches.

Victorian minister for housing Richard Wynne. Photograph: Erik Anderson/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.50pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.31pm GMT

Some more information is trickling through on the two new cases being reported today from the northern beaches.

Jason Falinski, the local MP, has tweeted saying one of the infections is a man in a band, and another is a woman who works at Pittwater Palms:

enltrTwo further COVID cases on the Northern Beaches. One man from Frenchs Forest who is in a band, and one woman who works at Pittwater Palms in Palm Beach. NSW Health are trying to set up additional testing sites in Avalon and Frenchs Forest. #auspol

— Jason Falinski MP (@JasonFalinskiMP) December 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.33pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.26pm GMT

Brad Hazzard appeals to Western Australia not to close border

Berejiklian finishes her press conference by saying NSW is considering changing the guidelines for how international air crew quarantine.

“The challenge for us is not so much the guidelines, but people’s willingness to stick to them,” she says. “Some air crew are choosing to breach the guidelines.”

Berejiklian says that airline crew currently go to “a number of different hotels” but NSW is “looking to consolidate” the process so they go to a few set hotels.

Meanwhile, the health minister, Brad Hazzard, says the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has spoken to her interstate colleagues.

Hazzard says there is no reason at the moment for borders to close or for NSW to change its restrictions.

“At this stage there’s no reason for the NSW government to be contemplating changes,” he said. “But obviously, we’ll look at that as we go but I don’t see any reason at the moment.

“3,000 people died yesterday – 3,000 people will die tomorrow in the United States of America. Many thousands are dying in Europe. We’ve had a few cases.”

In a message to WA premier. Mark McGowan. he says: “I certainly would be hopeful that Western Australia does not do anything pre-emptive [with its border].

“I appreciate they’re under some pressure because there is an election coming up in March but certainly I would be strongly encouraging them to just let us give them the facts.

“Certainly, our chief health officers are in full discussion. I spoke to Dr Chant only an hour or so ago and she confirmed she is discussing the issues with the WA chief health officer and other chief health officers around the country and that’s the way it should be.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.24pm GMT

NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard has hit out at his counterparts in the Western Australian government, asking they hold off before closing the borders again in light of a growing cluster on the northern beaches.

“Let’s face it, it is. And so we’re taking thousands of people in from overseas each week. 45% of those come from places like Queensland, WA, other states and territories. We’re doing the work for them.”

Hazzard referred to the upcoming WA elections, to be held in March, saying he hopes the state doesn’t take any “pre-emptive” actions.

“I think they should just allow us to do that work as we’ve done so well. And I certainly would be hopeful that Western Australia does not do anything pre-emptive. I appreciate they’re under some pressure because there is an election coming up in March but certainly I would be strongly encouraging them to just let us give them the facts.”

“Certainly, our chief health officers are in full discussion. I spoke to Dr Chant only an hour or so ago and she confirmed she is discussing the issues with the WA Chief Health Officer and other chief health officers around the country and that’s the way it should be. We will just let it unfold as it does.”

“But NSW has shown the gold standard in terms of keeping a state open, managing the economy, ensuring there are jobs and therefore driving down the mental illness issues. I would certainly encourage WA to recognise that’s an important component that they should also adhere to.”

It comes after the office of the Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, told the ABC  yesterday they were waiting and watching the situation unfold in NSW, before they decide on putting up a hard border again.

block-time published-time 11.19pm GMT

Refugees detained in Mantra hotel in Melbourne being transported to another detention centre

Refugees in the Mantra hotel in Preston, Melbourne, are reporting they are being transported to another detention centre now.

enltrBreaking : We are being transferred to another detention. #auspoI pic.twitter.com/CQdQWfdhgA

— Moz_azimi (@AzimiMoz) December 16, 2020

About 60 men have been detained at the hotel for more than a year, and were devastated to hear they would be relocated and not released.

enltrThis is the Mantra hotel in Melbourne’s north right now. Dozens of police outside, and mounted police inside the gates. About 60 men will be removed from the hotel soon, after 13+ months detained inside. Unclear where they will be taken to. pic.twitter.com/xoeVeRijxK

— Bianca Hall (@_Biancah) December 16, 2020

You can read more on their detention here:

Related:  Refugees detained in Melbourne hotel 'devastated' as they await move to another site

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.28pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.13pm GMT

The NSW Health minister, Brad Hazzard is also speaking now. He says that more detail of the two new cases will be released “later on”. “I anticipate about 1pm today,” he says.

Hazzard also says that NSW Health does not yet know the source of the two infections recorded yesterday.

Meanwhile, prime minister Scott Morrison has also said that borders should remain open, when asked whether these new NSW cases could prompt border closures.

“Australia is open again, and Australians like that,” he says.

He adds that people will work hard to “keep it that way”.

“NSW is the gold standard, I don’t spend too much time worrying about NSW.”

block-time published-time 11.11pm GMT

So that brings the total number of active cases in NSW to five, and the northern beaches cluster to four.

block-time published-time 11.09pm GMT

Two further Covid cases recorded on Sydney's northern beaches

Premier Berejiklian has confirmed that two new cases of Covid-19 have been recorded this morning on Sydney’s northern beaches, in addition to two mystery cases yesterday.

She tells press that NSW Health “literally only identified the two [additional] positive cases 30 minutes before this press conference started”.

She says genomic testing is in “overdrive” and NSW Health are trying to figure out if the two new cases are linked to the cases yesterday.

She adds: “Certain aged care facilities on the northern beaches we are recommending no visitors” until more detail is known about the source of the infections.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.54pm GMT

The finance minister, Simon Birmingham, has confirmed that the budget position will benefit from an increase in iron ore prices.

Birmingham told Sky News: “ We have always prudently budgeted when it comes to commodities like iron ore, and that’s an approach that we will continue. In the budget handed down just 72 days ago, we projected that the iron ore price, although it was running over a hundred dollars, and over the last month it’s been averaging I think around US$132, we projected that that would taper down to some $55. So, we’ve taken that conservative approach consistently, it’s served us well to date, and we will maintain that type of prudent careful approach.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.17pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.50pm GMT

Gladys Berejiklian urges more northern beaches residents to get tested for Covid

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian  has just spoken about the two new mystery cases of Covid-19 diagnosed yesterday in Sydney.

She says that there has been an increase in testing overnight on the northern beaches as a result.

“We are encouraging anybody who lives on the northern beaches with the mildest symptoms to come forward for testing,” she said.

She adds that the last detected case was in the Sydney suburb of Frenchs Forest.

“We have seen an increase in testing overnight. We really want to get on top of this. We don’t want this to concern us leading into the last few days before Christmas.”

NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.04pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.41pm GMT

An alarming tidbit from the Victorian ombudsman’s report  was that the chief health officer had only 15 minutes before the press conference announcing the lockdowns, to sign off on the lockdowns.

Health officials had agreed to the lockdown but had assumed it would be announced for the next day, which would have given residents time to plan and purchase food and supplies.

Ombudsman Deborah Glass  has said that it was this decision, the timing, which is what curtailed residents’ human rights.

“It was the immediacy of that which did not appear to be reasonably necessary,” she told a press conference this morning.

“There could have been time to plan that would have mitigated the impact of the lockdown to the point where people would have been able to have supplies of food, have supplies of medication, have an understanding of what was going on.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.45pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.36pm GMT

Queensland police shoot armed man on Logan Motorway

A man has been shot by police in Queensland, with reports saying the man has died.

AAP has the story:

Police have shot an armed man multiple times after he confronted them on a motorway south of Brisbane.

Officers found the man walking along the Logan Motorway at Drewvale after being called there about 6am on Thursday.

Police say he then threatened the police, who shot him multiple times.

Officers can’t say what medical condition the man is in, but the motorway’s eastbound lanes have been closed.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.19pm GMT

Late this morning the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, will release the mid-year economic and fiscal update which is expected to show that the budget deficit will be less than $200bn due to a $11bn saving on jobkeeper and rising iron ore prices boosting revenue.

Asked about the $11bn jobkeeper saving, the finance minister,  Simon Birmingham,  told Channel Nine:

Look, it is really encouraging to see the strength of the recovery in the Australian economy. Now, there is still a long way to go but we’ve seen more than 650,000 jobs created across Australia in recent months. More Australians back in work, fewer Australians on jobkeeper – this is a trend that we want to see continue but we know that there are always threats present.

But we are delighted to see that the measures put in place to help the Australian economy through the depths of Covid-19 and drive it into recovery are working, and we’ll have to continue to show that type of determination to keep them working in the months and years ahead.

Labor is less impressed, with its industrial relations spokesman, Tony Burke,  arguing that savings are built off the back of workers who were excluded from the wage subsidy scheme:

enltrGovt claims it is spending so much less than announced on JobKeeper because of the economy. No. It’s because it chose to exclude so many casuals, local Govt workers, arts workers, aviation workers, workers at unis... The delivery didn’t match the announcement.

— Tony Burke (@Tony_Burke) December 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.30pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.14pm GMT

Melbourne's public housing Covid lockdown violated human rights, Victoria's ombudsman has found

Victoria’s ombudsman has tabled the report from her investigation into the detention and treatment of Melbourne public housing residents at the onset of the state’s second wave.

enltrOmbudsman's Investigation into the detention and treatment of public housing residents arising from a COVID-19 'hard lockdown' in July 2020 tabled today, a non-sitting day https://t.co/cXTFf4wPIy #springst

— Victorian Parliament (@VicParliament) December 16, 2020

The ombudsman found the state government had breached human rights when it locked down several public housing towers in Flemington and North Melbourne.

It outlined that the residents deserved an apology, and that health authorities had been surprised by the decision, having assumed the towers would be locked the following day.

The ombudsman, Deborah Glass, said the decision to lock down the towers had breached the residents’ rights to humane treatment:

The rushed lockdown was not compatible with the residents’ human rights, including their right to humane treatment when deprived of liberty. Based on the evidence gathered by the investigation, the action appeared to be contrary to the law.

You can read more on the findings here:

Related:  Melbourne public housing Covid lockdown violated human rights, Victoria's ombudsman finds

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.55pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.56pm GMT

The former Australian PM John Howard is in the news again , saying Donald Trump penned a lengthy “political suicide note” with his “terrible” handling of the coronavirus pandemic.

Howard made the remarks at a question and answer session at the Menzies Research Centre after a lecture delivered by former Nationals leader John Anderson. Howard said:

He was headed towards a victory until the pandemic hit. It was his mishandling of that because, in the end, the public, when threatened, want their leaders to defend them against the threat.

You can read the full story here:

Related:  Trump 'penned political suicide note' at every Covid press conference, former Australian PM says

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.25pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.38pm GMT

Triple zeroes again for Victoria today.

enltrYesterday there were 0 new local cases, 0 new cases acquired overseas and 0 deaths reported. 9,477 test results were received - thanks, #EveryTestHelps  us to #StaySafeStayOpen.  More info: https://t.co/lIUrl0ZEco #COVID19Vic #COVID19VicData pic.twitter.com/7IRkMs0zHb

— VicGovDHHS (@VicGovDHHS) December 16, 2020

All eyes are on NSW, but as always it is great to see Victoria’s streak continue.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.24pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.28pm GMT

The Australian  is reporting that the two Covid patients on the northern beaches did not isolate before receiving a negative test result, as per guidelines.

Authorities are apparently concerned that the two, a woman in her 60s and a man in his 70s, instead visited several venues in the area.

An official told the paper the two “took a long time to track down” and that they were a “classic Avalon couple, divorced but living under the same roof”.

Authorities also do not know how they contracted the virus, with genomic sequencing under way and results are expected within 48 hours.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.22pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.11pm GMT

Seven venues have been identified as locations the two northern beaches people visited while infectious, including:

•The Palm beach female change rooms, on Sunday 13 Dec, from 9-9.15am•Hungry Ghost Cafe on Sunday 13 Dec, from 9.30-11am and Tuesday, 15 December 9.30-11am•Coast Palm Beach Cafe on Sunday, 13 December 10-11am•Avalon Bowlo on Sunday, 13 December, 5-7pm, and on Tuesday, 15 December 3-5pm•Sneaky Grind Cafe on Monday, 14 December, 9.30-11am•Barramee Thai Massage and Spa on Monday, 14 December, 2-3.30pm•Bangkok Sidewalk Restaurant on Monday, 14 December 7-8pm

The Palm beach female change rooms, on Sunday 13 Dec, from 9-9.15am

Hungry Ghost Cafe on Sunday 13 Dec, from 9.30-11am and Tuesday, 15 December 9.30-11am

Coast Palm Beach Cafe on Sunday, 13 December 10-11am

Avalon Bowlo on Sunday, 13 December, 5-7pm, and on Tuesday, 15 December 3-5pm

Sneaky Grind Cafe on Monday, 14 December, 9.30-11am

Barramee Thai Massage and Spa on Monday, 14 December, 2-3.30pm

Bangkok Sidewalk Restaurant on Monday, 14 December 7-8pm

NSW Health is advising anyone who has visited the following venues is considered a close contact and should get tested and isolate for 14 days even if they receive a negative result.

The Sydney airport van driver also attended venues while infectious, including the Forest Rangers FC Little Rangers session at Gannons Park in Peakhurst on Friday between 4.30pm and 5.30pm.

Anyone who attended is considered a casual contact, and NSW Health is advising all who were there to get tested as soon as possible.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.28pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.58pm GMT

Flood warnings are still in place for the mid north coast and northern rivers catchments, in addition to the Tweed, Wilsons, Clarence, Bellinger, Macleay, Hastings and Orara rivers.

A severe weather warning for heavy rainfall has also been issued for the north-west slopes and plains and northern tablelands districts.

The Bureau of Meteorology is saying that some of the weather is easing , but Sydney is still expecting thunderstorms later today.

enltrWe've seen significant rainfall across the country over the past week, which is an indication that La Niña is well & truly here. La Niña increases the risk of widespread & prolonged riverine flooding so make sure you're prepared. Learn more: https://t.co/YL23PO5IKZ pic.twitter.com/yGNwF6u3Pp

— Bureau of Meteorology, Australia (@BOM_au) December 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.53pm GMT

Flash flooding in the Queensland town of Killarney has killed a man  after the water swept him and his car downstream.

Queensland police say preliminary investigations indicate the 69-year-old was moving cattle to higher ground at a property on Condamine River Road when rapidly rising waters rushed in, engulfing him and his car about 8.30pm:

Emergency services were called to the scene and immediately commenced a search and rescue operation.

Police say the man’s body was discovered inside his vehicle about 100 metres downstream just after midnight. Officers will prepare a report for the coroner.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.06pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.40pm GMT

Good morning everyone, Mostafa Rachwani here, and welcome to another Australian live blog.

It’s Thursday, which means tomorrow is Friday, which hopefully bodes well for what I’m sure will be a busy day.

First up, New South Wales is scrambling after three new locally acquired cases were reported yesterday. One patient is a van driver from the airport, the other two are from the northern beaches.

We know the van driver contracted the virus from aircrew he was transporting but we are still waiting to find out how the two others caught it. We’ll be keeping you updated on that.

Second, wild weather continues to lash the east coast, with much of NSW under severe thunderstorms and heavy rainfall warnings , in addition to southern Queensland. Since the downpours began on Saturday, the State Emergency Service has attended more than 1,900 jobs.

The federal government will today be handing down its mid-year budget , which will reportedly include funding for the aged care industry and show a stronger than expected economic recovery.

And Israel’s justice minister has signed an extradition order  for Malka Leifer, saying it is their “moral duty” to see her stand trial. The order means Leifer could be back in Australia within the next two months.

If you see any news that you think should be on here, don’t hesitate to shoot me a message on Twitter, @Rachwani91 , or by email to mostafa.rachwani@theguardian.com

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.03pm GMT