block-time published-time 8.24am GMT

The Philippines  has also approved Russia's Sputnik V coronavirus vaccine, the 52nd country to do so, its developer said.

Russia's sovereign wealth fund, which backed the development of Sputnik V, said in a statement that the jab had been registered "under the emergency use authorisation procedure." This means a combined population of 1.4 billion people have approved Sputnik V for use, the firm said.

Amid rising cases, the Philippines has announced new restrictions this week. It plans to close its borders to foreigners beginning March 20 and limit entry to its own citizens to halt the spread of new cases.

block-time published-time 8.10am GMT

The Philippines records highest daily jump in Covid cases

The Philippines  has recorded its biggest daily increase in infections, with a 7,103 new coronavirus cases on Friday, its health ministry said.

The country also recorded 13 further deaths.

The ministry said total confirmed cases have increased to 648,066 while confirmed deaths have reached 12,900, Reuters reports. The country is in the throes of a spike in new cases, particularly in its capital region.

block-time published-time 8.07am GMT

Hungary  could have a summer free of coronavirus restrictions, Prime Minister Viktor Orban told public radio on Friday, according to Reuters.

Orban said the country would begin  to ease coronavirus restrictions once a further one million citizens have been vaccinated.

Around 1.5 million Hungarians have been vaccinated so far, and Orban said curbs could start to be eased once that number rose to 2.5 million - equivalent to a quarter of the population.

According to Orban, the daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths stood at a record 213, with more than 10,000 people in hospital.

Orban said: "There is a good chance (we) will have a (restrictions) free summer." Photograph: Reuters

block-time published-time 7.47am GMT

Like some European countries, Indonesia  is also set to resume vaccinations using the AstraZeneca vaccine.

Indonesia's Food and Drug agency approved the renewed usage after reviewing reports that the vaccine had caused blood clots among some recipients in Europe, it said in a statement on Friday.

"The benefit of administering AstraZeneca's COVID-19 vaccine outweigh the risks, so the usage... may be started," the statement said, according to Reuters.

Health workers wait during a Covid-19 vaccination drive in Sanur, Bali, Indonesia, 19 March 2021. Bali's government is planning to vaccinate tens of thousands of people residing in the three major tourist areas of Sanur, Nusadua and Ubud as a first step towards reopening Bali to foreign tourists. Photograph: Made Nagi/EPA

block-time published-time 7.24am GMT

UK considering Covid certificates for sports events

The UK  culture secretary Oliver Dowden said the government is considering Covid certificates to allow crowds to return to sports events.

"Another thing that we are considering is a Covid certification, and we'll be testing whether we can use Covid certification to help facilitate the return of sports," he told Sky News.

"(We're) working with many, many people to see how we can get people back safely in large numbers, because if we don't manage to do it this summer... I'm really worried about the future of those industries," he added, also referring to theatres.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.10am GMT

block-time published-time 7.22am GMT

In the UK,  the public sector borrowed more last month than during any other February since 1993, according to the Office for National Statistics. In total, £19.1 billion was borrowed last month.

Net debt has risen by £333 billion since the start of April when the Covid-19 lockdowns began, bringing the total to £2.131 trillion.

But chancellor Rishi Sunak insisted that this was the right thing to do.

"Coronavirus has caused one of the largest economic shocks this country has ever faced, which is why we responded with our 352 billion package of support to protect lives and livelihoods," he said. "This was the fiscally responsible thing to do and the best way to support the public finances in the medium-term.

"But I have always said that we should look to return the public finances to a more sustainable path once the economy has recovered and at the Budget I set out how we will begin to do just that, providing families and businesses with certainty."

block-time published-time 7.11am GMT

There is no reason for the French people to turn down the AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine, government spokesman Gabriel Attal told RTL radio on Friday, according to Reuters.

France  is set resume the use of the vaccine on Friday after joining more than a dozen other nations in a brief suspension due to concerns about reports of blood clots in patients who had had the vaccine. Germany and Italy will also resume uses today.

Following an investigation into the reports, The European Union's drug watchdog said on Thursday that it was convinced the benefits outweighed any risks.

French Prime Minister Jean Castex is due to get the AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine himself on Friday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.17am GMT

block-time published-time 7.07am GMT

Good morning, I'm Molly Blackall. From London, I'll be bringing you the latest updates in the coronavirus pandemic around the world. I hope you're all safe and well, wherever you're reading from.

If you spot something we should be reporting on in this blog, please do feel free to ping me a message on Twitter.  Thanks in advance!

block-time published-time 6.57am GMT

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan , from a wet and windy Sydney. Thanks for following along - and stay tuned for more updates.

My weekend plans are as follows - how about you?

jaltr???????? pic.twitter.com/EdpigWEait

- ?????? (@tyomateee2) March 17, 2021

block-time published-time 6.45am GMT

Summary

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•French PM announced limited Covid lockdown for Paris and other regions. French Prime Minister Jean Castex on Thursday announced a limited month-long lockdown for Paris and several other regions to combat surging Covid-19 cases, AFP reports, while insisting the measures would be less strict than in the past.•India reported its highest infections since November. India reported 39,726 new coronavirus cases on Friday, its highest since 28 November, when more than 41,000 cases where confirmed. The worst-hit states, such as western industrialised Maharashtra, adopted fresh curbs to restrain the spread of the disease.•Tanzania to swear in first woman president after death of John Magufuli. Tanzania's Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan was due to be sworn in as president on Friday, a government official said, a historic move that is set to make her the East African country's first female head of state. Hassan's ascension to the presidency comes after the death of President John Magufuli, 61, whose death due to heart disease was announced on Wednesday, more than two weeks after he was last seen in public.•Biden said US to hit 100m vaccination goal on Friday. With the US closing in on President Joe Biden's goal of injecting 100 million coronavirus vaccinations weeks ahead of his target date, the White House announced Thursday the nation is now in position to help supply neighbours Canada and Mexico with millions of lifesaving shots.•Cuba approves second homegrown vaccine. Cuba's drug regulatory authority on Thursday approved a second Covid vaccine candidate for late-stage clinical trials as the country races to secure a homegrown shot to quell its worst outbreak since the start of the pandemic and sell abroad.•European countries to resume AstraZeneca jabs after 'safe' verdict. Leading EU countries said Thursday they would resume AstraZeneca vaccinations after the European medical regulator said the jab is "safe and effective" and not associated with a higher blood clot risk after days of commotion around the shot.•Norway, Sweden to wait before using AstraZeneca vaccine again, even though it has been declared safe by Europe's medical regulator. The European Medicines Agency's (EMA) said that after an investigation the AstraZeneca vaccine was "safe and effective" and not linked to an increased risk of blood clots. The Norwegian Institute of Public Health said it "took note" of the EMA's finding, but deemed it "premature" at this point to come to a final conclusion.The NIPH said it would issue its own guidance at the end of next week.•Brazil's Bolsonaro says health minister swap takes effect on Friday. Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro said on Thursday that the replacement of his health minister will take effect on Friday with publication in the official gazette, as the country had its second-worst day of deaths caused by Covid.•Brazil suffered second-highest daily Covid death toll. Brazil registered its second deadliest day in its Covid pandemic, with 2,724 deaths, according to the Health Ministry on Thursday. The country had 86,982 new cases. The country is facing a dangerous new shortage of staff in intensive care unit.•China confirmed first local case since 14 February. China reported 11 new Covid cases on 18 March, up from six cases a day earlier, the country's national health authority said on Monday. The National Health Commission, in a statement, said one of the cases was a locally transmitted infection in Shaanxi province, marking China's first local Covid case since 14 February Reuters reports. The other 10 cases were infection that originated from overseas.•Philippines approved emergency use of Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine. The Philippines has approved Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine for emergency use, the country's Food and Drug Administration said on Friday.

French PM announced limited Covid lockdown for Paris and other regions. French Prime Minister Jean Castex on Thursday announced a limited month-long lockdown for Paris and several other regions to combat surging Covid-19 cases, AFP reports, while insisting the measures would be less strict than in the past.

India reported its highest infections since November. India reported 39,726 new coronavirus cases on Friday, its highest since 28 November, when more than 41,000 cases where confirmed. The worst-hit states, such as western industrialised Maharashtra, adopted fresh curbs to restrain the spread of the disease.

Tanzania to swear in first woman president after death of John Magufuli. Tanzania's Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan was due to be sworn in as president on Friday, a government official said, a historic move that is set to make her the East African country's first female head of state. Hassan's ascension to the presidency comes after the death of President John Magufuli, 61, whose death due to heart disease was announced on Wednesday, more than two weeks after he was last seen in public.

Biden said US to hit 100m vaccination goal on Friday. With the US closing in on President Joe Biden's goal of injecting 100 million coronavirus vaccinations weeks ahead of his target date, the White House announced Thursday the nation is now in position to help supply neighbours Canada and Mexico with millions of lifesaving shots.

Cuba approves second homegrown vaccine. Cuba's drug regulatory authority on Thursday approved a second Covid vaccine candidate for late-stage clinical trials as the country races to secure a homegrown shot to quell its worst outbreak since the start of the pandemic and sell abroad.

European countries to resume AstraZeneca jabs after 'safe' verdict. Leading EU countries said Thursday they would resume AstraZeneca vaccinations after the European medical regulator said the jab is "safe and effective" and not associated with a higher blood clot risk after days of commotion around the shot.

Norway, Sweden to wait before using AstraZeneca vaccine again, even though it has been declared safe by Europe's medical regulator. The European Medicines Agency's (EMA) said that after an investigation the AstraZeneca vaccine was "safe and effective" and not linked to an increased risk of blood clots. The Norwegian Institute of Public Health said it "took note" of the EMA's finding, but deemed it "premature" at this point to come to a final conclusion.The NIPH said it would issue its own guidance at the end of next week.

Brazil's Bolsonaro says health minister swap takes effect on Friday. Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro said on Thursday that the replacement of his health minister will take effect on Friday with publication in the official gazette, as the country had its second-worst day of deaths caused by Covid.

Brazil suffered second-highest daily Covid death toll. Brazil registered its second deadliest day in its Covid pandemic, with 2,724 deaths, according to the Health Ministry on Thursday. The country had 86,982 new cases. The country is facing a dangerous new shortage of staff in intensive care unit.

China confirmed first local case since 14 February. China reported 11 new Covid cases on 18 March, up from six cases a day earlier, the country's national health authority said on Monday. The National Health Commission, in a statement, said one of the cases was a locally transmitted infection in Shaanxi province, marking China's first local Covid case since 14 February Reuters reports. The other 10 cases were infection that originated from overseas.

Philippines approved emergency use of Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine. The Philippines has approved Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine for emergency use, the country's Food and Drug Administration said on Friday.

block-time published-time 6.06am GMT

Boris Johnson to receive AstraZeneca vaccine as he reassures public over safety

The British prime minister is due to receive his first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine as a host of European countries announced they would return to using the jab following fresh safety assurances.

A slew of countries, including Germany and France, reversed their decision to temporarily pause its use over blood clot concerns after the European Medicines Agency (EMA) called the vaccine "safe and effective".

Boris Johnson is due to receive the AstraZeneca jab when he is given his first dose of Covid-19 vaccine on Friday.

France, Italy and Germany have confirmed they will resume rollout of the Oxford shot on Friday, while Spain, Portugal and the Netherlands said they will follow suit next week, although Spain said it could exclude certain groups.

The French prime minister Jean Castex is also expected to receive the AstraZeneca vaccine on Friday.

Johnson, 56, told a Downing Street press conference on Thursday  : "The Oxford jab is safe and the Pfizer jab is safe.

"The thing that isn't safe is catching Covid, which is why it is so important that we all get our jabs as soon as our turn comes."

He urged the population to continue taking up the offer of a shot to ensure coronavirus cases continue to plummet so he can keep to his current timetable for easing the lockdown in England.

block-time published-time 6.03am GMT

Tanzania to swear in first woman president after death of John Magufuli

Tanzania's Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan was due to be sworn in as president on Friday, a government official said, a historic move that is set to make her the East African country's first female head of state. Reuters: Hassan's ascension to the presidency comes after the death of President John Magufuli, 61, whose death due to heart disease was announced on Wednesday, more than two weeks after he was last seen in public. Magufuli's absence since 27 February had fuelled speculation about his health and sparked rumours he had contracted Covid, although officials had denied he was ill. In a tweet on Friday morning, confirmed by the presidency, government spokesman Hassan Abbasi said Vice President Hassan, 61, will be sworn in at 10am local time (0700 GMT) on Friday.

Tanzania's Vice President Samia Suluhu Hassan was due to be sworn in as president on Friday, a government official said, a historic move that is set to make her the East African country's first female head of state. Photograph: AP

Described as a soft-spoken consensus-builder, Hassan is poised to be the country's first female president and the first to be born in Zanzibar, the archipelago that forms part of the union of the Republic of Tanzania. Her leadership style is seen as a potential contrast from Magufuli, a brash populist who earned the nickname 'Bulldozer' for muscling through policies and who drew criticism for his intolerance of dissent. On Thursday the opposition had called for quickly swearing in Hassan to avoid a constitutional vacuum.

block-time published-time 5.35am GMT

After months of depression and isolation, the 2021 season on the warm sands of Florida's Miami Beach is off to a banging start, fuelled by "Roaring Twenties" anticipation of post-pandemic life, AFP reports.

The shore is once again packed with revellers - a sight that Americans view either as a proof of long-awaited progress against Covid-19, or of a recklessness that could set back the nation's recovery.

For James Mitchell, 45, newly-arrived from freezing Chicago, the haters need to lighten up.

"We just got to start back living, man," he told AFP. "For real."

block-time published-time 4.58am GMT

India reports highest infections since November

India reported 39,726 new coronavirus cases on Friday, its highest since 28 November, when more than 41,000 cases where confirmed. The worst-hit states, such as western industrialised Maharashtra, adopted fresh curbs to restrain the spread of the disease. The tally of infections stands at 11.51 million, the highest after the United States and Brazil. Deaths rose by 154 to 159,370, data from the health ministry showed.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06am GMT

block-time published-time 4.37am GMT

Cuba approves second homegrown vaccine

Cuba's drug regulatory authority on Thursday approved a second Covid vaccine candidate for late-stage clinical trials as the country races to secure a homegrown shot to quell its worst outbreak since the start of the pandemic and sell abroad, Reuters reports. The Communist-run Caribbean island nation, which has long experience with developing and exporting vaccines, is one of a handful in the region that have not started vaccinating against Covid, as it is counting on its own candidates. This month, Cuba started late-phase trials of its most advanced experimental vaccine, named Soberana (Sovereignty) 2, reflecting national pride in its relative self-reliance in areas like healthcare despite the decades-old US trade embargo. On Thursday, the Cuban regulatory authority gave the green light for it to start such trials for Abdala, named after a poem by 19th century Cuban independence hero Jose Marti, which like Soberana 2 targets the spike protein of the novel coronavirus.

A woman wearing a face mask looks out the window of the bus, in Havana, Cuba, 16 March 2021. Photograph: Yander Zamora/EPA

Authorities will start recruiting about 48,000 volunteers between the ages of 19 and 80 in Cuba's eastern provinces for a randomised, placebo-controlled trial of the three-shot vaccine next week, according to Cuba's official registry of clinical trials. The study is to be completed in July, with first results due for publication in August. Cuba is going through its worst coronavirus outbreak since the start of the pandemic after opening its borders late last year. The island of 11 million inhabitants is registering 600-1,000 daily cases, well above the scores or a handful per day for most of last year, although its cumulative tallies of cases and deaths at 64,414 and 384 respectively remain well below the global averages per capita. The government has vowed to vaccinate the entire population this year with one of its five experimental shots in development. Critics argue any vaccine development is a gamble and it should be acquiring shots already approved to start immunising the most vulnerable sectors of the population while it awaits results from its own trials.

block-time published-time 4.19am GMT

The Tokyo operator of a restaurant famous for its cinematic links to the movie "Kill Bill: Volume I" has agreed to shorten its hours as the city government began enforcing fines for businesses failing to comply with infection controls, Reuters reports.

Global-Dining Inc, which runs the Gonpachi restaurant that inspired a fight scene in the Quentin Tarantino film, had flouted requests by the city government when a state of emergency over Covid was declared in January. The company said on Thursday it would close Tokyo-area restaurants at 8 p.m. through Sunday, obeying the request for just the last four days of the emergency period before it expires.

Global-Dining president Kozo Hasegawa had harshly criticised the closure requests and their economic impact, saying in a 11 March letter to the Tokyo government it was like "cutting off one's arm at the shoulder because the fingertip got infected." The Tokyo Metropolitan Government on Thursday issued orders against 27 restaurants that had not complied with requests to close early as a means to control the Covid virus. Under revised laws, businesses can be fined ¥300,000 ($2,752.55) if they don't obey.

A representative of Global-Dining, which operates 43 eateries centered around Tokyo, said the company had not been cited under the new regulations and that it had a policy to comply with government orders. Its Gonpachi restaurant, with a cavernous inner courtyard, inspired a bloody fight scene in Tarantino's first "Kill Bill" film and it was the site of a dinner between former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and US President George W Bush in 2002.

block-time published-time 3.53am GMT

Biden says US to hit 100m vaccination goal on Friday

With the US closing in on President Joe Biden's goal of injecting 100 million coronavirus vaccinations weeks ahead of his target date, the White House announced Thursday the nation is now in position to help supply neighbours Canada and Mexico with millions of lifesaving shots. AP: The Biden administration revealed the outlines of a plan to "loan" a limited number of vaccines to Canada and Mexico as the president announced the US is on the cusp of meeting his 100-day injection goal "way ahead of schedule." "I'm proud to announce that tomorrow, 58 days into our administration, we will have met our goal," Biden said. He promised to unveil a new vaccination target next week, as the US is on pace to have enough of the three currently authorised vaccines to cover the entire adult population just 10 weeks from now. Ahead of Biden's remarks, the White House said it was finalizing plans to send a combined 4 million doses of the AstraZeneca Covid vaccine to Mexico and Canada in its first export of shots. Press secretary Jen Psaki said the details of the "loan" were still being worked out, but 2.5 million doses would go to Mexico and 1.5 million would be sent to Canada.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.54am GMT

block-time published-time 3.34am GMT

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has refused to put a firm date on the opening of the Trans Tasman travel bubble , but says a timeframe will be announced "very soon". Yesterday Radio New Zealand reported it would be in place by the end of April, allowing for quarantine-free travel between the two countries where it presently only exists from New Zealand to Australia.

Tourism firms that have been struggling in the absence of international visitors say the change cannot come soon enough , with business analysts saying New Zealand - as the smaller country - stands to gain more  from the free travel arrangement than Australia does.

But tourism minister Stuart Nash has signalled  that tourism to New Zealand will look different in the future, so as to mitigate the negative costs and consequences of international visitors and make it more sustainable. "Regions heavily reliant on international tourism, dare I say it overly reliant on international tourism, should have a range of alternatives because we don't want to be in this situation again," Nash said.

block-time published-time 3.09am GMT

Children's entertainers The Wiggles say they received death threats after they were granted a spot in managed isolation at the New Zealand border. The group caused a row when space was found for them in the highly limited quarantine system while Kiwis overseas face a weeks-long wait to return home, prompting complaints of "wriggle room for The Wriggles".

Anthony "Blue Wiggle" Field said on The Project  that they were oblivious to the feeling over quarantine within New Zealand: "We were in Australia when it happened, we were just following orders... so we thought we'd done everything right, and then we started getting death threats on email...."

Of course, if we took someone's place that we shouldn't have, we would give that place up tomorrow or yesterday. Apologies for all that kerfuffle that we caused inadvertently."

The Wiggles' tour of New Zealand gets under way in Invercargill today.

block-time published-time 2.52am GMT

Philippines approves emergency use of Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine

The Philippines has approved Russia's Sputnik V Covid vaccine for emergency use, the country's Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said on Friday. The vaccine, developed by Russia's Gamaleya Institute, is the fourth to get emergency use authorisation in the Southeast Asian nation as it battles a renewed surge in infections, reports Reuters. "The known and potential benefits of the Gamaleya Sputnik V vaccine...outweigh the known and potential risks of said vaccine," FDA chief Rolando Enrique Domingo told a news conference.

block-time published-time 2.35am GMT

People may shed more coronavirus in the afternoons, suggesting this may be the best time of day to take tests, while separate research indicates that school attendance has a minimal impact on serious Covid-19 infections.

The phased return of children to classrooms across the UK has prompted widespread concern that this could lead to an increase in infections. Because of this, college and secondary schoolchildren are required to take twice weekly lateral flow tests, to monitor rates of infection in the community.

However, new research , which has not yet been peer reviewed, suggests Covid-19 tests may be less likely to give false negative results if taken during the early afternoon, compared with other times of day. Candace McNaughton at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, US, and colleagues examined the results of 30,000 PCR-based tests performed in the Nashville area between March and June last year, and found a twofold variation in the proportion that gave a positive result across the 24-hour day, with a peak at around 2pm:

Related:  Covid: viral shedding is greatest in afternoon, study suggests

block-time published-time 1.58am GMT

China confirms first local case since 14 February

China reported 11 new Covid cases on 18 March, up from six cases a day earlier, the country's national health authority said on Monday. The National Health Commission, in a statement, said one of the cases was a locally transmitted infection in Shaanxi province, marking China's first local Covid case since 14 February Reuters reports. The other 10 cases were infection that originated from overseas. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to five from six cases a day earlier. The total number of confirmed cases in mainland China now stands at 90,083, while the death toll remained at 4,636.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.07am GMT

block-time published-time 1.42am GMT

The UK video games market hit a record £7bn last year as lockdown fuelled an unprecedented boom in the popularity of mobile games, consoles and virtual reality headsets.

The gaming industry has proved to be a coronavirus winner , with tens of millions of consumers looking for relief from indoor boredom. Gaming fans were joined by millions of newbies seeking out home entertainment, resulting in £1.6bn more being spent on games compared with 2019, an unprecedented 30% year-on-year increase:

Related:  Lockdown boredom drives UK video games market to £7bn record high

block-time published-time 1.29am GMT

Brazil's Bolsonaro says health minister swap takes effect on Friday

Brazil's far-right President Jair Bolsonaro said on Thursday that the replacement of his health minister will take effect on Friday with publication in the official gazette, as the country had its second-worst day of deaths caused by Covid, Reuters reports. Bolsonaro, who is under pressure from the worsening pandemic, defended his opposition to lockdowns on a social media webcast. He said his government has asked the Supreme Court to stop what he termed "abuses" by governors in locking down economic activity, and sent a bill to Congress that would define as essential activities "anything that puts bread on the table."

Brazilian Minister of Health General Eduardo Pazuello. Photograph: Joédson Alves/EPA

On Monday, he named cardiologist Marcelo Queiroga to replace Health Minister Eduardo Pazuello, a three-star army general who has come under fire for toeing the president's policies and failing to deliver timely supplies of vaccines to a country fast becoming the world epicenter of the coronavirus. Pazuello's job was on the line after a week that saw record Covid fatalities in Brazil. More than 287,000 Brazilians have died so far in the outbreak that killed more people in Brazil than any other nation last week. Brazil had its second deadliest day in its Covid outbreak on Thursday, with 2,724 deaths, two days after reporting a record 2,841, according to the Health Ministry. Bolsonaro said he was not "obsessed" with being president or running for re-election next year. Polls this week showed that most Brazilians do not approve of his handling of the pandemic and former leftist president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva would beat him if the 2022 presidential elections were held today.

block-time published-time 1.06am GMT

Brazil suffers second-highest daily Covid death toll

Brazil registered its second deadliest day in its Covid pandemic, with 2,724 deaths, according to the Health Ministry on Thursday.

The country had 86,982 new cases.

The country is facing a dangerous new shortage of staff in intensive care unit, Reuters reports. Some medical professionals are burned out after months of grueling, soul-sapping work. Others are simply unable to keep up with the endless flow of critical Covid patients pushing the country's healthcare system to the brink. "Intensive care doctors are a commodity in short supply," César Eduardo Fernandes, the president of the Brazilian Medical Association (AMB) told Reuters on Wednesday. "There's no way to meet this brutal, catastrophic demand." Driven by an infectious new variant, a lack of containment measures, a chaotic federal response and a patchy vaccine rollout, Latin America's biggest country has become the epicenter of the global pandemic. More than 284,000 Brazilians have died from Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic - the highest death toll outside the United States.

block-time published-time 1.02am GMT

French PM announces limited Covid lockdown for Paris and other regions

French Prime Minister Jean Castex on Thursday announced a limited month-long lockdown for Paris and several other regions to combat surging Covid-19 cases, AFP reports, while insisting the measures would be less strict than in the past.

While non-essential businesses will close and movement outside will be restricted in the affected regions, schools will stay open and outdoor exercise allowed up to 10 kilometres (6 miles) from home, he said.

The lockdown will begin at midnight on Friday.

President Emmanuel Macron had so far resisted imposing a nationwide lockdown this year but his premier said the situation in Paris and elsewhere made the regionally-targeted measures affecting around a third of the country's population unavoidable.

"We are adopting a third way, a way that should allow braking (of the epidemic) without locking (people) up," Castex told reporters.

A woman wearing masks to prevent the spread of the coronavirus walk at la Defense business district in Paris, Thursday, 18 March 2021. Photograph: Michel Euler/AP

He said the measures were due to an increased number of Covid-19 cases due to a "third wave" of the virus, with around 1,200 people in intensive care in the Paris region alone.

The other regions affected by the new measures notably also include the Hauts-de-France region of northeast France which covers the city of Lille as well as the Alpes-Maritimes on the Mediterranean, as well as Seine-Maritime and the Eure in the north.

Health Minister Olivier Veran said that there were more people in intensive care in the Paris region than during the second wave in November, with hospital capacity now saturated.

As in previous lockdowns, a form written out or downloaded on the phone will be needed to justify why a person has left the home in areas under the new restrictions.

Residents in affected regions will not be allowed to travel to other areas, except for essential business, said Castex.

But Castex said that "while this is not good news" for people living in those regions, the restrictions were less severe this time.

"These confinement measures will not be a repeat of those we imposed in March and last November," said Castex.

Meanwhile, a curfew that has been in place nationwide will also relaxed all over France so it ends at 7:00 pm rather than 6:00 pm to take account of the longer days, Castex said.

block-time published-time 12.39am GMT

Norway, Sweden to wait before using AstraZeneca vaccine again

Norway and Sweden said Thursday they would wait before resuming use of AstraZeneca's Covid-19 vaccine, however, even though it has been declared safe by Europe's medical regulator.

AFP: The European Medicines Agency's (EMA) said that after an investigation the AstraZeneca vaccine was "safe and effective" and not linked to an increased risk of blood clots.

The ruling, which was similar to the World Health Organization's ruling, led to European heavyweights Germany, France, Spain and Italy all saying they would soon resume vaccinations with the jab.

The Norwegian Institute of Public Health said it "took note" of the EMA's finding, but deemed it "premature" at this point to come to a final conclusion.

The NIPH said it would issue its own guidance at the end of next week.

"Vaccinations with AstraZeneca will remain suspended until we have a full view of the situation," institute director Camilla Stoltenberg told the media.

Neighbouring Sweden also said it would maintain its suspension of the vaccine.

AstraZeneca is a British-Swedish pharmaceutical company, based in Britain.

block-time published-time 12.23am GMT

European countries to resume AstraZeneca jabs after 'safe' verdict

Leading EU countries said Thursday they would resume AstraZeneca vaccinations after the European medical regulator said the jab is "safe and effective" and not associated with a higher blood clot risk after days of commotion around the shot, AFP reports.

The closely-watched announcement from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) came after the WHO and Britain's health watchdog both said the vaccine was safe, adding that it was far riskier to not get the shot as several countries face a worrying rise in coronavirus cases.

After the EMA's announcement a raft of European countries said they would soon resume vaccinations, including Germany, France, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Lithuania, Latvia, Slovenia and Bulgaria.

France on Thursday became the latest nation to toughen Covid restrictions, announcing a month-long limited lockdown for Paris and several other regions to try and stave off a third wave of infections that has overwhelmed hospitals.

The EMA's chief Emer Cooke said Thursday that after an investigation into the AstraZeneca jab, its "committee has come to a clear scientific conclusion: this is a safe and effective vaccine".

"The committee also concluded that the vaccine is not associated with an increase in the overall risk of thromboembolic events or blood clots," she added.

However, the agency said it "cannot rule out definitively" a link to a rare clotting disorder.

block-time published-time 12.06am GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

I'm on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

Leading EU countries said Thursday they would resume AstraZeneca vaccinations after the European medical regulator said the jab is "safe and effective" and not associated with a higher blood clot risk after days of commotion around the shot.

Meanwhile French Prime Minister Jean Castex on Thursday announced a limited month-long lockdown for Paris and several other regions to combat surging Covid-19 cases, while insisting the measures would be less strict than in the past. The lockdown is set to begin on Friday at midnight.

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•The AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine is "safe and effective" and its benefits outweigh the risks, Europe's medicines regulator announced, but it will continue to study possible links between the shot and a very rare blood clotting disorder.•Following the review, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, France, Latvia, Lithuania and Cyprus are to resume the use of the vaccine. Ireland said they would make their decision tomorrow, while Sweden said it would report back publicly next week after "analysing the situation".•The EU is to send a formal letter to AstraZeneca in an attempt to resolve its dispute over vaccine supplies as it emerged that capitals including Paris, Berlin and Rome backed the bloc's threat to halt vaccine exports to countries that were not reciprocating, including Britain, amid further delays over jab deliveries.•Several French regions, including the Ile-de-France region around Paris, are to be subject to a new four-week lockdown from tomorrow, but schools will remain open and confinement will be less strict than in previous nationwide lockdowns, prime minister Jean Castex has said.•The Ukrainian capital Kyiv will go into a strict lockdown for three weeks from 20 March to contain the spread of coronavirus, elsewhere Bulgaria will close schools, restaurants and shopping malls for 10 days from 22 March in a bid to stem rising Covid-19 infections that are putting pressure on its hospitals.•The head of a World Health Organization team working with Chinese colleagues to finish a long-awaited report into Covid's origins has acknowledged its authors could face "pressures". But he insisted the final product would require unanimous approval from all of the team's science experts.•German regional leaders have urged the EU to speed up its review of Russia's Sputnik V vaccine and ensure that it could be rolled out efficiently across the bloc once approved.•The World Dental Federation warned that dentists around the globe are witnessing the collateral damage of the pandemic on oral health and that there is a higher incidence of tooth decay and more advanced gum disease.

The AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine is "safe and effective" and its benefits outweigh the risks, Europe's medicines regulator announced, but it will continue to study possible links between the shot and a very rare blood clotting disorder.

Following the review, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, France, Latvia, Lithuania and Cyprus are to resume the use of the vaccine. Ireland said they would make their decision tomorrow, while Sweden said it would report back publicly next week after "analysing the situation".

The EU is to send a formal letter to AstraZeneca in an attempt to resolve its dispute over vaccine supplies as it emerged that capitals including Paris, Berlin and Rome backed the bloc's threat to halt vaccine exports to countries that were not reciprocating, including Britain, amid further delays over jab deliveries.

Several French regions, including the Ile-de-France region around Paris, are to be subject to a new four-week lockdown from tomorrow, but schools will remain open and confinement will be less strict than in previous nationwide lockdowns, prime minister Jean Castex has said.

The Ukrainian capital Kyiv will go into a strict lockdown for three weeks from 20 March to contain the spread of coronavirus, elsewhere Bulgaria will close schools, restaurants and shopping malls for 10 days from 22 March in a bid to stem rising Covid-19 infections that are putting pressure on its hospitals.

The head of a World Health Organization team working with Chinese colleagues to finish a long-awaited report into Covid's origins has acknowledged its authors could face "pressures". But he insisted the final product would require unanimous approval from all of the team's science experts.

German regional leaders have urged the EU to speed up its review of Russia's Sputnik V vaccine and ensure that it could be rolled out efficiently across the bloc once approved.

The World Dental Federation warned that dentists around the globe are witnessing the collateral damage of the pandemic on oral health and that there is a higher incidence of tooth decay and more advanced gum disease.