Rugby league

Planned restart : 28 May

NRL players have this week reassembled with their clubs, spending Monday being educated on strict new biosecurity measures and Tuesday implementing any necessary domestic changes required to ensure the truncated season can go ahead. They are expected to return to the training pitch on Wednesday, when federal government guidelines will limit contact work and the size of groups to 10. Those measures are in line with the            Australian Institute of Sport's phased return to sport at all levels.

Once the season does get back underway, teams will play 18 consecutive games in a shortened 20-round season (two rounds had been completed before the suspension). The grand final will be played on 25 October, with State of Origin to be played in the weeks after that, although no concrete date has been set yet.

The Warriors were granted a travel exemption to ensure all 16 teams will contest the remainder of the season. The team flew in from New Zealand on Sunday and will be in quarantine for 14 days in Tamworth before moving to the Central Coast, where they hope to play the rest of the season.

Details of how the remaining 18 rounds will look have not yet been finalised. A revised broadcast deal with partners Foxtel and Channel Nine has not been reached yet, but details of player payments for the revised competition have been agreed - an 80% cut for the rest of the season.

Australian rules football

Planned restart: end of June

Now that travel restrictions have eased, the majority of clubs are beginning to recall players from interstate breaks, although no official restart date has been announced. There is hope that training might resume next week, in accordance with the government's phased return to sport plan.

Details of what shape any resumed season will take have not yet been finalised, but there is increasing optimism it will not involve large-scale quarantine hubs. The idea of players leaving their families for a long period - up to 20 weeks - was largely ill-received but the sports minister Richard Colback this week said the AFL has "almost moved past that model now".

A more traditional home-and-away fixture is expected to be able to be completed, with the season suspended after just one round was played before the coronavirus outbreak took hold. A resumption date in June for a modified season is hoped for.

Rugby union

Planned restart: July

Rugby Australia has submitted a return to play document to the federal government, but the code is not expected to resume until July. The document, worked on by RA's return-to-play committee, includes guidelines and details on biosecurity issues and medical provisions around training.

It is unlikely RA will make any return-to-play announcement until next week, with the players expected to have three to four weeks training together before contesting any matches. Super Rugby was suspended in mid-March after seven rounds after Australia and New Zealand introduced isolation policies due to concern over the coronavirus pandemic.

Sanzaar has acknowledged any return to play by its teams this year would have a strong domestic focus, given possible travel, border and government restrictions. RA's preferred format is a domestic round-robin home-and-away tournament including the four Super Rugby teams and possibly Western Force.

It is believed they would seek to avoid any hub scenario pending government restrictions and the ability to travel interstate.

Football

Planned restart: August

A-League clubs are preparing for a competition restart in August with Wellington Phoenix to base themselves in New South Wales for a two-week quarantine period. Football Federation Australia is yet to officially detail the league's resumption, but clubs are preparing for a July training phase ahead of an August return to games.

The league was suspended on 24 March with five rounds, plus finals, remaining. All games are likely to be played in Sydney at venues without spectators. An extra hurdle to potentially overcome lies in which stadiums to use, given the NRL is likely to run concurrently at cross-code venues such as Kogarah and Bankwest Stadium.

Netball

Planned restart: unknown

The 2020 season was supposed to start the beginning of May and details on what any revised campaign might look like are at this stage sparse. But Super Netball has been working through scenario planning and is "open-minded to possible season models", according to CEO Chris Symington.

The organisation will be in a position to make an announcement by the end of May, while a decision on whether the Quad Series and Constellation Cup can be held as scheduled in September and October - featuring Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and England - will be made in the coming weeks.

Cricket

Planned restart: unknown

Any official decisions on how the summer of cricket will look have yet to be made, but all eyes will be on how the coronavirus affects India, who are due in Australia late this year, and in turn any international travel ban that may impact the team's ability to tour.

Depending on how efforts to contain the outbreak go locally, the major domestic competitions, including the Sheffield Shield, Big Bash League and Women's Big Bash League, may yet begin as scheduled.

The men's national team end their annual leave period on 18 May and while the June tour of Bangladesh has already been cancelled, the ECB is reportedly hopeful of getting Justin Langer's side to tour England in September. But the safety of players in a nation that has been severely hit by the coronavirus would have to be guaranteed if that were to go ahead.

•With Australian Associated Press

With Australian Associated Press