block-time published-time 6.45am BST

China pivots to tackle 'silent' Covid-19 carriers as US says a quarter of cases may have no symptoms

Chinese authorities have shifted their focus to tackling "silent", or asymptomatic, carriers of the coronavirus as part of the next phase of the pandemic, amid concern among US health chiefs that a quarter of patients do not suffer symptoms.

The National Health Commission in China said it would start releasing a tally of asymptomatic patients from Wednesday and would order those cases into quarantine for 14 days, after the mainland witnessed its first rise in infections in five days.

Authorities reported 130 new asymptomatic cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of such cases under observation to 1,367.

Recent new infections likely caused by asymptomatic patients have prompted widespread public concern as the country lifts lockdown measures and citizens go back to work.

Those concerns were reflected on Tuesday by Robert Redfield, the director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), who said in a rare interview that as a many as one in four cases have no symptoms.

As a result, the CDC was now "aggressively reviewing" its recommendations on use of face masks, potentially extending their use based on the assumption that more people in "high transmission zones" were already infected but without symptoms.

Related:  China pivots to tackle 'silent' Covid-19 carriers as US says a quarter of cases may have no symptoms

block-time published-time 6.42am BST

China new cases

China's National Health Commission on Wednesday reported 36 new Covid-19 cases and 130 new asymptomatic cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of such cases under observation to 1,367.

Previously, China has regarded asymptomatic patients as a low risk and not included them in their tally of confirmed cases.

The move to disclose the number of asymptomatic cases comes amid scrutiny of China's reported figures, which previously only included people who exhibited symptoms.

The commission said all but one of the 36 new cases was imported from abroad, while seven more deaths from the disease had been reported over the previous 24 hours.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.47am BST

block-time published-time 6.36am BST

More on Curb Your Enthusiasm star Larry David's coronavirus message shared late on Tuesday in the US. The comedian, 72, warned older people are being endangered by those going outside for non-essential trips and "socialising too close". In a video shared by the Office of the Governor of California, David said: "Obviously, somebody put me up to this because it's generally not the kind of thing I do, but I basically want to address the idiots out there - and you know who you are. "You're going out - I don't know what you're doing. You're socialising too close, it's not good."

enltrThe only celebrity PSA any of us needed today, from Larry David: "If you've seen my show - nothing good ever happens going out of the house. You know that." pic.twitter.com/0wdob5x6Te

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) April 1, 2020

David, who created hit sitcoms Seinfeld and Curb Your Enthusiasm, said people flouting the stay-at-home order could make elderly relatives ill. He said: "You're hurting old people like me - well, not me. I have nothing to do with you. I'll never see you. But, you know, other - let's say, other old people who might be your relatives! Who the hell knows." David also warned people were missing a "once in a lifetime" opportunity to "stay in the house, sit on the couch and watch TV". "I don't know how you're passing that up," he added.

block-time published-time 6.28am BST

The UK papers on 1 April, 2020 after the very long month of March:

enltrGUARDIAN: Coronavirus pushing care homes toward breaking point, warn staff #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/97wJQiS0EJ

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 31, 2020

enltrTIMES: PM takes control of drive for virus tests #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/bdWf6gxNRL

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 31, 2020

enltrTELEGRAPH: NHS plans route out of virus lockdown #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/eoZXKy6pMF

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 31, 2020

enltrFT: ? @michaelgove ? admits problems obtaining kits to test medical staff for virus            #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/ZW8Sa8feqP

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 31, 2020

enltrDAILY MAIL: Fix testing fiasco NOW #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/9qisdsbLJJ

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 31, 2020

block-time published-time 6.15am BST

A British national has died on the coronavirus-stricken cruise ship heading to Florida

A British national is among four people to have died on a coronavirus-stricken cruise ship embroiled in a bitter dispute over plans to disembark passengers in the US, PA news agency reports.

Passengers use binoculars onboard Holland America's cruise ship Zaandam as it entered the Panama City bay to be assisted by the Rotterdam cruise ship with supplies, personnel and Covid-19 testing devices, eight milles off the coast of Panama City, 27 March, 2020. Photograph: Luis Acosta/AFP via Getty Images

In what is being described as an unfolding humanitarian crisis, so far two of the four people to have died on the cruise ship Zaandam have been confirmed to have had Covid-19, with nine people aboard testing positive and 189 reporting flu-like symptoms. "One of the deceased passengers is from the UK," a spokesman for the Holland America cruise line, which operates the Zaandam, said in an email to the PA news agency. "Due to US... laws, we cannot provide any additional medical and health details." The Zaandam, which is carrying more than 200 British nationals, and its sister ship the Rotterdam, passed through the Panama Canal on Monday after being denied entry to several ports. Both ships are seeking to dock in Florida later this week. But the state's governor is reluctant to allow disembarkation for the more than 1,000 people aboard the Zaandam.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.19am BST

block-time published-time 6.11am BST

Public schools in Tokyo could remain closed for a second month, according to media reports, as speculation mounts that the government could declare a state of emergency in response to a rise in Covid-19 infections in the capital and other parts of Japan.

Hitomi Sato helps her daughters Yurina (L) and Hinano (R) to do their homework while schools are closed in Tokyo, Japan. Photograph: Behrouz Mehri/AFP via Getty Images

While Japan, with around 2,200 cases and 66 deaths, has been spared the devastation seen in the US, Europe and China, it reported a record daily rise in infections on Tuesday. The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said the government was prepared to "whatever is needed" to contain the outbreak, which has already left the world's third-biggest economy teetering on the brink of recession. Calls have intensified for the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, to declare a state of emergency - a move that would enable prefectural governments to urge people to avoid nonessential trips outside the home. Those steps would be voluntary, rather than legally binding, however. Abe this week dismissed as "fake news" social media speculation that a more draconian form of lockdown was imminent. Public broadcaster NHK reported that the Tokyo metropolitan government was considering keeping the city's schools closed until May, despite suggestions that some could reopen this month to coincide with the start of the new academic year. Japan's schools closed at the beginning of March at Abe's request.

block-time published-time 6.00am BST

Here are the latest global figures now, according to Johns Hopkins University.

There are just shy of 860,000 confirmed cases worldwide, with the total currently at 859,796. There have been 42,332 deaths. Here are ten worst-affected countries by number of confirmed cases, with the US more than 80,000 cases ahead of the next worst-affected country, Italy.

Confirmed US cases account for roughly 1 in 5 worldwide.

•US: 189,510•Italy: 105,792•Spain: 95,923•China: 82,294•Germany: 71,808•France: 52,836•Iran: 44,605•United Kingdom: 25,481•Switzerland: 16,605•Turkey: 13,531

US: 189,510

Italy: 105,792

Spain: 95,923

China: 82,294

Germany: 71,808

France: 52,836

Iran: 44,605

United Kingdom: 25,481

Switzerland: 16,605

Turkey: 13,531

Here are the ten countries with the highest number of coronavirus-related deaths:

•Italy: 12,428 deaths•Spain: 8,464 deaths•US: 4,079 deaths•France: 3,523 deaths•China: 3,310 deaths•Iran: 2,898 deaths•United Kingdom: 1,789 deaths•Netherlands: 1,039 deaths•Germany: 775 deaths•Belgium: 705 deaths

Italy: 12,428 deaths

Spain: 8,464 deaths

US: 4,079 deaths

France: 3,523 deaths

China: 3,310 deaths

Iran: 2,898 deaths

United Kingdom: 1,789 deaths

Netherlands: 1,039 deaths

Germany: 775 deaths

Belgium: 705 deaths

There have been 178,301 recoveries.

block-time published-time 5.43am BST

People are sharing before and after shots on Twitter - where "before" is the beginning of March and "after" is now:

enltrMe on March 1 vs. Me on March 31 #MarchSadness           #Marchl20           pic.twitter.com/ZAnWExR1gQ

- Erin with an eeeeeeee (@erinemaxwell) March 30, 2020

undltrmarch 1 / april 1 pic.twitter.com/glCSpwu5Uy

- Dave Itzkoff (@ditzkoff) April 1, 2020

undltr https://t.co/hBBfnuBlga           pic.twitter.com/vym9SbBlqh

- nuanced opinion guy (@charles_kinbote) April 1, 2020

enltrMarch 1 vs. March 31 pic.twitter.com/vhlHsg3Nry

- Ira Madison III (@ira) April 1, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.44am BST

block-time published-time 5.26am BST

Cuba suspends international passenger flights

Cuba said on Tuesday it was suspending the arrival of international passenger flights and asking all foreign boats to withdraw from the Caribbean island's waters to curb the spread of the new coronavirus.

Cuban doctor Liz Caballero, from El Vedado polyclinic in Havana, walks with two students as they go door by door looking for possible coronavirus cases on 31 March, 2020. Photograph: Adalberto Roque/AFP via Getty Images

Cuba, which has confirmed 186 cases of the fast-spreading disease, partially closed its borders last week, banning the arrival of foreign tourists and the departure of Cubans. Prime Minister Manuel Marrero clarified that Cuba would remain open for commerce and donations. Cuba first reported cases of the new coronavirus three weeks ago in a group of Italian tourists and has since reported six deaths from the disease.

Nearly 3,000 people it suspects could have it are being monitored in state isolation facilities. Authorities have carried out 2,322 tests.

block-time published-time 5.20am BST

New Zealand on Wednesday reported 61 new cases of the coronavirus, but said it was too early to assess if the lower number of cases this week meant the nationwide lockdown measures were working.

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern speaks during her media update at the Beehive Theatrette, Parliament on 1 April, 2020 in Wellington, New Zealand. Photograph: Getty Images

The new cases take the country's total to 708. The number of new Covid-19 cases was as high as 85 last week, but has stayed lower this week. More than half of the cases was related to overseas travel and community transmission cases were about 1%. "While on the face of it that might seem a heartening number relative to some of the other figures we have had now, I want to emphasise it's too early to assess if our measures are successfully slowing Covid-19," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said in a news conference.

block-time published-time 5.16am BST

The number of cases in Germany has risen by 5,453 to 67,366, according to the RKI health institute.

That rise is up from yesterday's +4,615 cases.

Germany confirmed 149 new deaths.

block-time published-time 5.10am BST

Summary

•Global deaths pass 42,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 42,332 people have died across the world. At least 859,556 have been infected.•US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House, whose models indicate at least 100,000 will doe. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China. Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 4,076 people.•A US Navy captain asked permission to isolate crew on shore. The captain of US Navy aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt, which is facing a growing outbreak of the coronavirus, is asking for permission to isolate the bulk of his roughly 5,000 crew members on shore, which would take the warship out of duty in an effort to save lives.•Saudi Arabia urged Muslims to wait before making Hajj plans, until there is more clarity about the pandemic.•Japan remains on the brink of a state of emergency as the rate of coronavirus infections continues to increase in the country, its top government spokesman said on Wednesday.•Turkmenistan banned the media from using the word "coronavirus". An international media freedom watchdog says the autocratic ex-Soviet nation of Turkmenistan has banned the media from using the word "coronavirus", AP reports.•California hospitalisations double in four days, ICU patients triple. California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday that the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations in the state had nearly doubled over the past four days and the number of ICU patients tripled during that time.•Twenty-eight students who returned to Texas after spring in Mexico have tested positive for coronavirus, although Mexican officials pushed back against the suggestion that they picked up the virus at the tourist spot, Reuters reports.•France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837.

Global deaths pass 42,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 42,332 people have died across the world. At least 859,556 have been infected.

US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House, whose models indicate at least 100,000 will doe. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China. Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 4,076 people.

A US Navy captain asked permission to isolate crew on shore. The captain of US Navy aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt, which is facing a growing outbreak of the coronavirus, is asking for permission to isolate the bulk of his roughly 5,000 crew members on shore, which would take the warship out of duty in an effort to save lives.

Saudi Arabia urged Muslims to wait before making Hajj plans, until there is more clarity about the pandemic.

Japan remains on the brink of a state of emergency as the rate of coronavirus infections continues to increase in the country, its top government spokesman said on Wednesday.

Turkmenistan banned the media from using the word "coronavirus". An international media freedom watchdog says the autocratic ex-Soviet nation of Turkmenistan has banned the media from using the word "coronavirus", AP reports.

California hospitalisations double in four days, ICU patients triple. California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday that the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations in the state had nearly doubled over the past four days and the number of ICU patients tripled during that time.

Twenty-eight students who returned to Texas after spring in Mexico have tested positive for coronavirus, although Mexican officials pushed back against the suggestion that they picked up the virus at the tourist spot, Reuters reports.

France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.19am BST

block-time published-time 5.07am BST

The first two cases of the coronavirus were confirmed among Colombia's indigenous people on Tuesday, local authorities said, fanning fears that the highly contagious disease could decimate vulnerable tribal communities, Reuters reports.

The cases were found in two people from the Yukpa group who live in dire poverty in a cluster of makeshift shelters and tents in the northern border city of Cucuta, according to the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (ONIC), the country's leading indigenous authority. Health experts said they fear the coronavirus could spread rapidly among tribes who have little immunity to diseases common in the general population. Their immune systems often are weakened as well by malnutrition, hepatitis B, diabetes and respiratory diseases like tuberculosis, experts say.

block-time published-time 5.00am BST

As it eases its strict coronavirus curbs, China has urged authorities to pay more attention to asymptomatic cases, part of efforts to allay public fears that large numbers of infectious people have gone unreported.

A community volunteer wearing a hazmat suit guards the entrance of a compound along in Wuhan, in China's central Hubei province on 1 April, 2020. Photograph: Noel Celis/AFP via Getty Images

China is easing travel restrictions and allowing people to return to work in the city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei after two months of strict curbs on people's movements with no new cases of the coronavirus reported in the region where it emerged last year for seven days. But several studies have raised the possibility that the attempt to restore normal life might be premature, warning that lifting the restrictions in Wuhan so soon could lead to a second wave of infections.

block-time published-time 4.51am BST

Puerto Rico on Tuesday closed its fourth police station in a week, raising concerns about the ability of the US territory to respond to the coronavirus pandemic as officers accused the government of exposing one of the largest police departments in a U.S. jurisdiction to Covid-19.

More than 100 officers now remain quarantined as dozens of police await test results on an island that has reported eight deaths and more than 230 confirmed cases amid a month long curfew that has shuttered beaches, parks and non-essential businesses. The first police station to close is located in the popular tourist town of Rincon, where the 42-year-old wife of one officer recently died from Covid-19, according to health officials. A couple of days later, authorities shuttered the police station in the eastern town of Aguas Buenas after one officer tested positive. Two more then closed over coronavirus infection fears. Shortly afterward, the government announced that it also closed a station in the western town of Moca and sent more than 40 officers home after the relative of one policeman showed symptoms that could be related to Covid-19.

block-time published-time 4.41am BST

Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has offered a prayer for the national cabinet to stay "strong and united" and committed the Australian nation to God during times of "great need and suffering" as it responds to Covid-19.

The prayer is contained in a video, first published by Eternity News but later removed and republished by Queensland Parents for Secular State Schools, in which Morrison explains his faith gives him "enormous encouragement" in how to respond to the crisis.

Morrison, Australia's first evangelical Christian prime minister, has made no secret of his religious faith, referring to his re-election in 2019 as a "miracle".

But glimpses of Morrison's personal practice of Christianity are rarer, such as his decision to invite cameras into Horizon church at Easter in 2019.

Related:  Scott Morrison prays for Australia and commits nation to God amid coronavirus crisis

block-time published-time 4.30am BST

Thousands of people have urged Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabic to let them briefly walk pets during a curfew introduced over the coronavirus crisis, local media reported Tuesday.

A closed farmers market in Belgrade, Serbia, 31 March 2020. Photograph: Andrej Cukic/EPA

Serbia has declared a state of emergency and adopted strict measures to curb the Covid-19 outbreak, including a curfew from 5:00 pm to 5:00 am during the week and from three pm to five am on weekends. The Balkan country has confirmed 900 cases of Covid-19 and 23 deaths.

block-time published-time 4.18am BST

A very worrying report out of the Pacific region now.

The Northern Mariana Islands, which is a US commonwealth in the north Pacific, has seen its first coronavirus-related death - a 70-year-old man. The commonwealth now has six confirmed cases of coronavirus and officials warn there is evidence of community transmission.

This brings the Pacific region's death toll to three. Two people have died in Guam, which is located just to the south of the Northern Marianas.

Map

There are grave fears for the Pacific region in relation to coronavirus.

So far, there have been a relatively low number of cases across the Pacific, but in many of Pacific countries and territories, health systems are very weak and doctors struggle to have the resources to deal with even ordinary illnesses. There are fears that if the virus reached pandemic levels in these countries, the death toll would be huge.

The Northern Marianas does not have any testing capacity for coronavirus and tests have been sent to Guam, but as Anita Hofschneider from Hawaii's Civil Beat, a Marianas local, reports only a handful of cases from the Marianas have been tested so far.

enltrThe Northern Mariana Islands now has six confirmed #COVID19 cases including one death of a 70-year-old man. The CNMI lacks            #coronavirus testing capacity and just 19 tests have been conducted on neighboring Guam, with 12 pending. Officials say there's evidence of community spread.            pic.twitter.com/FBpuHEk9wV

- Anita Hofschneider (@ahofschneider) April 1, 2020

block-time published-time 3.55am BST

A pet cat has tested positive for the coronavirus in Hong Kong after its owner was confirmed with having the virus, the city's Agricultural and Fisheries department said, cautioning that the animal has not shown any signs of the disease.

A ginger and white Tabby cat - not the infected animal. Photograph: Pearl Bucknall/Alamy Stock Photo

In a notice late on Tuesday, the department said there is currently no evidence that pet animals can be a source of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, and owners should not abandon their pets, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization also states on their website that there is no evidence that a dog, cat or any pet can transmit Covid-19. The cat is the third animal to test positive in Hong Kong, following earlier cases in which two dogs tested weak positive or positive during repeated tests for the virus. Authorities said the cat will continue to be monitored and examined. There has only been one other reported case of coronavirus in a cat, in Belgium, which is believed to have become infected from its owner, according to a statement from the Hong Kong Veterinary Association.

block-time published-time 3.50am BST

Japan on the brink of a state of emergency, top government spokesperson says

Japan remains on the brink of a state of emergency as the rate of coronavirus infections continues to increase in the country, its top government spokesman said on Wednesday. Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga told reporters controlling the virus was a top priority, and that the government would do "whatever is needed" to minimise the economic impact after a nationwide poll released earlier in the day showed a pessimistic turn in sentiment among manufacturers because of the virus.

Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe (C) attends an Upper House Accounts Committee meeting in Tokyo, Japan, 01 April 2020. Photograph: Jiji Press/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.07am BST

block-time published-time 3.36am BST

Taiwan's economic stimulus response to the coronavirus outbreak could reach T$1 trillion (US$33.09 billion), Taiwan media reported late on Tuesday citing Premier Su Tseng-chang.

A woman wearing a face mask walks in front of Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei on 31 March, 2020. Photograph: Sam Yeh/AFP via Getty Images

The government is already rolling out a T$60 billion package to help the export-dependent economy, and President Tsai Ing-wen has said another T$40 billion is available. Taiwan's central bank said last month it was making T$200 billion available in loans for small and medium-sized businesses to help them cope with the impact of the virus, and said this week it could increase that if needed. Tsai is due to hold a news conference later on Wednesday.

block-time published-time 3.27am BST

28 spring break students test positive after returning from Mexico

Twenty-eight students who returned to Texas after spring break at Mexico's Cabo San Lucas beach resort have tested positive for coronavirus, although Mexican officials pushed back against the suggestion that they picked up the virus at the tourist spot, Reuters reports.

The 28 confirmed cases are self-isolating and dozens more are under quarantine while being monitored and tested, the city of Austin said in a statement on Tuesday, drawing attention to possibly low detection of cases in Mexico. However, the Los Cabos Trust, which runs tourism sites including the resort where the vacationers stayed, said the group departed on 11 March, implying they did not come in contact with the coronavirus until later. "Twenty days after their return to Austin, Texas, they had already passed the incubation period established by the World Health Organization," the trust said in a statement. It added that no resort staff member presented coronavirus symptoms.

Mexico's health ministry on Tuesday registered 1,215 cases of coronavirus in the country, up from 1,094 the day before. It also said 29 people died from the virus in Mexico, up from 28 a day earlier.

At the time of the trip, Mexico was not under a US federal travel advisory, but had advised against non-essential travel. "A leisure vacation of any kind is not considered essential," the city said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.38am BST

block-time published-time 3.22am BST

NHS Nightingale: inside London's temporary coronavirus hospital

Britain's first coronavirus field hospital has been built in London and will treat up to 4,000           previously fit and healthy people struck down by Covid-19.            London patients in need of intensive care but with the best chance of survival will be taken to the Nightingale hospital, which has been constructed within the ExCel arena in the capital's Docklands area in the space of a week.

block-time published-time 3.13am BST

California hospitalisations double in four days, ICU patients triple

California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday that the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations in the state had nearly doubled over the past four days and the number of ICU patients tripled during that time. By Monday, 1,421 California patients had been hospitalised with COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, up from 746 four days ago, Newsom said. The number of patients requiring intensive care beds rose to 597 from 200, he said. Altogether, 5,763 people have tested positive for the disease in the state, he said.

Red Cross trucks are parked outside the Los Angeles Convention Center in downtown Los Angeles California 30 March, 2020. The California National Guard is currently setting up the convention center as a field hospital to help lessen the strain on LA-area hospitals during the coronavirus crisis. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP via Getty Images

The rapid increase in the need for hospital and ICU care led Newsom to set up a website to connect retired doctors and nurses, as well as medical and nursing students, to hospitals and clinics that need them. The state will help retirees activate their licenses and students obtain licensing. "If you're a nursing school student, a medical school student, we need you," Newsom said. "If you've just retired in the last couple of years, we need you." The state is hoping its initiative, dubbed California Health Corps, will bring on board enough staff to handle an additional 50,000 hospital beds, Newsom said. In a livestreamed video with Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan, Newsom thanked the couple for a previously unannounced $25 million donation in support of the health corps. A Facebook spokeswoman said the donation was coming from the company and would help cover costs like temporary housing near health care sites, child care costs and licensing fees. An executive order signed on Monday also temporarily allows physician assistants and nurse practitioners to perform some duties normally performed by physicians and registered nurses, and waives other state rules during the crisis.

block-time published-time 3.10am BST

In New York, a surge in deaths has overwhelmed the city's permanent morgues and filled storage spaces in many hospitals to capacity. The Federal Emergency Management Agency is sending 85 refrigerated trucks to serve as temporary morgues, the city said. Its been that way for days at Brooklyn Hospital Center, which said in a statement that the unprecedented crisis calls for extraordinary measures and that extra storage is needed to accommodate the tragic spike in deaths, placing a strain on the entire system of care from hospitals to funeral homes. "Grieving families cannot quickly make arrangements, and their loved ones who have passed are remaining in hospitals longer, thus the need for this accommodation," the hospital in Brooklyns Fort Greene neighbourhood said. The city's medical examiner's office has also started operating a makeshift morgue, as it did after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, to provide emergency capacity as the city's permanent facilities fill up. The city's coronavirus death toll more than doubled in the past four days, surging from 450 on Friday to 932 as of Tuesday morning, AP reports.

block-time published-time 2.50am BST

"I basically want to address the idiots out there": Seinfeld and Curb Your Enthusiasm creator Larry David has filmed a stay-home message for the Office of the Governor of California.

"You're hurting old people like me. Well, not me... I'll never see you," he says.

enltrThe only celebrity PSA any of us needed today, from Larry David: "If you've seen my show - nothing good ever happens going out of the house. You know that." pic.twitter.com/0wdob5x6Te

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) April 1, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.50am BST

block-time published-time 2.39am BST

More now on that warning from US Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who said the world faces the most challenging crisis since the second world war.

UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP via Getty Images

There is also a risk that the combination of the disease and its economic impact will contribute to enhanced instability, enhanced unrest, and enhanced conflict, the UN chief said at the launch of a report on the socioeconomic impacts of Covid-19. Guterres  called for a much stronger and more effective global response to the coronavirus pandemic and to the social and economic devastation that Covid-19 is causing. "We are facing a global health crisis unlike any in the 75-year history of the United Nations. One that is killing people, spreading human suffering, and upending peoples lives," the report said.

"The secretary-general told reporters: The magnitude of the response must match the scale of the crisis large-scale, coordinated and comprehensive, with country and international responses being guided by the World Health Organization." He stressed that we are still very far from where we need to be to effectively fight the virus and its impacts worldwide.

He said many countries are not respecting WHO guidelines, and that while US$5 trillion has been mobilised, most of that money was from and for the developed world, including $2 trillion in the United States to support their own economy.

block-time published-time 2.33am BST

The New York Times reports that the US Centers for Disease Control is reconsidering its guidelines on masks, as it warns that up to 25% of people infected with the virus do not show symptoms.

block-time published-time 2.21am BST

Teargas, beatings and bleach: the most extreme Covid-19 lockdown controls around the world

As coronavirus lockdowns have been expanded globally, billions of people have found that they are now faced with unprecedented restrictions. Police across the world have been given licence to control behaviour in a way that would normally be extreme even for an authoritarian state.

On Tuesday, police in Kenya gave their "sincere condolences" after a 13-year-old boy was shot and killed on his balcony in Nairobi as police moved through the neighbourhood, enforcing a coronavirus curfew.

"They come in screaming and beating us like cows, and we are law-abiding citizens," said Hussein Moyo, the father of Yasin, the boy who was shot.

Relatives and friends pray over the body of 13-year-old Yasin Hussein Moyo at his burial, at the Kariakor cemetery in Nairobi, Kenya Tuesday, 31 March 31, 2020. Photograph: Brian Inganga/AP

Concerns are growing that police forces around the world are using gruelling and humiliating punishments to enforce quarantine on the poorest and most vulnerable groups, including tens of millions who live hand-to-mouth and risk starving if they do not defy lockdowns and seek work.

Related:  Teargas, beatings and bleach: the most extreme Covid-19 lockdown controls around the world

block-time published-time 2.17am BST

South Korea has reported 101 new cases of the virus, which is in keeping with the average.

Yesterday it reported 125 new cases, higher than the around 100 cases reported daily for the past three weeks.

The total number of cases is 9,887.

block-time published-time 2.15am BST

US Navy captain asks for permission to isolate crew on shore

The captain of a US Navy aircraft carrier facing a growing outbreak of the coronavirus is asking for permission to isolate the bulk of his roughly 5,000 crew members on shore, which would take the warship out of duty in an effort to save lives, AP reports. In a memo to Navy leaders, the captain of the USS Theodore Roosevelt said the spread of the disease is ongoing and accelerating, and said that removing all but 10% of the crew is a necessary risk in order to stop the spread of the virus. The ship is docked in Guam.

The aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt transits the Pacific Ocean. Photograph: Paul L Archer/US NAVY/AFP via Getty Images

US Navy leaders on Tuesday were scrambling to determine how to best respond to the extraordinary request as over 100 crew members tested positive.  The outbreak on the carrier may be the Navys most dramatic, but it tracks an accelerating upward trend across the military. The Pentagon said the number of cases in the military reached 673 on Tuesday morning, a jump of 104 from the day before and up from 174 a week ago. Since March 20, the total has surged tenfold, even as the Pentagon has taken many steps to try to limit the spread, including halting nearly all movement of troops overseas.

Related:  Captain of coronavirus-hit US aircraft carrier warns sailors will die if not let off ship

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.09am BST

block-time published-time 2.08am BST

If you have questions, stories you think we should be covering, tips, or something on the lighter side to share you can get in touch with me directly on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

block-time published-time 2.02am BST

Panama has announced strict quarantine measures that separate citizens by gender, AFP reports.

From Wednesday for 15 days, men and women will only be able to leave their homes for two hours at a time, and on different days. On Sunday all outings are banned.

Panama has confirmed 27 deaths and 1,075 coronavirus cases.

Two people walk wearing masks and gloves in Panama City, Panama, 31 March 2020. Photograph: Carlos Lemos/EPA

block-time published-time 1.57am BST

President Trump has said he will speak to Florida governor about two coronavirus-stricken cruise ships stranded at sea during his White House Press briefing on Tuesday. Four people have died, nine people have tested positive for Covid-19 and dozens are ill on the Zaandam and Rotterdam ships, which are traveling towards Florida to attempt to dock after several Latin American countries refused to allow them into port. Port Everglades has not yet confirmed whether the boats will be allowed to dock in Fort Lauderdale.

Holland America's cruise ship Zaandam (L) and the Rotterdam cruise ship are seen in Panama City bay on 28 March,2020. Photograph: Ivan Pisarenko/AFP via Getty Images

On Monday, Ron DeSantis has said passengers on the ships cannot be "dumped" in his state, dismissing them as mostly "foreigners". But President Trump said he did not want the cruise liners to become "ghost ships" and said he would do the right thing "for humanity". President Trump told reporters: "You have people that are dying on the ship who are least very sick, but they are dying on the ship. I'm going to do what is right. Not only for us but for humanity. These are two big ships and they have a lot of very sick people. I'll be speaking to the governor." The operator of a coronavirus-stricken cruise liner has            warned that more people could die at sea after several Caribbean countries refused to accept two emergency medical evacuations from the ships.

block-time published-time 1.51am BST

Turkmenistan bans media from using the word "coronavirus"

An international media freedom watchdog says the autocratic ex-Soviet nation of Turkmenistan has banned the media from using the word "coronavirus", AP reports. Reporters Without Borders said Tuesday the word also has been removed from health information brochures distributed in schools, hospitals and workplaces. The gas-rich Central Asian nation that neighbours Iran so far has reported no cases of the new coronavirus. Iran has reported more than 44,000 cases.

Paris-based Reporters Without Borders said people wearing face masks or talking about the coronavirus are liable to be arrested by plainclothes police. Ranked last in the group's 2019 World Press Freedom Index, Turkmenistan is one of the world's most closed countries. Turkmenistan President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has ruled the country since 2006 through an all-encompassing personality cult that styles him as Turkmenistan's "arkadaq," or protector.

block-time published-time 1.48am BST

Here is our story on that Trump press conference on Tuesday:

Donald Trump has warned America to brace for a "very, very painful two weeks" as the White House projected that the coronavirus pandemic could claim 100,000 to 240,000 lives, even if current social distancing guidelines are maintained.

Striking an unusually sombre tone at the start a marathon two-hour briefing, the US president defended his early handling of the crisis and displayed models that, he said, justified his decision to keep much of the economy shut down.

"I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead," Trump told reporters at the White House. "We're going to go through a very tough two weeks. This is going to be a very painful, very, very painful two weeks."

The US death toll from the coronavirus climbed past 3,800 on Tuesday, eclipsing China's official count. Trump            has been widely condemned for exacerbating the crisis by failing to prepare testing kits, breathing apparatus and other equipment.

On Tuesday his experts said their models showed between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans could die from the coronavirus even if the country keeps mitigation measures in place.

Related:  Trump warns of 'painful two weeks' as officials predict up to 240,000 US coronavirus deaths

block-time published-time 1.47am BST

US secretary of state Mike Pompeo has released a statement saying two local US embassy staff members have died in Jakarta, Indonesia and Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo Foreign Policy reports:

enltrNEW: Pompeo in statement says two locally employed staff, at US embassies in Jakarta and Kinshasa, have died from Coronavirus. No deaths to report from American State Department staff

- Robbie Gramer (@RobbieGramer)

April 1, 2020

block-time published-time 1.32am BST

In the US, Politico reports: "Trump officials have decided against reopening Obamacare enrolment to uninsured Americans during the coronavirus pandemic, defying calls from health insurers and Dems to create a special sign-up window amid the health crisis."

Trump and officials in his administration had said they were considering relaunching the federal Obamacare enrolment site.

"However, a White House official on Tuesday evening told POLITICO the administration will not reopen the site for a special enrollment period, and that the administration is 'exploring other options'."

Trump has just meanwhile published a link to the full "Coronavirus Guidelines for America", which includes social distancing measures:

undltr https://t.co/cawqG2DGXV

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 1, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34am BST

block-time published-time 1.27am BST

In lighter news, with humans sheltering indoors to escape the new coronavirus, mountain goats are taking advantage of the peace and space to roam in frisky clumps through the streets of Llandudno, a town in North Wales.

These goats aren't kidding around.

enltrLlandudno is run by goats pic.twitter.com/C7nENePcEA

- Andrew Stuart (@AndrewStuart) March 31, 2020

Andrew Stuart, a video producer for the Manchester Evening News, has been posting videos of the furry adventurers on his Twitter feed.

enltrIf you haven't got a goat correspondent like we do then you can just piss off https://t.co/viQSNoCwRH

- John Scheerhout (@johnscheerhout) March 31, 2020

He said the goats normally keep largely to themselves in a country park nearby. But now, emboldened by the lack of people and cars, the long-horned animals are venturing deeper into the seaside town.

Related:  Llandudno marauders: the herd of goats running riot through a Welsh town

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.40am BST

block-time published-time 1.19am BST

Health experts call virus pandemic a window into future climate threats

The coronavirus pandemic is a preview of the types of global health threats that will emerge as the planet becomes hotter, and how it is tackled has implications for dealing with climate threats as well, health experts said on Tuesday. Reuters reports:

Growing destruction of forests and farming expansion are both driving climate change and bringing people into closer contact with wild animal diseases, said Mandeep Dhaliwal, director for HIV, health and development for the United Nations Development Programme, speaking during an online panel at the Skoll Forum on Social Entrepreneurship.   The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said the coronavirus pandemic had its origin in bats, with early infections linked to a large live animal market in the Chinese city of Wuhan.  Dr. David Nabarro, a special envoy to the World Health Organization (WHO) on the pandemic, said about a third of the world's countries were on lockdown. That was forcing leaders into "awful political tradeoffs" between protecting lives and keeping economies functioning  - the kind of tradeoffs that could become more frequent as climate-linked disasters from wildfires to drought worsen, he said. Gary Cohen, head of Healthcare Without Harm, an organisation that works in 53 countries to make health care systems environmentally sustainable, said climate change, like coronavirus, was a "force multiplier" for economic and social injustices.  "Those living on the edge, without enough food, with poor or no housing, with no health care... those are the people that are going to suffer most. We're already seeing that in the response to the Covid-19 crisis," he said.

block-time published-time 1.03am BST

US president Donald Trump has shared guidelines on Twitter under the heading "30 Days to Slow the Spread".

The points mainly relate to those who are sick, elderly or have underlying health conditions - all of these people should stay home and not go to work.

Trump issues "Guidelines for America" during coronavirus pandemic. Photograph: social media

Trump earlier today said of the pandemic: "It's going to go away, hopefully at the end of the month."

enltr30 DAYS TO SLOW THE SPREAD #COVID?19           https://t.co/p9j7kZsD7b           pic.twitter.com/RSUHRfT8If

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 31, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.04am BST

block-time published-time 12.52am BST

Saudi Arabia urges Muslims to wait before making Hajj plans

Moving away from the US now to Saudi Arabia, which has urged Muslims to wait before making plans to attend the annual Hajj pilgrimage until there is more clarity about the pandemic.

Some 2.5 million pilgrims from around the world usually flock to the holiest sites of Islam in Mecca and Medina for the week-long ritual, which is a once-in-a-lifetime duty for every able-bodied Muslim and a major source of income for the kingdom.

Muslim pilgrims circle the Kaaba and pray at the Grand mosque at the end of their Hajj pilgrimage in the holy city of Mecca, Saudi Arabia 13 August, 2019. Photograph: Ümit Bektas/Reuters

The largest annual gathering of Muslims is scheduled to begin in late July, but the coronavirus outbreak has raised questions about whether it can or should go ahead given the risk of spreading the disease further in large gatherings. Saudi Arabia has already suspended the smaller, year-round umrah pilgrimage until further notice, halted all international passenger flights indefinitely and last week blocked entry and exit to several cities, including Mecca and Medina. The kingdom has reported 10 deaths among 1,563 cases of coronavirus, which has infected some 800,000 people globally and killed more than 38,000. Cancelling the Hajj would be unprecedented in modern times, but curbing attendance from high-risk areas has happened before, including in recent years during the Ebola outbreak.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.34am BST

block-time published-time 12.46am BST

Trump also said that "nobody knew how contagious this virus was".

My colleagues have fact checked this:

Fact check: "Nobody knew"

"Nobody knew how contagious this was," Trump said. "I don't think any doctor new it at the time. People have not seen anything like this."

In fact, as the disease spread through China, public health experts were warning for weeks that the coronavirus threat could grow into a pandemic.

Moreover, epidemiologists have been predicting this sort of pandemic for years. The US intelligence community, in its January 2019 Worldwide Threat Assessment, wrote: "We assess that the United States and the world will remain vulnerable to the next flu pandemic or large-scale outbreak of a contagious disease that could lead to massive rates of death and disability, severely affect the world economy, strain international resources, and increase calls on the United States for support."

block-time published-time 12.45am BST

US president Donald Trump has just finished a White House briefing, one of the more memorable because of the predictions coming out of the coronavirus task force's modelling.

"It's an incredibly dark topic," Trump said, before leaving the podium. "An incredibly horrible topic. And it's incredibly interesting. That's why everybody is, They're going crazy, they can't get enough of it."

Between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans will die, the White House modelling says.

Trump told people to prepare for a "very, very painful two weeks".

The graph showing those numbers listed those possible deaths as "goals" in the mitigation:

enltrThis White House briefing room slide lists as "goals" 100,000 to 240,000 deaths. Breathtaking. pic.twitter.com/CrajjVGqVf

- Shane Goldmacher (@ShaneGoldmacher)

March 31, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.46am BST

block-time published-time 12.37am BST

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic, which the UN secretary general António Guterres called the greatest challenge faced by the planet since the second world war.

There are now more than 850,000 cases worldwide, a fifth of which are in the United States. Tuesday saw several countries, including France, Italy, US, Spain and Russia, declare record daily increases in pandemic-related deaths.

I'll be taking you through the next few hours of news. If you have questions, stories you think we should be covering, tips, or something heartwarming you can get in touch with me directly on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

•Global deaths pass 40,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 40,636 people have died across the world, while 174,019 people have recovered after becoming infected. At least 850,000 people have been infected.•US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China . Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 3,400 people. The figures mean the coronavirus death toll has now surpassed that of the 11 September terror attacks and is greater than that of China - 3,309.•France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837.•Boy, 13, becomes UK's youngest victim. A 13-year-old boy in London who tested positive has died, Kings College hospital has said. He is believed to be the youngest victim of the outbreak in the UK.•Worst FTSE quarter since 1987. The FTSE 100 posts its worst quarter since autumn 1987 as it closes for the night at 5671 points (up 108 points, or 1.95% today). That means it has shed 24.8% of its value in the last three months. That's its second-worst quarter since being created in 1984.•More than 1,000 have now died in the Netherlands. The number of deaths in the Netherlands resulting from the epidemic rises by 175 to 1,039. The number of confirmed infections has increased by 845 to 12,595, the Netherlands' National Institute for Health (RIVM) says.•UK shows early signs of flattening the curve. The NHS needs everyone to play their part in reducing transmission of the virus, the medical director of NHS England Stephen Powis says, as signs emerge that physical distancing measures are beginning to work.•'Stay healthy!' US urges Americans left behind in Pakistan. A US government-arranged flight is to leave Islamabad in Pakistan on Wednesday night to repatriate Americans in the country. But not all US nationals will be on it. Their embassy's advice to them while they await a plan to get them home is: "Stay healthy!"•Ireland: confirmed cases of coronavirus halve. Ireland on Monday confirmed 295 new cases, the second highest daily number, bringing the total to 2,910. It recorded eight deaths, bringing the death toll to 54. Northern Ireland has 533 confirmed cases and 22 deaths.•Burundi and Sierra Leone confirmed their first cases, and Slovakia and Oman registered their first deaths.

Global deaths pass 40,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 40,636 people have died across the world, while 174,019 people have recovered after becoming infected. At least 850,000 people have been infected.

US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China . Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 3,400 people. The figures mean the coronavirus death toll has now surpassed that of the 11 September terror attacks and is greater than that of China - 3,309.

France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837.

Boy, 13, becomes UK's youngest victim. A 13-year-old boy in London who tested positive has died, Kings College hospital has said. He is believed to be the youngest victim of the outbreak in the UK.

Worst FTSE quarter since 1987. The FTSE 100 posts its worst quarter since autumn 1987 as it closes for the night at 5671 points (up 108 points, or 1.95% today). That means it has shed 24.8% of its value in the last three months. That's its second-worst quarter since being created in 1984.

More than 1,000 have now died in the Netherlands. The number of deaths in the Netherlands resulting from the epidemic rises by 175 to 1,039. The number of confirmed infections has increased by 845 to 12,595, the Netherlands' National Institute for Health (RIVM) says.

UK shows early signs of flattening the curve. The NHS needs everyone to play their part in reducing transmission of the virus, the medical director of NHS England Stephen Powis says, as signs emerge that physical distancing measures are beginning to work.

'Stay healthy!' US urges Americans left behind in Pakistan. A US government-arranged flight is to leave Islamabad in Pakistan on Wednesday night to repatriate Americans in the country. But not all US nationals will be on it. Their embassy's advice to them while they await a plan to get them home is: "Stay healthy!"

Ireland: confirmed cases of coronavirus halve. Ireland on Monday confirmed 295 new cases, the second highest daily number, bringing the total to 2,910. It recorded eight deaths, bringing the death toll to 54. Northern Ireland has 533 confirmed cases and 22 deaths.

Burundi and Sierra Leone confirmed their first cases, and Slovakia and Oman registered their first deaths.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.00am BST

6663 2020-03-31T23:37:44Z false false 2020-04-01T05:47:47Z true AUS theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/dhndg false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/87274d59494a2c8beaf1d3879f05f1dcc5569ae5/0_305_4579_2748/500.jpg false en true China pivots to tackle 'silent' Covid-19 carriers as US says a quarter of cases may have no symptoms Chinese authorities have shifted their focus to tackling "silent", or asymptomatic, carriers of the coronavirus as part of the next phase of the pandemic, amid concern among US health chiefs that a quarter of patients do not suffer symptoms. The National Health Commission in China said it would start releasing a tally of asymptomatic patients from Wednesday and would order those cases into quarantine for 14 days, after the mainland witnessed its first rise in infections in five days. Authorities reported 130 new asymptomatic cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of such cases under observation to 1,367. Recent new infections likely caused by asymptomatic patients have prompted widespread public concern as the country lifts lockdown measures and citizens go back to work. Those concerns were reflected on Tuesday by Robert Redfield, the director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), who said in a rare interview that as a many as one in four cases have no symptoms. As a result, the CDC was now "aggressively reviewing" its recommendations on use of face masks, potentially extending their use based on the assumption that more people in "high transmission zones" were already infected but without symptoms. China's National Health Commission on Wednesday reported 36 new Covid-19 cases and 130 new asymptomatic cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of such cases under observation to 1,367. Previously, China has regarded asymptomatic patients as a low risk and not included them in their tally of confirmed cases. The move to disclose the number of asymptomatic cases comes amid scrutiny of China's reported figures, which previously only included people who exhibited symptoms. The commission said all but one of the 36 new cases was imported from abroad, while seven more deaths from the disease had been reported over the previous 24 hours. More on Curb Your Enthusiasm star Larry David's coronavirus message shared late on Tuesday in the US. The comedian, 72, warned older people are being endangered by those going outside for non-essential trips and "socialising too close". In a video shared by the Office of the Governor of California, David said: "Obviously, somebody put me up to this because it's generally not the kind of thing I do, but I basically want to address the idiots out there - and you know who you are. "You're going out - I don't know what you're doing. You're socialising too close, it's not good." David, who created hit sitcoms Seinfeld and Curb Your Enthusiasm, said people flouting the stay-at-home order could make elderly relatives ill. He said: "You're hurting old people like me - well, not me. I have nothing to do with you. I'll never see you. But, you know, other - let's say, other old people who might be your relatives! Who the hell knows." David also warned people were missing a "once in a lifetime" opportunity to "stay in the house, sit on the couch and watch TV". "I don't know how you're passing that up," he added. The UK papers on 1 April, 2020 after the very long month of March: A British national is among four people to have died on a coronavirus-stricken cruise ship embroiled in a bitter dispute over plans to disembark passengers in the US, PA news agency reports. In what is being described as an unfolding humanitarian crisis, so far two of the four people to have died on the cruise ship Zaandam have been confirmed to have had Covid-19, with nine people aboard testing positive and 189 reporting flu-like symptoms. "One of the deceased passengers is from the UK," a spokesman for the Holland America cruise line, which operates the Zaandam, said in an email to the PA news agency. "Due to US... laws, we cannot provide any additional medical and health details." The Zaandam, which is carrying more than 200 British nationals, and its sister ship the Rotterdam, passed through the Panama Canal on Monday after being denied entry to several ports. Both ships are seeking to dock in Florida later this week. But the state's governor is reluctant to allow disembarkation for the more than 1,000 people aboard the Zaandam. Public schools in Tokyo could remain closed for a second month, according to media reports, as speculation mounts that the government could declare a state of emergency in response to a rise in Covid-19 infections in the capital and other parts of Japan. While Japan, with around 2,200 cases and 66 deaths, has been spared the devastation seen in the US, Europe and China, it reported a record daily rise in infections on Tuesday. The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said the government was prepared to "whatever is needed" to contain the outbreak, which has already left the world's third-biggest economy teetering on the brink of recession. Calls have intensified for the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, to declare a state of emergency - a move that would enable prefectural governments to urge people to avoid nonessential trips outside the home. Those steps would be voluntary, rather than legally binding, however. Abe this week dismissed as "fake news" social media speculation that a more draconian form of lockdown was imminent. Public broadcaster NHK reported that the Tokyo metropolitan government was considering keeping the city's schools closed until May, despite suggestions that some could reopen this month to coincide with the start of the new academic year. Japan's schools closed at the beginning of March at Abe's request. Here are the latest global figures now, according to Johns Hopkins University. There are just shy of 860,000 confirmed cases worldwide, with the total currently at 859,796. There have been 42,332 deaths. Here are ten worst-affected countries by number of confirmed cases, with the US more than 80,000 cases ahead of the next worst-affected country, Italy. Confirmed US cases account for roughly 1 in 5 worldwide. US: 189,510 Italy: 105,792 Spain: 95,923 China: 82,294 Germany: 71,808 France: 52,836 Iran: 44,605 United Kingdom: 25,481 Switzerland: 16,605 Turkey: 13,531 Here are the ten countries with the highest number of coronavirus-related deaths: Italy: 12,428 deaths Spain: 8,464 deaths US: 4,079 deaths France: 3,523 deaths China: 3,310 deaths Iran: 2,898 deaths United Kingdom: 1,789 deaths Netherlands: 1,039 deaths Germany: 775 deaths Belgium: 705 deaths There have been 178,301 recoveries. People are sharing before and after shots on Twitter - where "before" is the beginning of March and "after" is now: Cuba said on Tuesday it was suspending the arrival of international passenger flights and asking all foreign boats to withdraw from the Caribbean island's waters to curb the spread of the new coronavirus. Cuba, which has confirmed 186 cases of the fast-spreading disease, partially closed its borders last week, banning the arrival of foreign tourists and the departure of Cubans. Prime Minister Manuel Marrero clarified that Cuba would remain open for commerce and donations. Cuba first reported cases of the new coronavirus three weeks ago in a group of Italian tourists and has since reported six deaths from the disease. Nearly 3,000 people it suspects could have it are being monitored in state isolation facilities. Authorities have carried out 2,322 tests. New Zealand on Wednesday reported 61 new cases of the coronavirus, but said it was too early to assess if the lower number of cases this week meant the nationwide lockdown measures were working. The new cases take the country's total to 708. The number of new Covid-19 cases was as high as 85 last week, but has stayed lower this week. More than half of the cases was related to overseas travel and community transmission cases were about 1%. "While on the face of it that might seem a heartening number relative to some of the other figures we have had now, I want to emphasise it's too early to assess if our measures are successfully slowing Covid-19," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said in a news conference. The number of cases in Germany has risen by 5,453 to 67,366, according to the RKI health institute. That rise is up from yesterday's +4,615 cases. Germany confirmed 149 new deaths. Global deaths pass 42,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 42,332 people have died across the world. At least 859,556 have been infected. US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House, whose models indicate at least 100,000 will doe. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China. Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 4,076 people. A US Navy captain asked permission to isolate crew on shore. The captain of US Navy aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt, which is facing a growing outbreak of the coronavirus, is asking for permission to isolate the bulk of his roughly 5,000 crew members on shore, which would take the warship out of duty in an effort to save lives. Saudi Arabia urged Muslims to wait before making Hajj plans, until there is more clarity about the pandemic. Japan remains on the brink of a state of emergency as the rate of coronavirus infections continues to increase in the country, its top government spokesman said on Wednesday. Turkmenistan banned the media from using the word "coronavirus". An international media freedom watchdog says the autocratic ex-Soviet nation of Turkmenistan has banned the media from using the word "coronavirus", AP reports. California hospitalisations double in four days, ICU patients triple. California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday that the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations in the state had nearly doubled over the past four days and the number of ICU patients tripled during that time. Twenty-eight students who returned to Texas after spring in Mexico have tested positive for coronavirus, although Mexican officials pushed back against the suggestion that they picked up the virus at the tourist spot, Reuters reports. France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837. The first two cases of the coronavirus were confirmed among Colombia's indigenous people on Tuesday, local authorities said, fanning fears that the highly contagious disease could decimate vulnerable tribal communities, Reuters reports. The cases were found in two people from the Yukpa group who live in dire poverty in a cluster of makeshift shelters and tents in the northern border city of Cucuta, according to the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (ONIC), the country's leading indigenous authority. Health experts said they fear the coronavirus could spread rapidly among tribes who have little immunity to diseases common in the general population. Their immune systems often are weakened as well by malnutrition, hepatitis B, diabetes and respiratory diseases like tuberculosis, experts say. As it eases its strict coronavirus curbs, China has urged authorities to pay more attention to asymptomatic cases, part of efforts to allay public fears that large numbers of infectious people have gone unreported. China is easing travel restrictions and allowing people to return to work in the city of Wuhan and the surrounding province of Hubei after two months of strict curbs on people's movements with no new cases of the coronavirus reported in the region where it emerged last year for seven days. But several studies have raised the possibility that the attempt to restore normal life might be premature, warning that lifting the restrictions in Wuhan so soon could lead to a second wave of infections. Puerto Rico on Tuesday closed its fourth police station in a week, raising concerns about the ability of the US territory to respond to the coronavirus pandemic as officers accused the government of exposing one of the largest police departments in a U.S. jurisdiction to Covid-19. More than 100 officers now remain quarantined as dozens of police await test results on an island that has reported eight deaths and more than 230 confirmed cases amid a month long curfew that has shuttered beaches, parks and non-essential businesses. The first police station to close is located in the popular tourist town of Rincon, where the 42-year-old wife of one officer recently died from Covid-19, according to health officials. A couple of days later, authorities shuttered the police station in the eastern town of Aguas Buenas after one officer tested positive. Two more then closed over coronavirus infection fears. Shortly afterward, the government announced that it also closed a station in the western town of Moca and sent more than 40 officers home after the relative of one policeman showed symptoms that could be related to Covid-19. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison has offered a prayer for the national cabinet to stay "strong and united" and committed the Australian nation to God during times of "great need and suffering" as it responds to Covid-19. The prayer is contained in a video, first published by Eternity News but later removed and republished by Queensland Parents for Secular State Schools, in which Morrison explains his faith gives him "enormous encouragement" in how to respond to the crisis. Morrison, Australia's first evangelical Christian prime minister, has made no secret of his religious faith, referring to his re-election in 2019 as a "miracle". But glimpses of Morrison's personal practice of Christianity are rarer, such as his decision to invite cameras into Horizon church at Easter in 2019. Thousands of people have urged Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabic to let them briefly walk pets during a curfew introduced over the coronavirus crisis, local media reported Tuesday. Serbia has declared a state of emergency and adopted strict measures to curb the Covid-19 outbreak, including a curfew from 5:00 pm to 5:00 am during the week and from three pm to five am on weekends. The Balkan country has confirmed 900 cases of Covid-19 and 23 deaths. A very worrying report out of the Pacific region now. The Northern Mariana Islands, which is a US commonwealth in the north Pacific, has seen its first coronavirus-related death - a 70-year-old man. The commonwealth now has six confirmed cases of coronavirus and officials warn there is evidence of community transmission. This brings the Pacific region's death toll to three. Two people have died in Guam, which is located just to the south of the Northern Marianas. There are grave fears for the Pacific region in relation to coronavirus. So far, there have been a relatively low number of cases across the Pacific, but in many of Pacific countries and territories, health systems are very weak and doctors struggle to have the resources to deal with even ordinary illnesses. There are fears that if the virus reached pandemic levels in these countries, the death toll would be huge. The Northern Marianas does not have any testing capacity for coronavirus and tests have been sent to Guam, but as Anita Hofschneider from Hawaii's Civil Beat, a Marianas local, reports only a handful of cases from the Marianas have been tested so far. A pet cat has tested positive for the coronavirus in Hong Kong after its owner was confirmed with having the virus, the city's Agricultural and Fisheries department said, cautioning that the animal has not shown any signs of the disease. In a notice late on Tuesday, the department said there is currently no evidence that pet animals can be a source of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, and owners should not abandon their pets, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization also states on their website that there is no evidence that a dog, cat or any pet can transmit Covid-19. The cat is the third animal to test positive in Hong Kong, following earlier cases in which two dogs tested weak positive or positive during repeated tests for the virus. Authorities said the cat will continue to be monitored and examined. There has only been one other reported case of coronavirus in a cat, in Belgium, which is believed to have become infected from its owner, according to a statement from the Hong Kong Veterinary Association. Japan remains on the brink of a state of emergency as the rate of coronavirus infections continues to increase in the country, its top government spokesman said on Wednesday. Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga told reporters controlling the virus was a top priority, and that the government would do "whatever is needed" to minimise the economic impact after a nationwide poll released earlier in the day showed a pessimistic turn in sentiment among manufacturers because of the virus. Taiwan's economic stimulus response to the coronavirus outbreak could reach T$1 trillion (US$33.09 billion), Taiwan media reported late on Tuesday citing Premier Su Tseng-chang. The government is already rolling out a T$60 billion package to help the export-dependent economy, and President Tsai Ing-wen has said another T$40 billion is available. Taiwan's central bank said last month it was making T$200 billion available in loans for small and medium-sized businesses to help them cope with the impact of the virus, and said this week it could increase that if needed. Tsai is due to hold a news conference later on Wednesday. Twenty-eight students who returned to Texas after spring break at Mexico's Cabo San Lucas beach resort have tested positive for coronavirus, although Mexican officials pushed back against the suggestion that they picked up the virus at the tourist spot, Reuters reports. The 28 confirmed cases are self-isolating and dozens more are under quarantine while being monitored and tested, the city of Austin said in a statement on Tuesday, drawing attention to possibly low detection of cases in Mexico. However, the Los Cabos Trust, which runs tourism sites including the resort where the vacationers stayed, said the group departed on 11 March, implying they did not come in contact with the coronavirus until later. "Twenty days after their return to Austin, Texas, they had already passed the incubation period established by the World Health Organization," the trust said in a statement. It added that no resort staff member presented coronavirus symptoms. Mexico's health ministry on Tuesday registered 1,215 cases of coronavirus in the country, up from 1,094 the day before. It also said 29 people died from the virus in Mexico, up from 28 a day earlier. At the time of the trip, Mexico was not under a US federal travel advisory, but had advised against non-essential travel. "A leisure vacation of any kind is not considered essential," the city said. NHS Nightingale: inside London's temporary coronavirus hospital Britain's first coronavirus field hospital has been built in London and will treat up to 4,000 previously fit and healthy people struck down by Covid-19. London patients in need of intensive care but with the best chance of survival will be taken to the Nightingale hospital, which has been constructed within the ExCel arena in the capital's Docklands area in the space of a week. California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday that the number of Covid-19 hospitalisations in the state had nearly doubled over the past four days and the number of ICU patients tripled during that time. By Monday, 1,421 California patients had been hospitalised with COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, up from 746 four days ago, Newsom said. The number of patients requiring intensive care beds rose to 597 from 200, he said. Altogether, 5,763 people have tested positive for the disease in the state, he said. The rapid increase in the need for hospital and ICU care led Newsom to set up a website to connect retired doctors and nurses, as well as medical and nursing students, to hospitals and clinics that need them. The state will help retirees activate their licenses and students obtain licensing. "If you're a nursing school student, a medical school student, we need you," Newsom said. "If you've just retired in the last couple of years, we need you." The state is hoping its initiative, dubbed California Health Corps, will bring on board enough staff to handle an additional 50,000 hospital beds, Newsom said. In a livestreamed video with Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan, Newsom thanked the couple for a previously unannounced $25 million donation in support of the health corps. A Facebook spokeswoman said the donation was coming from the company and would help cover costs like temporary housing near health care sites, child care costs and licensing fees. An executive order signed on Monday also temporarily allows physician assistants and nurse practitioners to perform some duties normally performed by physicians and registered nurses, and waives other state rules during the crisis. In New York, a surge in deaths has overwhelmed the city's permanent morgues and filled storage spaces in many hospitals to capacity. The Federal Emergency Management Agency is sending 85 refrigerated trucks to serve as temporary morgues, the city said. Its been that way for days at Brooklyn Hospital Center, which said in a statement that the unprecedented crisis calls for extraordinary measures and that extra storage is needed to accommodate the tragic spike in deaths, placing a strain on the entire system of care from hospitals to funeral homes. "Grieving families cannot quickly make arrangements, and their loved ones who have passed are remaining in hospitals longer, thus the need for this accommodation," the hospital in Brooklyns Fort Greene neighbourhood said. The city's medical examiner's office has also started operating a makeshift morgue, as it did after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, to provide emergency capacity as the city's permanent facilities fill up. The city's coronavirus death toll more than doubled in the past four days, surging from 450 on Friday to 932 as of Tuesday morning, AP reports. "I basically want to address the idiots out there": Seinfeld and Curb Your Enthusiasm creator Larry David has filmed a stay-home message for the Office of the Governor of California. "You're hurting old people like me. Well, not me... I'll never see you," he says. More now on that warning from US Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who said the world faces the most challenging crisis since the second world war. There is also a risk that the combination of the disease and its economic impact will contribute to enhanced instability, enhanced unrest, and enhanced conflict, the UN chief said at the launch of a report on the socioeconomic impacts of Covid-19. Guterres called for a much stronger and more effective global response to the coronavirus pandemic and to the social and economic devastation that Covid-19 is causing. "We are facing a global health crisis unlike any in the 75-year history of the United Nations. One that is killing people, spreading human suffering, and upending peoples lives," the report said. "The secretary-general told reporters: The magnitude of the response must match the scale of the crisis large-scale, coordinated and comprehensive, with country and international responses being guided by the World Health Organization." He stressed that we are still very far from where we need to be to effectively fight the virus and its impacts worldwide. He said many countries are not respecting WHO guidelines, and that while US$5 trillion has been mobilised, most of that money was from and for the developed world, including $2 trillion in the United States to support their own economy. The New York Times reports that the US Centers for Disease Control is reconsidering its guidelines on masks, as it warns that up to 25% of people infected with the virus do not show symptoms. Teargas, beatings and bleach: the most extreme Covid-19 lockdown controls around the world As coronavirus lockdowns have been expanded globally, billions of people have found that they are now faced with unprecedented restrictions. Policeacross the world have been given licence to control behaviour in a way that would normally be extreme even for an authoritarian state. On Tuesday, police in Kenya gave their "sincere condolences" after a 13-year-old boy was shot and killed on his balcony in Nairobi as police moved through the neighbourhood, enforcing a coronavirus curfew. "They come in screaming and beating us like cows, and we are law-abiding citizens," said Hussein Moyo, the father of Yasin, the boy who was shot. Concerns are growing that police forces around the world are using gruelling and humiliating punishments to enforce quarantine on the poorest and most vulnerable groups, including tens of millions who live hand-to-mouth and risk starving if they do not defy lockdowns and seek work. South Korea has reported 101 new cases of the virus, which is in keeping with the average. Yesterday it reported 125 new cases, higher than the around 100 cases reported daily for the past three weeks. The total number of cases is 9,887. The captain of a US Navy aircraft carrier facing a growing outbreak of the coronavirus is asking for permission to isolate the bulk of his roughly 5,000 crew members on shore, which would take the warship out of duty in an effort to save lives, AP reports. In a memo to Navy leaders, the captain of the USS Theodore Roosevelt said the spread of the disease is ongoing and accelerating, and said that removing all but 10% of the crew is a necessary risk in order to stop the spread of the virus. The ship is docked in Guam. US Navy leaders on Tuesday were scrambling to determine how to best respond to the extraordinary request as over 100 crew members tested positive. The outbreak on the carrier may be the Navys most dramatic, but it tracks an accelerating upward trend across the military. The Pentagon said the number of cases in the military reached 673 on Tuesday morning, a jump of 104 from the day before and up from 174 a week ago. Since March 20, the total has surged tenfold, even as the Pentagon has taken many steps to try to limit the spread, including halting nearly all movement of troops overseas. If you have questions, stories you think we should be covering, tips, or something on the lighter side to share you can get in touch with me directly on Twitter @helenrsullivan. Panama has announced strict quarantine measures that separate citizens by gender, AFP reports. From Wednesday for 15 days, men and women will only be able to leave their homes for two hours at a time, and on different days. On Sunday all outings are banned. Panama has confirmed 27 deaths and 1,075 coronavirus cases. President Trump has said he will speak to Florida governor about two coronavirus-stricken cruise ships stranded at sea during his White House Press briefing on Tuesday. Four people have died, nine people have tested positive for Covid-19 and dozens are ill on the Zaandam and Rotterdam ships, which are traveling towards Florida to attempt to dock after several Latin American countries refused to allow them into port. Port Everglades has not yet confirmed whether the boats will be allowed to dock in Fort Lauderdale. On Monday, Ron DeSantis has said passengers on the ships cannot be "dumped"in his state, dismissing them as mostly "foreigners". But President Trump said he did not want the cruise liners to become "ghost ships" and said he would do the right thing "for humanity". President Trump told reporters: "You have people that are dying on the ship who are least very sick, but they are dying on the ship. I'm going to do what is right. Not only for us but for humanity. These are two big ships and they have a lot of very sick people. I'll be speaking to the governor." The operator of a coronavirus-stricken cruise liner has warned that more people could die at sea after several Caribbean countries refused to accept two emergency medical evacuations from the ships. An international media freedom watchdog says the autocratic ex-Soviet nation of Turkmenistan has banned the media from using the word "coronavirus", AP reports. Reporters Without Borders said Tuesday the word also has been removed from health information brochures distributed in schools, hospitals and workplaces. The gas-rich Central Asian nation that neighbours Iran so far has reported no cases of the new coronavirus. Iran has reported more than 44,000 cases. Paris-based Reporters Without Borders said people wearing face masks or talking about the coronavirus are liable to be arrested by plainclothes police. Ranked last in the group's 2019 World Press Freedom Index, Turkmenistan is one of the world's most closed countries. Turkmenistan President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has ruled the country since 2006 through an all-encompassing personality cult that styles him as Turkmenistan's "arkadaq," or protector. Here is our story on that Trump press conference on Tuesday: Donald Trump has warned America to brace for a "very, very painful two weeks" as the White House projected that the coronavirus pandemic could claim 100,000 to 240,000 lives, even if current social distancing guidelines are maintained. Striking an unusually sombre tone at the start a marathon two-hour briefing, the US president defended his early handling of the crisis and displayed models that, he said, justified his decision to keep much of the economy shut down. "I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead," Trump told reporters at the White House. "We're going to go through a very tough two weeks. This is going to be a very painful, very, very painful two weeks." The US death toll from the coronavirus climbed past 3,800 on Tuesday, eclipsing China's official count. Trump has been widely condemned for exacerbating the crisis by failing to prepare testing kits, breathing apparatus and other equipment. On Tuesday his experts said their models showed between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans could die from the coronavirus even if the country keeps mitigation measures in place. US secretary of state Mike Pompeo has released a statement saying two local US embassy staff members have died in Jakarta, Indonesia and Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo Foreign Policy reports: In the US, Politico reports: "Trump officials have decided against reopening Obamacare enrolment to uninsured Americans during the coronavirus pandemic, defying calls from health insurers and Dems to create a special sign-up window amid the health crisis." Trump and officials in his administration had said they were considering relaunching the federal Obamacare enrolment site. "However, a White House official on Tuesday evening told POLITICO the administration will not reopen the site for a special enrollment period, and that the administration is 'exploring other options'." Trump has just meanwhile published a link to the full "Coronavirus Guidelines for America", which includes social distancing measures: In lighter news, with humans sheltering indoors to escape the new coronavirus, mountain goats are taking advantage of the peace and space to roam in frisky clumps through the streets of Llandudno, a town in North Wales. These goats aren't kidding around. Andrew Stuart, a video producer for the Manchester Evening News, has been posting videos of the furry adventurers on his Twitter feed. He said the goats normally keep largely to themselves in a country park nearby. But now, emboldened by the lack of people and cars, the long-horned animals are venturing deeper into the seaside town. Health experts call virus pandemic a window into future climate threats The coronavirus pandemic is a preview of the types of global health threats that will emerge as the planet becomes hotter, and how it is tackled has implications for dealing with climate threats as well, health experts said on Tuesday. Reuters reports: Growing destruction of forests and farming expansion are both driving climate change and bringing people into closer contact with wild animal diseases, said Mandeep Dhaliwal, director for HIV, health and development for the United Nations Development Programme, speaking during an online panel at the Skoll Forum on Social Entrepreneurship. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said the coronavirus pandemic had its origin in bats, with early infections linked to a large live animal market in the Chinese city of Wuhan. Dr. David Nabarro, a special envoy to the World Health Organization (WHO) on the pandemic, said about a third of the world's countries were on lockdown. That was forcing leaders into "awful political tradeoffs" between protecting lives and keeping economies functioning - the kind of tradeoffs that could become more frequent as climate-linked disasters from wildfires to drought worsen, he said. Gary Cohen, head of Healthcare Without Harm, an organisation that works in 53 countries to make health care systems environmentally sustainable, said climate change, like coronavirus, was a "force multiplier" for economic and social injustices. "Those living on the edge, without enough food, with poor or no housing, with no health care... those are the people that are going to suffer most. We're already seeing that in the response to the Covid-19 crisis," he said. US president Donald Trump has shared guidelines on Twitter under the heading "30 Days to Slow the Spread". The points mainly relate to those who are sick, elderly or have underlying health conditions - all of these people should stay home and not go to work. Trump earlier today said of the pandemic: "It's going to go away, hopefully at the end of the month." Moving away from the US now to Saudi Arabia, which has urged Muslims to wait before making plans to attend the annual Hajj pilgrimage until there is more clarity about the pandemic. Some 2.5 million pilgrims from around the world usually flock to the holiest sites of Islam in Mecca and Medina for the week-long ritual, which is a once-in-a-lifetime duty for every able-bodied Muslim and a major source of income for the kingdom. The largest annual gathering of Muslims is scheduled to begin in late July, but the coronavirus outbreak has raised questions about whether it can or should go ahead given the risk of spreading the disease further in large gatherings. Saudi Arabia has already suspended the smaller, year-round umrah pilgrimage until further notice, halted all international passenger flights indefinitely and last week blocked entry and exit to several cities, including Mecca and Medina. The kingdom has reported 10 deaths among 1,563 cases of coronavirus, which has infected some 800,000 people globally and killed more than 38,000. Cancelling the Hajj would be unprecedented in modern times, but curbing attendance from high-risk areas has happened before, including in recent years during the Ebola outbreak. Trump also said that "nobody knew how contagious this virus was". My colleagues have fact checked this: Fact check: "Nobody knew" "Nobody knew how contagious this was," Trump said. "I don't think any doctor new it at the time. People have not seen anything like this." In fact, as the disease spread through China, public health experts were warning for weeks that the coronavirus threat could grow into a pandemic. Moreover, epidemiologists have been predicting this sort of pandemic for years. The US intelligence community, in its January 2019 Worldwide Threat Assessment, wrote: "We assess that the United States and the world will remain vulnerable to the next flu pandemic or large-scale outbreak of a contagious disease that could lead to massive rates of death and disability, severely affect the world economy, strain international resources, and increase calls on the United States for support." US president Donald Trump has just finished a White House briefing, one of the more memorable because of the predictions coming out of the coronavirus task force's modelling. "It's an incredibly dark topic," Trump said, before leaving the podium. "An incredibly horrible topic. And it's incredibly interesting. That's why everybody is, They're going crazy, they can't get enough of it." Between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans will die, the White House modelling says. Trump told people to prepare for a "very, very painful two weeks". The graph showing those numbers listed those possible deaths as "goals" in the mitigation: Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic, which the UN secretary general António Guterres called the greatest challenge faced by the planet since the second world war. There are now more than 850,000 cases worldwide, a fifth of which are in the United States. Tuesday saw several countries, including France, Italy, US, Spain and Russia, declare record daily increases in pandemic-related deaths. I'll be taking you through the next few hours of news. If you have questions, stories you think we should be covering, tips, or something heartwarming you can get in touch with me directly on Twitter @helenrsullivan. Global deaths pass 40,000. Data collected by Johns Hopkins University researchers show at least 40,636 people have died across the world, while 174,019 people have recovered after becoming infected. At least 850,000 people have been infected. US deaths could reach 240,000 according to the White House. Trump said the country should expect a "very, very painful two weeks." US deaths currently exceed those in China. Monday was the deadliest day yet for the US, which has now lost more than 3,400 people. The figures mean the coronavirus death toll has now surpassed that of the 11 September terror attacks and is greater than that of China - 3,309. France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the UK recorded their highest daily deaths. UK deaths were up 381 from 1,408 on the previous 24 hours and represents a 27% day-on-day increase - by far the biggest. Italy's death toll rose by 837. Boy, 13, becomes UK's youngest victim. A 13-year-old boy in London who tested positive has died, Kings College hospital has said. He is believed to be the youngest victim of the outbreak in the UK. Worst FTSE quarter since 1987. The FTSE 100 posts its worst quarter since autumn 1987 as it closes for the night at 5671 points (up 108 points, or 1.95% today). That means it has shed 24.8% of its value in the last three months. That's its second-worst quarter since being created in 1984. More than 1,000 have now died in the Netherlands. The number of deaths in the Netherlands resulting from the epidemic rises by 175 to 1,039. The number of confirmed infections has increased by 845 to 12,595, the Netherlands' National Institute for Health (RIVM) says. UK shows early signs of flattening the curve. The NHS needs everyone to play their part in reducing transmission of the virus, the medical director of NHS England Stephen Powis says, as signs emerge that physical distancing measures are beginning to work. 'Stay healthy!' US urges Americans left behind in Pakistan. A US government-arranged flight is to leave Islamabad in Pakistan on Wednesday night to repatriate Americans in the country. But not all US nationals will be on it. Their embassy's advice to them while they await a plan to get them home is: "Stay healthy!" Ireland: confirmed cases of coronavirus halve. Ireland on Monday confirmed 295 new cases, the second highest daily number, bringing the total to 2,910. It recorded eight deaths, bringing the death toll to 54. Northern Ireland has 533 confirmed cases and 22 deaths. Burundi and Sierra Leone confirmed their first cases, and Slovakia and Oman registered their first deaths. 39858 false false

Helen Sullivan       Police officers cross an empty Red Square in Moscow, Russia. The Russian capital woke up to a lockdown in response to coronavirus, obliging most people in the city of 13 million to stay home.         Passengers use binoculars onboard HollandAmerica's cruise ship Zaandam as it entered the Panama City bay to be assisted by the Rotterdam cruise ship with supplies, personnel and Covid-19 testing devices, eight milles off the coast of Panama City, 27 March, 2020.        Hitomi Sato helps her daughters Yurina (L) and Hinano (R) to do their homework while schools are closed in Tokyo, Japan.        Cuban doctor Liz Caballero, from El Vedado polyclinic in Havana, walks with two students as they go door by door looking for possible coronavirus cases on 31 March, 2020.        Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern speaks during her media update at the Beehive Theatrette, Parliament on 1 April, 2020 in Wellington, New Zealand.        A community volunteer wearing a hazmat suit guards the entrance of a compound along in Wuhan, in China's central Hubei province on 1 April, 2020.        A closed farmers market in Belgrade, Serbia, 31 March 2020.        A ginger and white Tabby cat - not the infected animal.        Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe (C) attends an Upper House Accounts Committee meeting in Tokyo, Japan, 01 April 2020.        A woman wearing a face mask walks in front of Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei on 31 March, 2020.        Red Cross trucks are parked outside the Los Angeles Convention Center in downtown Los Angeles California 30 March, 2020. The California National Guard is currently setting up the convention center as a field hospital to help lessen the strain on LA-area hospitals during the coronavirus crisis.        UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.        Relatives and friends pray over the body of 13-year-old Yasin Hussein Moyo at his burial, at the Kariakor cemetery in Nairobi, Kenya Tuesday, 31 March 31, 2020.        The aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt transits the Pacific Ocean.        Two people walk wearing masks and gloves in Panama City, Panama, 31 March 2020.        Holland America's cruise ship Zaandam (L) and the Rotterdam cruise ship are seen in Panama City bay on 28 March,2020.        Trump issues "Guidelines for America" during coronavirus pandemic.        Muslim pilgrims circle the Kaaba and pray at the Grand mosque at the end of their Hajj pilgrimage in the holy city of Mecca, Saudi Arabia 13 August, 2019.