Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

Global number of confirmed cases passes 4.5m

According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 4,523,916 people are known to have been infected and 306,412 people have died worldwide since the pandemic began.

The figures are likely to represent a significant underestimate of the true scale of the pandemic.

Record increase in cases in Brazil

Brazil confirms 15,305 new cases ; a record for a 24-hour period, as well as 824 related deaths, according to data from the country's health ministry. The country has registered 218,223 confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic, as well as 14,817 deaths.

Fears US could hit 100,000 deaths within weeks

The CDC director Robert Redfield says the number of deaths in the US is projected to exceed 100,000 by 1 June. The agency came to the conclusion after tracking 12 different forecasting models, which all predicted at least 100,000 deaths.

CDC tracks 12 different forecasting models of possible #COVID19 deaths in the US. As of May 11, all forecast an increase in deaths in the coming weeks and a cumulative total exceeding 100,000 by June 1. See national & state forecasts:            https://t.co/PI1AtLCCmt           pic.twitter.com/iylBnom5U0 - Dr. Robert R. Redfield (@CDCDirector)            May 15, 2020

China seeks Taiwanese exclusion from WHO meeting

Beijing steps up pressure on European states to reject Taiwan's call to be represented at next week's assembly of the World Health Organization, arguing that its presence can only be justified if it accepts that it is part of China.

The World Health Assembly is being held virtually on Monday and Taiwan's attendance - as well as a possible international inquiry into the origins of the pandemic - are likely to be the two big political flashpoints between China and the West.

EU states yet to reach funding agreement

There is no agreement yet between European Union countries on how much of the bloc's proposed new recovery fund should be handed out as grants to member states and how much in loans, a senior EU official says.

Europe could see second wave of winter infections, WHO warns

European countries face a deadly second wave of infections in the winter, the World Health Organization's top official in Europe says.

Dr Hans Kluge, the director for the WHO European region, warned countries beginning to ease their lockdown restrictions that now is the "time for preparation, not celebration". Dr Kluge told the Telegraph countries should use the current period to build capacity in hospitals and strengthen public health systems.

Denmark reports nil deaths for first time since March

Denmark reports zero deaths on Friday - the first time it has seen no fatalities in a 24-hour period since 13 March. The country's total number of confirmed cases rises by 78 to 10,791, while the number of hospitalisations falls by 10 to 137. The death toll remains unchanged at 537.

Italian death and infection rates fall

Italy reports 242 more fatalities, down by 20 on the number seen in the previous 24 hours. That brings its death toll to 31,610 as it prepares to ease lockdown restrictions. New infections rise by 789, which is about 200 fewer than in the previous 24 hours, according to the civil protection authority.

Restaurants, bars, hairdressers and beauty salons are due to reopen on Monday, while the ban on inter-regional travel might be lifted from 3 June.

Spain hails large-scale antibody study

The Spanish government hails a large-scale antibody study as a key tool in the efforts to end the pandemic, but warns that any premature or irresponsible relaxation of restrictions could have "enormous consequences" given that only 5% of Spaniards have had the disease.

The country's Socialist-led coalition government is under growing pressure from political opponents to end the two-month state of emergency that underpins one of the strictest lockdowns in Europe.