Top story: Police knelt on black man's neck until he died

Hello, welcome to Friday, Warren Murray here with news to start the day.

Thousands of protesters have taken to the streets for another night of mass demonstrations as anger over the death of George Floyd continues to sweep the US. Minnesota's governor called in the national guard as the city of Minneapolis faced a third night of protests. Floyd, a 46-year-old black man, died on Monday after his neck was knelt on by a white police officer for almost nine minutes despite his cries of "I can't breathe".

Reports emerged last night of large fires breaking out in the city. Elsewhere in the US, dozens were arrested at a large demonstration in New York City, while at a protest which broke out in Denver, Colorado, shots were fired near the state Capitol, though no injuries were reported.

* * *

'Will not throw away gains' -  Boris Johnson has declared that the coronavirus peak has passed and revealed plans to ease England's lockdown from Monday, with socially distanced  gatherings of up to six permitted  in parks and gardens, and dentistry permitted a week later. "I cannot, and will not, throw away all the gains we have made together - and so the changes we have made are limited and cautious," he said. Nicola Sturgeon has announced            similar easing measures for Scotland.

Johnson has continued to brush aside a  revolt by more than 100 MPs over Dominic Cummings' lockdown travel. Police have concluded Cummings may have broken the rules but decided they will take no action against him. The government is also facing criticism for             rejecting a radical plan to protect those in care homes, the Guardian has learned. In England, Wales and Scotland 12,597 more people died in care homes during the pandemic than the five-year average.

The Philippines president has announced plans to ease one of the longest and toughest coronavirus lockdowns in the world despite the country reporting 539 infections on Thursday - its biggest daily spike in cases since the pandemic began. There have been 921 deaths. "For me, this does not look bad," said President Rodrigo Duterte in a televised address. In India, Mumbai's hospitals are on the verge of collapse under the pressure of Covid-19 cases, with footage emerging of             patients sharing beds and oxygen tanks. Back in the UK, what is expected to be the            last clap for carers was held last night. Stay alert to the latest developments at our            global live blog and here are some            key points at a glance.

There's more in our Coronavirus Extra section further down ... and here's where you can find  all our coverage of the outbreak - from breaking news to factchecks and advice.

* * *

Bid to prosecute Raab -  The family of Harry Dunn, the 19-year-old hit and killed by a car driven by the wife of a US intelligence officer, intends to bring a private criminal prosecution against the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, the Guardian has learned. They claim Raab did not have authority to allow Anne Sacoolas to return to the United States, and that he misled parliament about the case. Sacoolas was subsequently charged with causing death by dangerous driving. Interpol has issued a wanted notice and Raab has called for Sacoolas's extradition back to the UK.

* * *

Trump turns antisocial -  Donald Trump has signed an executive order that aims to strip social media companies of protection from liability over what their users post. It is a retaliation after Twitter fact-checked the president for tweeting falsehoods. Legal challenges are expected to what Trump characterised as a measure to fight censorship and safeguard free speech. Interesting, then, how a satirical cartoon that got under that thin orange skin was            temporarily removed from sale online following a complaint from the Trump campaign.

The executive action by Trump is seen as politically motivated ahead of the US elections - conservatives have long accused social media companies of liberal or pro-China bias, even while using them extensively to propagate their views. After previously promising to clean up disinformation on Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg has responded to Trump losing his temper by saying Facebook"shouldn't be the arbiter of truth". Separately a UK inquiry has found that            Facebook-owned apps were used in the majority of online child sex grooming crimes.

* * *

Palace letters victory -  Letters between the Queen and her Australian viceroy leading up to the dismissal in 1975 of a prime minister are public record, the country's high court has ruled. John Kerr, Australia's unelected governor, infamously sacked the democratically elected Gough Whitlam on remembrance day amid huge controversy. A historian, Jenny Hocking, has fought for years for Australia's national archive to release 211 letters between the Queen, her private secretary and Kerr leading up to the dismissal. Australia's most senior court has now ordered the archive to reconsider the request by Hocking, who says the letters are vital in understanding what role the Queen played in one of the most important episodes in Australia's history.

* * *

Butterflies back -  A type of large heath butterfly known as the "Manchester argus" is being reintroduced to peatlands in greater Manchester 150 years after going locally extinct. Numbers plummeted as land was drained for agricultural land and peat extraction.

Conservationists are looking to reverse the fortunes of the rare butterfly by restoring a 37-hectare area of peatland between Wigan and Salford and releasing 45 hand-reared pupae at a secret site where they will be kept in protected tents as they emerge. There are a few isolated populations of large heath butterflies remaining in England and Wales and larger populations in Scotland.

Coronavirus Extra

A 94-year-old woman living alone - who did not eat for five days because she was "too scared" to leave her house under lockdown and had no one to shop for her - has been rescued from acute hunger by charity volunteers who were doorknocking in Glasgow.

Nearly 2,000 immigration staff, including workers at the UK's ports and airports, were off sick with Covid-19 symptoms in the first four months of the year, with more than half absent before the lockdown was imposed, the Guardian can reveal. At least two border force staff have died with Covid-19. Critics of the government's approach have questioned if more could have been done to screen arrivals earlier in the pandemic.

Life during the coronavirus lockdown has reinforced gender inequality across Europe with research emphasising that the economic and social consequences of the crisis are far greater for women and threaten to push them back into traditional roles in the home which they will struggle to shake off once it is over.

Today in Focus podcast: Crisis for Hong Kong's freedoms

Protesters have take to the streets again, this time over a  national security law that is set to be imposed by Beijing. Verna Yu and Lily Kuo look at how the standoff compares with those of Hong Kong's recent history.

Lunchtime read: 'Do I really care?' Woody Allen comes out fighting

The 1992 accusation that the film-maker sexually assaulted his young daughter has made him a pariah, yet he was never charged. In this exclusive interview, he explains why he is done with treading carefully.

Sport

The Premier League looks set  to resume on 17 June, three months after it was forced into hiatus by the Covid-19 pandemic. Top-flight football in Italy has             also been given the go-ahead to resume  from 20 June. The British Grand Prix is expected to be confirmed for August as part of the Formula One calendar next week. Hopes for an English county season being staged this summer             are on the rise  despite the announcement that no domestic professional cricket will take place before 1 August because of the coronavirus pandemic.

Dina Asher-Smith has described how  running with deer has kept her fit  during the Covid-19 lockdown, also admitting she felt relieved when the Olympics were postponed because of the near-impossibility of training sufficiently. Manchester City Women have             appointed the former Wales international Gareth Taylor  as manager on a three-year deal. And the Boston Marathon has been             cancelled for the first time in its history, bowing to social distancing requirements and ending a 124-year run that had persisted through two world wars, a volcanic eruption and even another pandemic.

Business

Shares have been falling in Asia after Wall Street's rally petered out amid harsh exchanges between the Trump administration and China on everything from Hong Kong to coronavirus. Benchmarks have declined in Hong Kong, Tokyo and Sydney but have risen in Shanghai. Weak economic data from Japan also played a part, as the government reported industrial production fell more than 9% in April from the month before, while retail sales dropped nearly 10% month-on-month. That was the biggest fall since a sales tax hike in 1997. The pound is trading at $1.232 and (EURO)1.111 while the FTSE at time of writing is trending around 60 points lower.

The papers

The working week ends as it began with Dominic Cummings on the front pages. "PM stands by adviser after police say he may have breached rules", says the Guardian, while the Mirror has "Police: we would have turned back Cummings". The Mail claims that Boris Johnson's adviser is "set to quit in six months" according to sources (would it be cynical to view that as a ploy to help quieten things down?).

Plenty of jubilation about the "group of six" rule that comes into effect on what the Mail calls "Happy Monday". The Express enthuses "Can't wait till we meet again". The Metro has some fun: "Form an orderly barbecue ... not till Monday, only six of you, avoid the loo". In the  Telegraph it's "Family and friends can reunite at last, says PM" - the Times' and the Mirror's treatments of the topic are similar. The i  says "Six of the best", presumably unaware of the origin of the phrase.

"Back of the net!" That's the Sun welcoming the return of Premier League football. The FT gives prominence that is absent elsewhere to the            crisis in Hong Kong and the UK response: "Britain opens door to citizenship for 300,000 Hong Kong residents".

Sign up

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.

For more news: www.theguardian.com