More than 1,000 public health workers will door-knock the two Victorian suburbs at the heart of the latest outbreak of Covid-19, with residents offered free testing including by Australian Defence Force medics being brought into the state to boost capacity, as 33 more cases of the virus were identified in the state overnight.

On Thursday morning the premier, Daniel Andrews, said residents could expect to see "hundreds and hundreds" of door-knockers "inviting them to come and get a free test, whether they be symptomatic or asymptomatic". Half of the residents of Broadmeadows and Keilor Downs - suburbs with the highest number of community transmission cases - will be tested over the next three days.

That testing will be done in numerous ways, including with ambulances and other vans that will park at the end of people's streets. "So, they will be invited to come and get a test, and they'll only have to travel 50m or 100m in order to complete that test," Andrews said.

While the two suburbs would be the initial targets for testing, eight other suburbs were named as hotspot locations: Maidstone, Albanvale, Sunshine West, Hallam, Brunswick West, Fawkner, Reservoir and Pakenham. Ten additional drive-through testing sites will be established in coming days to address increased demand for tests in those suburbs.

Of the new virus cases announced overnight, seven are returned travellers in hotel quarantine, nine are linked to known outbreaks, six were uncovered through routine testing and the origin of 11 cases are still under investigation. Two people are in intensive care.

The ninth consecutive day of double-digit cases in Victoria prompted the New South Wales health minister Brad Hazzard to tell people in his state on Thursday: "Don't visit Victoria, don't in particular visit Melbourne hotspots.

"Indeed if you don't have to go to Melbourne, don't go to Melbourne for the time being," he said. "That is not something I want to be saying. I think Victoria and NSW has been in this together, we work very hard on these issues, but just at the moment, it is clear that for the foreseeable future, it would be helpful if NSW residents were not travelling to hotspots for Melbourne, were not travelling to Melbourne, if you can avoid it, and certainly if you come back here, you should be taking some precautionary steps.

"Normally we welcome our Victorian cousins into NSW, very happy to have them, but right now, I am asking Victorians, particularly those from the hotspots in Melbourne, to not come to regional NSW and not come to Sydney."

Andrews said the boosted testing was a proactive measure, and said rates of community transmission had remained stable over the past week.

"Rather than waiting for an unsustainable number of community transmissions to become known, we are going to go out and literally door-to-door we are bringing the public health and coronavirus response to your doorstep, if you are in these worst-affected suburbs," he said.