Top story: Teachers threaten to sue over return to work

Morning everyone. I'm Martin Farrer and these are the top stories from the UK and around the world.

The government's stockpile of personal protective equipment has been managed in chaotic fashion by a private company and may have resulted in delays to the delivery of vital supplies to healthcare workers, according to an investigation by the Guardian and ITV News. Delivery drivers and well-placed sources say the operation run by US-owned Movianto was dogged by bad management and short staffing. "Nobody knew what they were doing," said one driver. Ministers' claims that a new antibody test will be a "game-changer" in the fight against Covid-19 comes despite            doubts that the test will be freely available in the NHS any time soon.

A teachers' union has threatened to sue local authorities if its members are forced to go back to work without the same protections given to frontline health staff. The NASUWT says it has "fundamental concerns" about the safety of reopening schools by the government's 1 June deadline. Union leaders are meeting the government's scientific advisers later today.

Donald Trump has threatened to cut US ties with China as his dispute with Beijing over the pandemic deepened. The US president told Fox News such a move could save the US "$500bn". A senior US public health official turned whistleblower has warned Congress that the country must prepare for the            "darkest winter in modern history" because of federal government failures in tackling the pandemic. Almost 250 million people could catch the virus in Africa,            according to modelling by the World Health Organization, but there will be fewer severe cases and deaths than in the US and Europe because the continent has more young people and also less obesity.

The virus has now killed more than 300,000 around the world and infected close to 4.5 million. You can follow all the day's developments at our live blog here, and you can catch up with overnight news            at a glance.

There's more in our Coronavirus Extra section further down ... and here's where you can find all our coverage of the outbreak - from breaking news to factchecks and advice.

* * *

Whitehall woe -  An inquiry into the role played by civil servants in Brexit has found that officials were hung out to dry by Theresa May and Boris Johnson when they became targets for political attacks during negotiations with Brussels. An independent thinktank, the Institute for Government (IfG), has spent months interviewing officials involved in the talks and said Johnson put some in an "immensely difficult position" when he threatened to break the law by leaving the EU without a deal. Many civil servants quit their jobs because of the intense pressure and long hours.

* * *

Hunters hunted -  Birds of prey are being targeted by hunters who are taking advantage of what they think might be reduced surveillance during lockdown. The RSPB says it has been overrun with reports of killings in recent weeks, adding most incidents were on or close to sporting estates managed for game bird shooting.

* * *

Name game - An online dictionary explaining the origins of more than 45,000 British and Irish surnames is being opened up in the hope that it might help bring families separated by Covid-19 closer together. For the next week, people will be able to tap into the Oxford Dictionary of Family Names in Britain and Ireland for free and find out where their surnames - and thus perhaps their ancestors - came from.

Coronavirus Extra

The government's plan to roll out an app to help trace the spread of Covid-19 is causing headaches because the app's advisory board can't decide whether it has the authority to tell the government to ditch the controversial technology and switch to a decentralised model. And MPs are urging ministers to guarantee that            all data captured by the app will be deleted when it is no longer needed. Carers are concerned that            residnts in old people's homes are "fading away" in their rooms after being denied contact with friends and family for weeks. Figures released yesterday showed more than a quarter of NHS patients who died in hospitals in England after contracting coronavirus            had diabetes. Polly Toynbee laments the government's latest idea to kickstart the economy -            opening up the housing market as quickly as possible.

Pubs in New South Wales are able to serve drinks for the first time in weeks after restrictions were lifted, but patrons are limited to 10 and must be dining too. The easing of lockdown rules in New Zealand has meant            family reunions, eating out and lots of haircuts. Lockdown for Hollywood star Matt Damon has been a            "fairytale" after he and his family became "trapped" in an Irish village where he was making a film.

Today in Focus podcast

In the concluding part of our Blind Date takeover, two more couples meet remotely for a socially distanced evening of drinks and dinner. First up are Mally and Butho, who sit down to dinner, one in Glasgow, the other in Edinburgh. Later on amid a dramatic thunderstorm, Deej, who is in isolation in Kathmandu, Nepal, dials in to Naomi in east London.

Lunchtime read: The simple joy of cinema

As lockdown deprives us of the simple pleasure of going to the pictures, we've asked actors, film-makers and critics to recall that once-familiar communal thrill - from Steve McQueen seeing The Magnificent Seven with his dad, to Tilda Swinton remembering a screening in a Kenyan village. And Oscar-winning film editor Walter Murch looks at the four ways in which cinema creates its            "paradoxical mass intimacy".

Sport

The Premier League has been told by the government it must show some matches on free-to-air TV and put more money into the Football League and grassroots game as a condition for restarting this season. Meanwhile, top-flight clubs are seeking answers            over their proposed medical rules before Monday's pivotal vote on Project Restart. Chris Froome and Team Ineos remain tight-lipped over speculation the four-times Tour de France winner            may move to a rival team before this year's race in order to ensure leadership status. England's cricketers will each be            allocated their own box of balls - but barred from applying any saliva to them - when they restart training next week in anticipation of playing six biosecure Tests against West Indies and Pakistan this summer. England's leading clubs have been warned that            a fundamental change in attitude is needed to restore public trust in the wake of the Saracens            salary cap affair. British racing will resume with            an eight-race all-weather card at Newcastle on Monday 1 June if government restrictions to control the spread of coronavirus ease sufficiently. And MLB All-Star pitcher Blake Snell says he will            not take the mound this year if his pay is cut further, proclaiming: "I'm not playing unless I get mine."

Business

As the cost of the coronavirus pandemic to UK plchits an estimated £300bn, our economics editor Larry Elliott looks at            how Britain might pull itself out of its budgetary hole. Stock markets in Asia have bounced back overnight after shares around the world            took a hammering yesterday. The FTSE100 looks like following suit with a decent rise of 0.74% while the pound is on $1.221 and (EURO)1.130.

The papers

The Times has an intriguing lead saying the prime minister is going to lead a campaign against obesity after realising his own weight was a factor in contracting Covid-19. "Johnson to launch war on fat after virus scare", the headline says. The Telegraph's main headline reads "Just 24 new cases per day in London, says PHE" and the Express is also looking on the bright side with "So far so good! Vaccine trials boost". The Mirror says "19m Brits 'have had virus' & recovered", while the Metro - "Virus test: yes it really is a game changer" - and the i - "NHS to offer game-changing antibody tests within weeks" - lead with a minister's claim about new antibody tests.

The Guardian says "Revealed: 'chaos' at privately run warehouse of UK's PPE stockpile". The Scotsman says "Scots factory to make 70m face masks for the NHS" while the Mail goes after the teaching unions with "Let our teachers be heroes". The FT has some potentially very good news for the north-east with its page one scoop: "Nissan lifts hopes for thousands of jobs with boost for Sunderland". The Sun says Dele Alli has stepped up security after his break-in: "Watch dogs".

Sign up

The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.

For more news: www.theguardian.com