block-time published-time 4.57am GMT

India recorded 31,118 new coronavirus cases, the lowest daily tally since Nov. 17, data from the health ministry showed on Tuesday. India now has 9.46 million Covid-19 infections, but the number of new daily cases has stayed below the 50,000 mark since Nov. 7 despite a busy festival season last month, according to a Reuters tally. Deaths rose by 482, bringing the total to 137,621.

block-time published-time 4.39am GMT

Jakarta governor and deputy test positive

The Jakarta governor and his deputy have both tested positive for coronavirus, Reuters reports.

Indonesia confirmed a national record case rise on 29 November, with 6,267 new infections reported, according to Johns Hopkins University. There are a total of 538,883 cases in the country, and 16,945 people have died.

enltrBad news for Jakarta, the governor and his deputy are both positive for the coronavirus now. https://t.co/9vFvGcEYKv

— Kate Lamb (@_KateLamb) December 1, 2020

block-time published-time 4.34am GMT

Three more Pakistan cricketers test positive for coronavirus

Three more members of the touring Pakistan cricket party have returned positive tests to Covid-19, according to New Zealand’s health ministry.

AAP: In a significant setback to the Pakistan’s hopes of a competitive series against the Black Caps, the latest cases mean 10 of the 53-strong group have tested positive for coronavirus since arriving in New Zealand last month.

Pakistan’s players and staff are completing a fortnight in isolation, as is compulsory on arrival in New Zealand, in a Christchurch hotel.

The Covid-19 cases mean none of the group have received permission to leave their hotel to train.

The touring party has also earned rebukes from health officials for breaching NZ’s strict quarantine rules by mingling in their hotels.

On Monday, the 46 members of the squad to have previously tested negative to Covid-19 were re-tested.

Health authorities said 42 returned another negative test result but three were under investigation “to determine whether they are historical cases” - and therefore not infectious - and one result was pending.

A Ministry of Health spokeswoman clarified the three had returned positive PCR tests.

Pakistan’s tour of three T20s and two Tests is due to begin with a short-form clash against the Black Caps at Auckland’s Eden Park on December 18.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.34am GMT

block-time published-time 3.59am GMT

Japan cancels Yamanashi contest after eight speed skaters get coronavirus

The Japan Skating Federation has decided to cancel a competition this month in Yamanashi prefecture, west of the capital Tokyo, after eight speed skaters were confirmed to have been infected with the coronavirus, Reuters reports. The federation will cancel the event, set to run from Friday to Sunday, to ensure the safety of athletes and others involved, it said on Monday. All the infected skaters were quarantined and in stable condition, public broadcaster NHK said on Tuesday. Federation officials were not immediately available to comment on details.

block-time published-time 3.34am GMT

WHO calls Mexico's rising coronavirus trend 'very worrisome'

The head of the World Health Organization said on Monday that Mexico is in “bad shape” regarding the coronavirus as infections and deaths surge, while the Mexican government forecast the pandemic would likely continue worsening until January. Mexico’s coronavirus death tally, the fourth highest in the world, stands at almost 106,000. Confirmed cases are in excess of 1.1 million, though public health experts say the true figure is likely significantly higher. “The number of increase in cases and deaths in Mexico is very worrisome,” WHO’s director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, told a press briefing in Geneva. Citing the increase in the number of weekly deaths from 2,000 the week of Oct. 12 to around 4,000 by Nov. 23, “This shows Mexico is in bad shape,” he said. At least seven of Mexico City’s 54 public hospitals treating Covid-19 patients are at full occupancy for coronavirus beds with respirators, according to a report by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

Healthcare workers wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) give instructions before they take a swab sample from women for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) rapid antigen testing outside the Azteca stadium in Mexico City, Mexico, November 25, 2020. Photograph: Henry Romero/Reuters

The OCHA said another 14 health centers risk being stretched, with Covid-19 bed occupancies exceeding 70%. It noted that Mexico’s Health Ministry reported 63% of all general hospital beds for Covid-19 patients in the capital are occupied. “When both indicators, deaths and cases, increase I think this is a very serious problem and we would like to ask Mexico to be very serious,” said Tedros. Speaking later at an evening news conference, Mexico’s deputy health minister, Hugo Lopez-Gatell, said he had “great respect” for Tedros and that he did not have to answer him. Separately, Lopez-Gatell said the pandemic would very probably continue to worsen in Mexico until January. Since Mexico began lifting its strictest lockdown restrictions in June, it has been reluctant to reimpose blanket measures because so many of the population living hand-to-mouth depend on being able to go out every day and do business. However, some states have ratcheted up restrictions to contain the pandemic in recent weeks.

block-time published-time 2.58am GMT

The head of the world’s largest humanitarian network is urging governments and institutions to combat “fake news” about Covid-19 vaccines which has become “a second pandemic” and start building trust in communities around the world about the critical importance of vaccinating people, AP reports. Francesco Rocca, president of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, said in a virtual briefing to the UN Correspondents Association on Monday that “to beat this pandemic, we also have to defeat the parallel pandemic of distrust.” He said there is “a growing hesitancy about vaccines in general, and about a Covid vaccine in particular” around the world, pointing to a recent Johns Hopkins University study in 67 countries that found vaccine acceptance declined significantly in most countries from July to October this year. In a quarter of countries, Rocca said, the study found that the acceptance rate for a vaccine against the coronavirus was near or below 50%, with Japan dropping from 70% to 50% acceptance, and France dropping from 51 percent to 38 percent acceptance. He stressed that the lack of trust “is by no means a Western phenomenon,” citing the federation’s research in recent months in eight African countries – Congo, Cameroon, Gabon, Zimbabwe, Sierra Leone, Rwanda, Lesotho and Kenya – which showed a steady decline in the perceptions of the risk of Covid-19 infection.

block-time published-time 2.32am GMT

block-time published-time 2.06am GMT

In the UK, local authorities in tier 3, with the toughest Covid restrictions , will be invited to apply for funds to run mass testing programmes of people with no symptoms, in hopes of driving down the virus and moving to tier 2 , the government has said.

Public health directors will be able to put forward proposals for testing in those parts of their communities most at risk from the virus, if they so choose, which could be particular neighbourhoods or workplaces where infection rates are high.

It would be open to them if they wanted to focus on particular ethnic minority communities, where there have been high death rates , if there was evidence they were more at risk or that an outbreak had originated in one community, with priority groups decided by local councils and directors of public health, the Department of Health and Social Care said.

Sarah Boseley  and Jessica Elgot  report:

Related:  Mass Covid testing to be rolled out to local authorities in tier 3

block-time published-time 1.54am GMT

WHO says ‘will do everything’ to find Covid-19 origins

The World Health Organization insisted Monday it would do everything possible to find the animal origins of Covid-19, insisting that knowledge was vital to preventing future outbreaks, AFP reports

“We want to know the origin and we will do everything to know the origin,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters.

He insisted the UN health agency was intent on getting to the bottom of the mystery, and urged critics who have accused it of handing the reins of the probe to China to stop “politicising” the issue.

“WHO’s position is very, very clear. We need to know the origin of this virus, because it can help us prevent future outbreaks,” Tedros said.

The WHO has for months been working to send a team of international experts, including epidemiologists and animal health specialists, to China to help probe the animal origin of the novel coronavirus pandemic and how the virus first crossed over to humans.

The organisation sent an advance team to Beijing in July to lay the groundwork for the international probe.

But it has remained unclear when the larger team of scientists would be able to travel to China to begin epidemiological studies to try to identify the first human cases and their source of infection.

Last week, the WHO’s emergencies chief Michael Ryan said the agency was hoping to send the international team to Wuhan “as soon as possible”.

Tedros meanwhile rejected on Monday criticism over lacking transparency on the probe, stressing that the names of the experts on the team and the terms of reference had been made public.

“There is nothing to hide. We want to know the origin. I don’t want to have any confusion on that.”

Scientists initially believed the killer virus jumped from animals to humans at a market selling exotic animals for meat in the city of Wuhan, where the virus was first detected late last year.

block-time published-time 1.52am GMT

The full story on Scott Atlas’s resignation now:

Related:  Scott Atlas resigns as Trump's pandemic adviser after controversial tenure

block-time published-time 1.30am GMT

Australia has welcomed its first group of international students to arrive since the coronavirus pandemic began, with more due to follow, AP reports. A charter flight carrying 63 students from mainland China, Hong Kong, Japan, Vietnam and Indonesia landed Monday in the northern city of Darwin. The students will all attend Charles Darwin University, with some new to the campus and others previously enrolled. They are part of a pilot program aimed at boosting the local economy and providing a template for international students to arrive in other parts of Australia. The arrival comes amid growing tensions between Australia and China after a Chinese official this week posted a fake image on Twitter of an Australian soldier appearing to slit a child’s throat. Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison called the image “repugnant” and demanded an apology from the Chinese government, but China has not backed down. The post took aim at alleged abuses by Australian soldiers during the conflict in Afghanistan. The arriving students were required to undertake a pre-departure health screening and have been placed in a quarantine facility for two weeks before they can begin attending classes.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34am GMT

block-time published-time 1.00am GMT

Scott Atlas resigns as special adviser to Trump on coronavirus

Dr. Scott Atlas has resigned as special adviser to President Donald Trump, a White House official said on Monday, after a controversial four months during which he clashed repeatedly with other members of the coronavirus task force.

“I am writing to resign from my position as Special Advisor to the President of the United States,” Atlas said in a letter to Trump dated 1 December, according to Fox News, which first reported his resignation.

White House pandemic adviser Scott Atlas has resigned as special adviser to President Donald Trump. Photograph: Carlos Barría/Reuters

Atlas, a neuroradiologist, apologised on Twitter this month for giving an interview to Russia’s Kremlin-backed television station RT, saying he was unaware it was a registered foreign agent in the United States. Atlas has been sharply criticised by public health experts, including Anthony Fauci, the leading US infectious disease expert, for providing Trump with misleading or incorrect information on the virus pandemic. He has repeatedly downplayed the importance of face masks and this month said lockdowns had been “an epic failure” in stopping its spread. His views on the handling the pandemic have been denounced by his peers at Stanford University’s medical school and elsewhere.

block-time published-time 12.55am GMT

China gave Covid-19 vaccine candidate to Kim Jong Un

China has provided North Korean leader Kim Jong Un and his family with an experimental coronavirus vaccine, a US analyst said on Tuesday, citing two unidentified Japanese intelligence sources.

Reuters: Harry Kazianis, a North Korea expert at the Center for the National Interest think tank in Washington, said the Kims and several senior North Korean officials had been vaccinated.

It was unclear which company had supplied its drug candidate to the Kims and whether it had proven to be safe, he added.

An audience member undergoes a health check as part of preventative measures against the coronavirus,before a performance by the North Korea’s National Acrobatic Troupe at the Pyongyang Circus Theater as part of celebrations marking the annual Mother’s Day public holiday, in Pyongyang on 16 November 2020. Photograph: Kim Won Jin/AFP/Getty Images

North Korea has not confirmed any coronavirus infections, but South Korea’s National Intelligence Service has said an outbreak there cannot be ruled out as the country had trade and people-to-people exchanges with China - the source of the pandemic - before shutting the border in late January.

Microsoft said last month that two North Korean hacking groups had tried to break into the network of vaccine developers in multiple countries, without specifying the companies targeted. Sources told Reuters they included British drugmaker AstraZeneca.

The NIS said last week it had foiled North Korea’s attempts to hack into South Korean Covid-19 vaccine makers.

block-time published-time 12.45am GMT

UN tourism body urges uniformity in virus travel rules

The World Tourism Organization called Monday for the standardisation of traveller health checks and the establishment of air corridors to ease international travel during the pandemic, AFP reports.

The call came at a conference in Spain’s Canary Islands as the global tourism industry reels from a year in which travel restrictions to slow the coronavirus pandemic have decimated the sector.

“We call for the adoption of international protocols for Covid-19 tests before departure and the acceptance of the results upon arrival,” the UN body said in joint statement with the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC) and the Spanish tourism ministry.

The statement came at the end of a one-day conference grouping representatives of more than 95 countries and more than 100 companies that was held in Las Palmas on Gran Canaria.

It also called for agreements to develop “international travel corridors to facilitate tourism and business travel between countries and cities with similar epidemiological situations”.

The text also warned that until a vaccine or treatment for Covid-19 was widely available, “tens of millions of jobs (in tourism) would likely be lost”.

And it called for “an international standard for contact tracing”.

Just over a month ago, the WTO said international tourists arrivals plunged by an annualised 70 percent during the first eight months of 2020 because of the pandemic.

block-time published-time 12.32am GMT

US may begin vaccinations before Christmas

After a Thanksgiving weekend when the number of people traveling through US airports reached its highest since mid-March, a top government official said on Monday some Americans could begin receiving coronavirus vaccinations before Christmas, Reuters reports. US Health Secretary Alex Azar said Pfizer Inc’s Covid-19 vaccine could be authorised and shipped within days of a Dec. 10 meeting of outside advisers to the Food and Drug Administration tasked with reviewing trial data and recommending whether it warrants approval.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccination study at the Research Centers of America in Hollywood. Photograph: Marco Bello/Reuters

A vaccine from Moderna Inc could follow a week later, he said, after the company announced on Monday it would apply for US and European emergency authorization. Final trial data showed the vaccine to be 94.1% effective at preventing Covid-19, comparable with Pfizer’s results. “So we could be seeing both of these vaccines out and getting into people’s arms before Christmas,” Azar said on CBS’ “This Morning.” The federal government will ship the vaccines. State governors will decide how they are distributed within their states. The United States has reported 4.2 million new Covid-19 cases so far in November and more than 36,000 coronavirus-related deaths, according to a Reuters tally. Hospitalizations are at a pandemic high and deaths the most in six months.

block-time published-time 12.22am GMT

Samoa’s two positive Covid-19 cases have been declared historical cases and not infectious.

Samoa’s two positive Covid-19 cases have been declared historical cases and not infectious.

The cases were detected in a 70-year-old who had travelled from Melbourne in Australia, and a sailor repatriated from Italy. Both Samoan citizens arrived in Apia on a repatriation flight on November 13, and subsequently tested positive for the novel coronavirus.

But further examination of their cases has found they were both historical: the sailor had the virus in May and the Australian-based man in August.

Blood samples from the two cases were sent to New Zealand: results showed low viral counts for both, and the cases were deemed not to be infectious.

Samoa’s director-general of health, Leausa Dr Take Naseri, said the two positive cases, and the rest of the 274 passengers who arrived in Samoa on the same flight, will have to remain in quarantine for an additional seven days as a precaution.

The hotel in Apia, Samoa, where the country’s first case, now found to be historical, was confirmed. Photograph: Nadya Va'a/The Guardian

Leausa said all front-line workers at the airport, including health staff, police, and airport crew had been tested and cleared of the coronavirus.

Samoa has recorded no other cases of the coronavirus.

Elsewhere in the Pacific, the Mariana Islands has recorded 106 cases, 80 of which have been imported to the islands, mainly from the US mainland and the US territory of Guam.

Fiji has recorded four more cases, all in border quarantine.

But French Polynesia, one of the worst affected territories in the Pacific, has surpassed 14,000 cases, and 73 deaths. 82 people remain in hospital, including 21 in intensive care. France has flown out additional medical personnel to assist with the surge in cases.

All but 62 of the 14,096 confirmed cases across French Polynesia came after the archipelago re-opened its borders in July and abolished mandatory quarantine.

block-time published-time 12.10am GMT

Vietnam reports first community virus in almost three months

Vietnam reported its first local transmission of Covid-19 in nearly three months on Monday, with officials scrambling to prevent a wider outbreak in the country’s most populous city.

Vietnam was applauded earlier this year for controlling the pandemic with strict restrictions on movement, extensive quarantine measures and a robust track-and-trace regime.

But late on Monday the health ministry announced that that it had detected coronavirus in a 32-year-old man in Ho Chi Minh City, a relative of a Vietnam Airlines flight attendant who tested positive on the weekend.

“A temporary lockdown has been made on locations (in the city) where the patient had visited,” the ministry said in a statement, adding that dozens of people in contact with the latest case had been put under quarantine.

Vietnam has recorded just 1,347 coronavirus cases and 35 deaths across a country of 95 million.

Life has almost returned to normal in the country over the past almost three months, despite a summer outbreak centred on the beach resort city of Danang that put health authorities back on high alert.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.51am GMT

block-time published-time 11.58pm GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

You can find me (and a picture of my dog) on Twitter@helenrsullivan.

After a Thanksgiving weekend when the number of people traveling through US airports reached its highest since mid-March, a top government official said on Monday some Americans could begin receiving coronavirus vaccinations before Christmas. US Health Secretary Alex Azar said Pfizer Inc’s Covid-19 vaccine could be authorized and shipped within days of a Dec. 10 meeting of outside advisers to the Food and Drug Administration tasked with reviewing trial data and recommending whether it warrants approval.

Meanwhile Vietnam reported its first local transmission of Covid-19 in nearly three months on Monday, with officials scrambling to prevent a wider outbreak in the country’s most populous city.

Here are the other key developments from the last few hours:

•The director general of the World Health Organization has warned that spending time with friends and family at Christmas is “not worth putting them or yourself at risk”. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the body’s director general, said people should consider whether travelling during the festive period is necessary.•France has seen its death toll rise by 406 to 52,731. Its health ministry said there were 4,005 new cases, fewer than on Sunday. It has also seen a fall in people in intensive care, and in the numbers admitted to hospital due to the virus. The country’s seven-day average of daily new infections stands at 11,118, an almost two-month low.•Brazil’s health ministry has confirmed 21,138 new cases of Covid-19 and 287 deaths. Earlier on Monday, the WHO urged its government to be “very, very serious” about its rising coronavirus infection numbers, as more than 170,000 have now been killed.•Opec will hold a second day of talks on Tuesday, as the oil producers’ club hopes to reach an agreement over cuts to production. Demand has been affected by the pandemic, with the current Opec president, Abdelmadjid Attar, saying it had caused “immense challenges”.•Rating agency Moody’s has said that most countries still face a “significant negative shock” from the pandemic, and vaccine trials have not caused it to change its forecasts.•Labour will abstain in a vote on England’s new coronavirus tier system on Tuesday over a disagreement on support for the hospitality sector.•Colombia will keep its land and river borders closed until 16 January in an attempt to stem Covid’s spread.•Serbia is to start tests of Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine, as it continues talks with Pfizer about purchasing the jab. Laboratories will get 20 doses this week for testing, according to a statement from the country’s prime minister, Ana Brnabic.•Mexico is in a “bad shape” as coronavirus cases and deaths surge, according to the WHO . The country’s death rally is now more than 105,500 and confirmed cases have passed 1.1 million. Public health experts believe it is likely to be significantly higher.

The director general of the World Health Organization has warned that spending time with friends and family at Christmas is “not worth putting them or yourself at risk”. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the body’s director general, said people should consider whether travelling during the festive period is necessary.

France has seen its death toll rise by 406 to 52,731. Its health ministry said there were 4,005 new cases, fewer than on Sunday. It has also seen a fall in people in intensive care, and in the numbers admitted to hospital due to the virus. The country’s seven-day average of daily new infections stands at 11,118, an almost two-month low.

Brazil’s health ministry has confirmed 21,138 new cases of Covid-19 and 287 deaths. Earlier on Monday, the WHO urged its government to be “very, very serious” about its rising coronavirus infection numbers, as more than 170,000 have now been killed.

Opec will hold a second day of talks on Tuesday, as the oil producers’ club hopes to reach an agreement over cuts to production. Demand has been affected by the pandemic, with the current Opec president, Abdelmadjid Attar, saying it had caused “immense challenges”.

Rating agency Moody’s has said that most countries still face a “significant negative shock” from the pandemic, and vaccine trials have not caused it to change its forecasts.

Labour will abstain in a vote on England’s new coronavirus tier system on Tuesday over a disagreement on support for the hospitality sector.

Colombia will keep its land and river borders closed until 16 January in an attempt to stem Covid’s spread.

Serbia is to start tests of Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine, as it continues talks with Pfizer about purchasing the jab. Laboratories will get 20 doses this week for testing, according to a statement from the country’s prime minister, Ana Brnabic.

Mexico is in a “bad shape” as coronavirus cases and deaths surge, according to the WHO . The country’s death rally is now more than 105,500 and confirmed cases have passed 1.1 million. Public health experts believe it is likely to be significantly higher.