block-time published-time 11.29am GMT

87th over: India 296-6 (Pant 29, Patel 5)  This has been a good spell from Root, certainly more accurate than Moeen today (and Bess in the first Test). Pant waves a single to keep the strike; he was hoping that would be the last over of the day but I think there will be time for one more.

"That 161 by Rohit Sharma, I mean Sharmsy (I'm forgetting myself), looks like it might have turned this innings' into a match-winning total, pitch conditions and all?" says Bill Hargreaves. "350-ish looking like it might be very difficult to follow?"

England will do well to get 350 in the match, if you ask me, which I think you did.

block-time published-time 11.26am GMT

86th over: India 295-6 (Pant 28, Patel 5)  Olly Stone replaces Moeen Ali. He bowls three deliveries with the old ball and then swaps it for something shiny and new. A loose ball on Patel's pads is flipped confidently through square leg, a boundary that tarnishes an otherwise good over.

"Does the insistence on declaring that England have lost this already have some Freudian origin?" asks Ian Copestake. "We are hardly out of the womb of this game and already OBOers are arranging a hit on Dad and giving Mum the glad eye."

block-time published-time 11.21am GMT

85th over: India 290-6 (Pant 27, Patel 1)  Patel gets his first Test run, pushing Root into the leg side. He is a decent No8, with a first-class hundred to his name. Pant then survives a big LBW appeal after pushing defensively outside the line. Root was tempted by a review but decided against it - rightly so, I think, as it looked like it was missing leg. Replays show it was just brushing the leg bail, so it would have been umpire's call.

"It's not an original observation but I really wish there was room for both Buttler and Foakes in England's first choice XI," says Phil Harrison. "Buttler has done well enough - with both bat and gloves - over the last year to deserve the spot. But Foakes is phenomenal isn't he? That stumping was like a cobra striking."

He's sublime, especially on poor wickets. In theory they could bat at six and seven, though Pope is established at No6 for now.

block-time published-time 11.17am GMT

84th over: India 288-6 (Pant 26, Patel 0)  The buckle has snapped on one of the Ben Foakes' pads, so there's a break while he waits for a new one. When play resumes, Pant pulls a filthy delivery from Moeen for four.

"Is India's batting line-up the best top six that's been around in the past few years?" says Andrew Hurley. "Granted, Gill and to a certain extent Pant are not there long, but it's hard to think of a better batting lineup since South Africa with Smith, Kallis, ABDV etc."

Yep, agreed. I'm still not sure about Rohit overseas, but overall it's a formidable top six. Varied, too, with everything from exhilarating mavericks to selfless classicists.

block-time published-time 11.13am GMT

83rd over: India 284-6 (Pant 22, Patel 0)  The debutant Axar Patel is beaten first up by a grotesque delivery that turns and bounces off the straight. This pitch isn't good enough, in truth, but because of that the cricket has been great fun to watch.

block-time published-time 11.10am GMT

WICKET! India 284-6 (Ashwin c Pope b Root 13)

It's day one, but this match is already on fast forward. Ravichandran Ashwin has gone for a frisky 13, running down the pitch to Root before bat-padding to short leg. Ollie Pope took the catch and then tried to run Ashwin out, just in case there was no bat involved. He missed the stumps but it didn't matter - the finger went up a split-second later and Ashwin was on his way.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11am GMT

block-time published-time 11.08am GMT

82nd over: India 284-5 (Pant 22, Ashwin 13)  The commentator Murali Kartik makes the point that Ben Foakes has kept majestically in very difficult conditions. It's not news, but it's nice to be reminded that he is a truly phenomenal wicketkeeper.

block-time published-time 11.08am GMT

REVIEW! India 284-5 (Pant not out 22)

Pant reverse-sweeps Moeen sweetly over gully for four and then lashes the next ball to long off for another boundary. He is given out caught behind off the next delivery, a but reviews immediately and successfully.  Replays show the ball brushed only his trousers.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.08am GMT

block-time published-time 11.03am GMT

81st over: India 276-5 (Pant 14, Ashwin 13)  With Rishabh Pant in mind, Joe Root replaces Jack Leach. That's a rare case of somebody simultaneously bottling it and putting themselves in the line of fire.

Pant is beaten first up by a kicking, screaming off-break, and then Ashwin gloves a sweep over leg slip for a couple. This is a first-day pitch in name, a fourth-day pitch in nature. I'm afraid England have two chances of winning this game, and slim is in quarantine. I think India will win by an innings.

"Slightly disappointing to see Rahane get out so soon after the DRS debacle," says Matt Dony. "I was rather hoping to blindly hang on to that moment as the reason England lost. Then he went and rendered it all-but-irrelevant. It's like they don't even care about our psychoses."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.04am GMT

block-time published-time 10.58am GMT

80th over: India 271-5 (Pant 13, Ashwin 9)  England's over-rate has been hopeless again, even though the spinners have bowled most of the overs, so we won't get the full 90 overs today. There is just over half an hour remaining.

Pant fiddles a turning delivery from Moeen wide of slip for a single, and then Ashwin - who has started very positively - drives a low full toss for four. Moeen has been expensive today: 24-2-100-2.

block-time published-time 10.55am GMT

79th over: India 266-5 (Pant 12, Ashwin 5)  Ashwin takes a single to bring Pant on strike against Leach. He is clearly a lover of theatre - and Pant doesn't let him down. He charges the first ball, driving it miles over midwicket for six. That took a chunk out of the pitch but Pant didn't care - he just launched it.

block-time published-time 10.50am GMT

78th over: India 258-5 (Pant 5, Ashwin 4)  A watchful Pant plays out a maiden from Moeen Ali. He's saving all his shots for Jack Leach.

block-time published-time 10.47am GMT

77th over: India 258-5 (Pant 5, Ashwin 4)  Pant v Leach II begins with a thumping cut for four, and then a nasty delivery that is gloved short of short leg.

In other news, England have been given their review back after that DRS cock-up. So all's well that ends well.

"Karma best served hot!" says Moses Gabriel Nyika. "Getting Rahane out was the best retaliation England could do after such an outrageous failure to use the DRS. The cricket gods are not asleep!"

Mother Cricket hasn't slept since 1877.

block-time published-time 10.42am GMT

76th over: India 250-5 (Pant 0, Ashwin 1)  Ravichandran Ashwin is the new batsman.

"As the result is clearly a foregone certainty this deep into its third session, let's not fret over that," says Geoff Wignall. "Had 1-1 coming out of Chennai been offered beforehand, I'm sure the England camp would have channelled their collective inner Giggsy and took it. But how about some full plaudits for Olly Stonesy (and can we be sure it isn't Stonesie)? In a different era and with slightly better luck he'd be well over 100 Test wickets before now. But he's a proper bowler. A truly good bowler. Now I just hope for runs for his Foakesiness, clinging as I do to the notion that the best XI has him playing alongside Buttler."

He's been darned good today, NQAT.

block-time published-time 10.39am GMT

WICKET! India 249-5 (Rahane b Moeen Ali 67)

Rahane, selfless to the last, spares the umpires by getting out a few balls later! He swept a little wildly at Moeen, and the ball ripped through to hit the top of off and middle. That's Moeen's second jaffa of the day; he bowled Kohli for a duck with a similar delivery this morning.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40am GMT

block-time published-time 10.38am GMT

75th over: IT DID HIT THE GLOVE!  Replays confirm England were right all along, and Rahane should have been out. That's an appalling cock-up, one of the worst I've seen in the DRS era. England have taken it remarkably well so far, but I suspect we'll hear plenty about it at the end of the day's play.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41am GMT

block-time published-time 10.36am GMT

And now Root is trying to explain  that he thought it hit the glove. The umpires aren't interested. England lose a review.  That, I'm afraid, is a bit of a farce. It will be even more of a shambles if replays show the ball did hit the glove.

block-time published-time 10.35am GMT

Now they are checking for the LBW!  This is a farce.

block-time published-time 10.34am GMT

Rahane is not out!  This is a bit of a cock-up. They have only checked whether it hit the bat, not the glove.

block-time published-time 10.33am GMT

Rahane pushed across the line  of a straight delivery from Leach, which hit the pad and looped up to Pope. England think it then  brushed the glove on the way through to Pope. We're about to find out.

block-time published-time 10.33am GMT

ENGLAND REVIEW AGAINST RAHANE!  England are really confident that Pope has caught Rahane at short leg.

block-time published-time 10.32am GMT

74th over: India 248-4 (Rahane 66, Pant 0)  Moeen, on for Root, beats Pant with a ludicrous delivery that roars from a full length. Pant struggles his way through a maiden, almost giving a return catch later in the over. To say this is a result pitch is an understatement, and it's fascinating that India gambled so much on winning the toss.

"Having watched the whole session from lunch to tea, I'm now back to OBO only, which means I'm ever more anxiously refreshing the app in the hope that the next flash of yellow text is a wicket, but knowing full well it'll be Rohit's 200 or Rahane's ton," said Guy Hornsby approximately 0.4 seconds before Rohit was out. "It's an odd feeling because England haven't played poorly. It's more than India have been excellent and every chance has dropped short or just gone their way. I wouldn't buy tickets for the fifth day."

Fifth day? I've already made plans for brunch on Monday, and Sunday is looking tempting too.

block-time published-time 10.28am GMT

73rd over: India 248-4 (Rahane 66, Pant 0)  That was the last ball of the over.

block-time published-time 10.27am GMT

BREAKING NEWS: RISHABH PANT IS BATTING

block-time published-time 10.26am GMT

WICKET! India 248-4 (Sharma c Moeen b Leach 161)

Rohit Sharma's masterpiece is over. He swept Leach straight to deep square leg, where Moeen Ali took a good running catch. He walks off shaking his head, oblivious to the ovation from the crowd. It was a truly great innings: 161 from 231 balls on a first-day dustbowl.

block-time published-time 10.22am GMT

72nd over: India 243-3 (Sharma 161, Rahane 61)  The more you see that Foakes stumping appeal, the more it looks like Sharma was fortunate to survive. There wasn't anything obviously behind the line, although the replays weren't conclusive either way. Anyway, it's done now. Over, forget it. Gone.

block-time published-time 10.20am GMT

SHARMA IS NOT OUT!  It was great work from Foakes, but Sharma has been given the benefit of the doubt. That was so tight, and could easily have gone against India. The replays weren't great, which didn't help; it was almost a 50/50 call.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.23am GMT

block-time published-time 10.18am GMT

71st over: India 240-3 (Sharma 159, Rahane 60)  Sharma dances down the track to drag Leach contemptuously over midwicket for four. That brings up an exemplary 150 partnership.

Sharma is then beaten by a jaffa from Leach, with Foakes whipping off the bails in a flash before appealing for the stumping. It's going to be checked by the third umpire, and it's very close. I think Sharma will just survive.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.20am GMT

block-time published-time 10.10am GMT

70th over: India 233-3 (Sharma 153, Rahane 59)  Sharma misses a sweep at a legside delivery from Root, and Foakes dances to his left to save byes with a brilliant bit of wicketkeeping. And now Sharma has been dropped, an extremely sharp chance to Pope at short leg. It came off the face of the bat and Pope, if anything, did well to stop the ball.

That's drinks.

block-time published-time 10.07am GMT

69th over: India 231-3 (Sharma 151, Rahane 59)  Broad is replaced by... Leach, so England must have given up on reverse swing. Sharma survives a modest LBW appeal to a delivery that didn't straighten enough and would have bounced over the top as well.

"When Moeen bowled Kohli, the captain stood his ground, looking aghast and not believing he was out," says David Melhuish. "And we were told that there was a review. But on the screen it says India have three reviews left. What gives?"

That's for the rest of the team; Virat gets three of his own. (I think they were just checking that Foakes hadn't dislodged the bails, though there was a whiff of WG Grace about it all.)

block-time published-time 10.03am GMT

68th over: India 230-3 (Sharma 150, Rahane 59)  Rohit Sharma works Root round the corner for a single to reach an immense 150!  He waves his bat modestly to an adoring crowd before composing himself again. It's been an immaculate innings, one that we may look back on as the turning point of the series. It has felt calm and controlled, certainly since lunch, yet he has faced only 208 balls.

"England's nickname sub-committee need sacking on the spot for gross negligence," fumes Phil Russell. "I don't understand how they went through all of the

•Prefixes (Capstone, Cobblestone, Headstone, Milestone, Millstone, Rhinestone, Tombstone)•Suffixes (Stonecold, Stonedead, Stonewall)•Synonyms (Boulder, Obilisk)•Phrases (rolling stone, stepping stone)•Popular culture (Sharon Stone, The Rolling Stones, Any film by director actual Oliver Stone, The Flintstones)

Prefixes (Capstone, Cobblestone, Headstone, Milestone, Millstone, Rhinestone, Tombstone)

Suffixes (Stonecold, Stonedead, Stonewall)

Synonyms (Boulder, Obilisk)

Phrases (rolling stone, stepping stone)

Popular culture (Sharon Stone, The Rolling Stones, Any film by director actual Oliver Stone, The Flintstones)

And then thought - yep, 'Stonesy' for us. They didn't even go with Rocky..."

block-time published-time 9.59am GMT

67th over: India 228-3 (Sharma 149, Rahane 58)  Broad has been unable to get the same reverse swing as Stone, so it might be time for Ben Stokes to have a spell at this end. He has bowled only two overs today and 12 in the series.

block-time published-time 9.54am GMT

66th over: India 225-3 (Sharma 148, Rahane 56)  Joe Root brings himself into the attack. He goes straight round the wicket to Rohit, who is beaten by a ball that keeps low. Root starts with a maiden, a good one, though every delivery that does something untoward is a mixed blessing for England.

"Morning Rob," says Kim Thonger. "Talk of the Masked Singer has caused me to wonder why an enterprising spinner has not so far chosen to wear a mask during his (or her) spell? Think of the fear it would instil in the batsman's (or batswoman's) mind? I'd suggest a cape as well but I think it might interfere with the arm ball. Underpants on the outside of cricket flannels might add to the effect though."

Anil Kumble sort of tried it in 2002, though some people claim that was because he had a broken jaw.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.54am GMT

block-time published-time 9.50am GMT

65th over: India 225-3 (Sharma 148, Rahane 56)  Jack Leach is getting loose. He has been much more economical today, conceding 48 from 20 overs as compared to Moeen's 94 from 20. Broad plugs away at the other end, meanwhile, but it's becoming harder to escape the thought that  we're all doomed  India are going to win this game by a huge margin. While it was a huge toss to win, Sharma and Rahane have played quite brilliantly.

block-time published-time 9.45am GMT

64th over: India 222-3 (Sharma 146, Rahane 55)  Sharma sweeps Moeen for four, with the ball going straight through the substitute Bess. He slid round the boundary but then got his knee stuck in the turf; it could have been a lot worse than four runs, as Simon Jones will testify.

"I think that too much talk is going on about rotation but I don't think it really has changed much has it?" says Abhi Saxena. "Anderson was great in the second innings with the rough surface giving him reverse swing, but this pitch on the other hand is an absolute dust bowl. Moeen Ali and Don Bess seem to be similar sort of players, who bowl some great deliveries but don't give that much control. I think if the pitch was offering anything to seamers Broad would have definitely extracted it. People are pretending as if he doesn't have 500 odd wickets... I think both England and India want their seamers to be fresh for the pink ball... hence Bumrah is also rested. I can only see Ashwin getting another 10fer. Kind of Chennai pitch where he made his name."

block-time published-time 9.42am GMT

63rd over: India 213-3 (Sharma 139, Rahane 53)  Stuart Broad replaces Oliver Stone. He is bowling very straight, as he did in his second spell, with a short midwicket and short mid-on for Rahane. There's no reverse swing, and the over passes without incident. England's tactics have been good today and they certainly haven't bowled badly; they've just been outplayed by two superb batsmen.

"I'm sure Mrs McMahon (58th over) will thoroughly enjoy her bottle of Buckfast, plate of neeps and tatties, and a quiet day to herself," says Matt Dony. "She's a lucky lassie, no doubt."

Giacomo Casanova over here.

block-time published-time 9.36am GMT

62nd over: India 212-3 (Sharma 138, Rahane 53)  "Morning Rob," says Will Lane. "'Foakesy' was just picked up on the stump mic calling Olly Stone 'Stonesy', which is pointless as it has the same number of syllables as his first name (in case you hadn't noticed it also has the compulsory 'y' ending for a nickname). Not to resurrect a regular OBO topic that has already been flogged to death but are nicknames in international cricket compulsory? Or is a player only fully initiated into a side once a suitable nickname has been found?"

I'm not sure Laney. You'd have to ask Rooty, or maybe Bessy and Leachy and Itchy and Scratchy.

block-time published-time 9.32am GMT

61st over: India 207-3 (Sharma 136, Rahane 50)  Stone has bowled four-over spells so far, but the reverse swing has given him enough energy for a fifth over this time. There's a little bit of shape back into Rahane, who defends solidly. A maiden. That will probably be it for this Stone spell; he has admirable figures of 13-5-33-1.

block-time published-time 9.29am GMT

60th over: India 207-3 (Sharma 136, Rahane 50)  Rahane flicks uppishly at Moeen, with the ball falling just short of Root on the leg side. A few deliveries are already exploding from the pitch; later in the over, Rahane aborts a late cut at a ball that turns and bounces grotesquely. Good luck batting on this in the second innings, never mind the fourth.

He composes himself and then pushes a single to reach a masterful  half-century from 104 balls. It's been a typical Rahane innings, full of class and intelligence.

Ajinkya Rahane of India celebrates his half century. Photograph: Saikat Das/BCCI

"Root was talking about seizing control of the series, with both Anderson and Bess integral to the first Test win," says Yas K. "Where's the wisdom in dropping both and then playing Ali, who's had no Test cricket in eons? This is not the place to find some form. Rashid would've been understandable and he'd have wreaked havoc on this pitch if in the squad."

Rashid's shoulder isn't up to Test cricket. Ultimately I don't think Bess or even Anderson would have made much difference today against some extremely good batting. The rotation is a red herring.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.10am GMT

block-time published-time 9.23am GMT

59th over: India 205-3 (Sharma 135, Rahane 49)  Stone is definitely getting some reverse swing, which should give England some much needed encouragement. A slightly weary short ball from Stone is pulled smoothly for four by Rahane, who then survives consecutive LBW appeals after being hit on the pad by reverse inswingers. Both were outside the line, though the second was closer than the first.

"I think England have to show faith with Moeen," says Colum Fordham. "Once his confidence is back, he will bowl enough good balls to trouble the India batsmen, as his LBW appeal just showed. And the jaffa to Kohli. Olly Stone looks promising."

Moeen is 34 this year. I can understand why he's playing here, but I think it would be a huge mistake to take him to Australia given his record against them. Leach is the best option in the Ashes I think.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29am GMT

block-time published-time 9.18am GMT

58th over: India 200-3 (Sharma 134, Rahane 45)  Rahane, on the run, drives Moeen sweetly through extra cover for four. He continues to go down the track, both in attack and defence. Moeen drops one short as a result, so Rahane skids back to cut for four. That's masterful batting from one of the great supporting actors of his generation. Moeen has been expensive today: 17-1-78-1.

"Morning Rob," says Simon McMahon. "Never mind resting Jimmy, when will I get a rest today? Cricket and tennis in the morning, football and rugby all afternoon, then the final of the Masked Singer tonight. (Just who is Badger?). And I need to find a Valentine's gift for Mrs McMahon from my local supermarket. I'll need to dig the car out first though. Do you think a mention on the OBO will suffice?"

I'm sorry, I assumed that was a rhetorical question.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29am GMT

block-time published-time 9.14am GMT

57th over: India 192-3 (Sharma 134, Rahane 37)  Rahane gloves a short ball from Stone round the corner for a single, and then Sharma then plays a gorgeous back-foot drive for a couple. Root has been off the field for the last few minutes, though he's about to come back on.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29am GMT

block-time published-time 9.10am GMT

56th over: India 189-3 (Sharma 132, Rahane 36)  Sharma is hit in the grille when he misses a sweep off Moeen. He misses another later in the over, falling over to the off side, and England have a biggish LBW appeal turned down. It was outside the line I think. That was a really good over from Moeen, his first maiden of the innings.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29am GMT

block-time published-time 9.06am GMT

55th over: India 189-3 (Sharma 132, Rahane 36)  Olly Stone beats Rahane with the first ball after tea. The picture is a couple of seconds behind the audio, and it's a bit strange to hear oohs and aahs while Stone is running in to bowl. Those oohs and aaahs were because Rahane had inside-edged another good delivery onto the pad. An excellent maiden from Stone, with the first suggestion of reverse swing.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29am GMT

block-time published-time 8.55am GMT

"I know this is a long shot, but is there any way of getting TMS commentary abroad for this Test?" says Andrew Mullinder. "Cannot find anything through the usual YouTube avenues. Thanks."

The BBC don't have the rights for this series, but it's on TalkSport.

block-time published-time 8.43am GMT

Tea-time reading

Related:  John Holder: 'I rocked the boat and got punished for doing my job properly'

block-time published-time 8.43am GMT

"Hi Rob," says Mittu Choudhary. "It's a tricky situation for Kohli - his rivals for Test and ODI captaincy saving India's blushes. If they play well, their credentials strengthen; if they don't, Kohli will have to take the blame for the loss. What do others think?"

From afar, it seems impossible that Kohli would ever have the captaincy taken away from him. If it does happen, I pity the fool who has to break the news.

block-time published-time 8.43am GMT

Tea

54th over: India 189-3 (Sharma 132, Rahane 36)  Rahane softens his hands to glove a nasty delivery from Leach just short of Root in the gully. That really kicked from a length, and is another ominous sign for England.

A quick single completes a perfect session for India: they scored 83 runs in 28 overs and, most importantly, lost not a solitary wicket. They won an important toss, sure, but they have batted beautifully and it's already hard to see how England can avoid defeat in this Test.

The fans in the MA Chidambaram Stadium would have enjoyed the day's play so far. Photograph: Pankaj Nangia/BCCI

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.47am GMT

block-time published-time 8.38am GMT

53rd over: India 187-3 (Sharma 131, Rahane 35)  Olly Stone comes on for one over before tea. After a few 90mph+ looseners, he beats Rahane with a clever slower ball. Stone's performance so far has been the high point of a difficult day for England.

"Good morning, Rob, and greetings from frozen over Berlin," says Eva Maaten. "Last February, when we were watching England play in SA seems like another world; I guess that's what we all feel right now even without having moved continents last year. But that's a digression. We finally got round to watching Lagaan the other night (I imagine the erudite OBO crowd is familiar with it) for a bit of historical background and full immersion into the England - India cricket rivalry; at four hours long, it even does a very good job in mimicking the atmosphere of watching aTtest match. Real cricket might feel inspired to include the occasional Bollywood dance routine at moments of high drama. Just a thought. And I was wondering if Ben Stokes has been modelling himself on the larger-than-life and impossibly good hero of the movie."

Lagaan! I had totally forgotten about the existence of that 224-minute epic.

block-time published-time 8.32am GMT

52nd over: India 187-3 (Sharma 131, Rahane 35)  Sharma cuts Leach for two to bring up a game-changing - maybe series-changing - hundred partnership. India are a few minutes away from a wicketless session; I don't think there will be too many of those in this Test.

block-time published-time 8.29am GMT

51st over: India 185-3 (Sharma 129, Rahane 35)  Moeen goes around the wicket to Sharma, who dabs past the leaping Stokes at slip for four. As frustrating at this has been for England, Sharma and Rahane have batted quite beautifully on a tricky first-day pitch.

"England won the first test with bat and ball, and now they're going for the series with the mind," roars Felix Wood. "Get Kohli for a duck but let Rahane get big runs, hammering on the cracks in this fragile India dressing-room. It really is very impressive indeed and no shut up YOU'RE grasping at straws."

Rahane's second-innings ten-for was a bit much though.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.29am GMT

block-time published-time 8.25am GMT

50th over: India 180-3 (Sharma 124, Rahane 35)  A good over from Leach, one from it.  England need to keep telling themselves that, on this pitch, one wicket could bring 12. But in truth they are already in a deal of trouble.

block-time published-time 8.22am GMT

49th over: India 179-3 (Sharma 123, Rahane 35)  Sharma slog-sweeps Moeen for four, fetching him from outside off stump. India have gone after Moeen, which I think is a good approach. I know a lot of people say you don't need to do that because he will always bowl you the odd bad ball. But Moeen's confidence is so fragile - and he can be so dangerous when his that confidence is high - that there is plenty to gain from getting on top of him, as Australia have shown.

block-time published-time 8.19am GMT

48th over: India 174-3 (Sharma 118, Rahane 35)  The pace of Sharma's innings has been fascinating - 80 from 78 balls before lunch, 38 from 78 since the break. The greedy bugger wants bed and breakfast!

"India are miles ahead now," says Andrew Hurley. "With Pant to come against a tiring attack... never has the idea to not play Jimmy look so silly (not hindsight, he can play consecutive Tests...)"

But can he play three in a row? They want him for the day-night game, so I can understand why they left him out. I thought it was a really brave decision, because they know they will be unfairly criticised if they lose here. ((n reality, I'm not sure Anderson would have made much difference today as there's no reverse swing). I'm generally a big fan of rotation.

block-time published-time 8.14am GMT

47th over: India 169-3 (Sharma 114, Rahane 34) Moeen has changed ends to replace Broad. Rahane is hit outside the line by a big off-break, prompting Joe Root to put in a leg gully. It also induces a rare poor stroke from Rahane, who scuffs a big drive just short of Lawrence at mid-off. He's back to his serene best next ball, skidding back in his crease to force three runs through the covers. That was a lovely shot.

block-time published-time 8.10am GMT

46th over: India 164-3 (Sharma 112, Rahane 31)  Jack Leach (15-2-31-1) changes ends to replace Moeen Ali (12-0-55-1). Sharma feels for a good delivery that lifts from a length and flies between slip and silly point, then inside-edges just past leg stump for three. That was beautifully bowled by Leach, an arm ball that had Sharma in two minds.

A good over turns into an expensive one when Rahane back cuts classily for four. He is playing with his usual unobtrusive brilliance, and his partnership with Sharma - worth 78 now - already feels like a potential matchwinner.

"Locked in following the OBO from NYC," says Paul Harrison. "What is your expert analysis of the wicket? If it IS a raging turner, is that good news or bad news for #TeamMoeen?"

It's not a raging turner yet, but it's in the post. I suspect it's very bad news for England.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.12am GMT

block-time published-time 8.04am GMT

45th over: India 157-3 (Sharma 109, Rahane 27)  Broad now has a short mid-on  and  short mid-off for Sharma, a kind of tactical V-sign. He has gone into full subcontinent mode, with almost everything full and straight. His second spell (4-1-9-0) has been excellent, missing only the one thing England really need: a wicket.

enltrIf England win the second Test, against this Indian team with 3 spinners on a bunsen after losing the toss, it has to be their best away win...

- Scyld Berry (@scyldberry) February 13, 2021

block-time published-time 7.59am GMT

44th over: India 156-3 (Sharma 108, Rahane 27)  It's been a mixed return so far for Moeen. He ripped out Kohli for a duck with a beautiful delivery, but he's going at 4.5 per over. In a game that is likely to be low scoring, that's a problem.

"I was wondering where you were getting the extra 30-odd runs from," says Chris Purcell. "It slowly dawned I was on Channel 4+1... errrr... had been for little while... morning everyone!"

At least Rishabh Pant wasn't batting, or you'd have been wondering where the extra 130 runs had come from.

block-time published-time 7.56am GMT

43rd over: India 152-3 (Sharma 105, Rahane 26)  Broad is bowling a good second spell, with plenty of cutters and a very tight line. Sharma steers him for a couple of twos, taking India past 150 in the process. After winning a vital toss, they are in a pretty strong position.

block-time published-time 7.52am GMT

This is Rohit Sharma's seventh Test hundred, all of them made in India. He is a home banker, who averages 85 in Tests in India and 27 overseas. In fact, of those who have played at least 20 Test innings in home conditions, only Don Bradman has a higher average.

block-time published-time 7.51am GMT

A CENTURY FOR ROHIT SHARMA!

42nd over: India 148-3 (Sharma 101, Rahane 26) Thanks Tim, morning everyone. That's enough of the pleasantries, because Rohit Sharma has made an extraordinary hundred! He laps Moeen for two to reach a century off only 130 balls, with 14 fours and two sixes. And it's come out of a score of only 148, on an awkward pitch. It's been a glorious performance.

Rohit Sharma of India thwacks a boundary on his way to his century. Photograph: Saikat Das/BCCI      Sharma celebrates his century. Photograph: Pankaj Nangia/BCCI

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.42am GMT

block-time published-time 7.47am GMT

41st over: India 144-3 (Sharma 98, Rahane 25) Broad is using all his wiles to keep Sharma from three figures, landing the ball on off stump while varying his grip each time. He gets a leg-cutter past the outside edge, but Rohit's forward defensive holds out otherwise, and that's drinks with India inching back on top. These two have added 58 and although England have kept Rohit honest, he's still there. That's it from me - over to the OBO maestro, Rob Smyth, for the rest of a fascinating day.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.49am GMT

block-time published-time 7.42am GMT

40th over: India 144-3 (Sharma 98, Rahane 25) Moeen almost nabs Rohit as he goes too early with a sweep and the ball pops up off the toe end towards Burns at short midwicket. Burns can't quite make it in fast enough, perhaps held back by his lockdown hairdo, an early-Eighties mullet.

block-time published-time 7.38am GMT

39th over: India 143-3 (Sharma 97, Rahane 25) Root, who's been proactive, gives Leach a rest and brings back Broad, who has probably been muttering to himself in the deep for two hours after going for 21 off his four overs with the new ball. He induces a nick from Rahane with the leg-cutter, but it goes for four. "No reverse swing yet," says Butcher, "until now-" as the next ball is an inswinging yorker. If it had been delivered at Stone's pace, it would have troubled Rahane.

More on how to get radio commentary around the world. "I've downloaded the talksport app here in Sydney," says Sam Rowe. "Ball by ball commentary there. That should work in Singapore (and elsewhere)?"

block-time published-time 7.32am GMT

38th over: India 139-3 (Sharma 97, Rahane 21) With the singles coming too easily, Root moves himself to silly mid-on, like the captain of the Under-10s. Rohit, reluctant to be tied down, gives Mo the charge and slaps over long-off for six. He's within one shot of a hundred, and the crowd are crazy for it, but he's calm enough to follow up with a forward defensive.

block-time published-time 7.28am GMT

37th over: India 133-3 (Sharma 91, Rahane 21) Three singles from Leach's over too as Rohit eases into the nineties.

"To answer Richard's question from the 33rd over," says Mittu Choudhary, "you can watch the match on Hotstar in Singapore - with a subscription, of course." Really? In Britain, we have the cricket on telly for nothing, in a tradition that goes all the way back to the beginning of this month.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.29am GMT

block-time published-time 7.25am GMT

36th over: India 130-3 (Sharma 89, Rahane 20) Better from Moeen, but he still goes for three singles. So far he's been much like the man he replaced, Dom Bess - patchy, with outbreaks of brilliance.

block-time published-time 7.21am GMT

35th over: India 128-3 (Sharma 88, Rahane 19) Leach beats Rahane with a classic slow-left-arm delivery, dipping like a good free kick. "A peach from Leach," Mark Butcher observes.

"Still can't get over the number of changes in the squad from the last Test," says Mittu Choudhary in Hanumangarh. "On the commentary, Sunil Gavaskar raises a pertinent point asking why are only the quicks and keepers being rotated. Would we see Root also being rested for the next Test or the one after that? For the sake of India's chances - hope that happens." Maybe if he scores 400.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.22am GMT

block-time published-time 7.17am GMT

34th over: India 127-3 (Sharma 88, Rahane 18) Stone goes off after blotting his copybook and back comes Moeen. Rohit's eyes light up, for the first time since lunch, as he sweeps for four.

block-time published-time 7.14am GMT

33rd over: India 121-3 (Sharma 83, Rahane 17) Good again from Leach, who gets one ball to bounce sharply at Rahane, while another skids through. You wouldn't want to bat last on this pitch.

"I've just landed home in Singapore," says Richard Eardley, "and face an obligatory 2 weeks quarantine in a hotel room. Following OBO is helping while away the time in entertaining fashion, but commentary would also help. Any advice on how to listen online from Sing would be gratefully received!" Hoping someone has the answer.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.15am GMT

block-time published-time 7.09am GMT

32nd over: India 120-3 (Sharma 82, Rahane 17) Rahane reaches double figures with a lovely shot, a back-foot force for four off Stone. When Stone responds by pitching it up, Rahane coolly pushes into the covers for four more. This is Stone's first bad over, but he ends it well with a yorker, dug out by Rahane.

block-time published-time 7.05am GMT

31st over: India 112-3 (Sharma 82, Rahane 9) Another tidy over from Leach, who has one for 26 from 12 overs. He's England No.1 spinner now and bowling like it.

block-time published-time 7.02am GMT

30th over: India 111-3 (Sharma 82, Rahane 8) Rahane pulls Stone for a single, wielding a shovel rather than a rapier. He's having a year of drastically mixed fortunes - first leading India to a famous victory in Brisbane, then making 1 and 0 in the first Test of this series.

"What times we live in," says Guy Hornsby. "Disturbed sleep due to a restless toddler, but resisting score checking until lunch. India in. Oh. 3 down. Oh! Replays of Kohli's wicket. Wow. Sharma's strike rate. Yikes. Pitch dusty already. There's a LOT to take in. It's only half 6 on day 1." Have you ever thought about becoming a live-blogger?

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.05am GMT

block-time published-time 6.57am GMT

29th over: India 110-3 (Sharma 82, Rahane 7) Leach raps Rohit on the pad as he misses a lap and appeals, but doesn't review as the impact was probably outside off. Itching to get the scoreboard moving again, Rohit chips for two, not all that convincingly.

"Could you clarify for me," asks Dean Kinsella, "whether Kohli called for a player's review of his dismissal? He obviously hung around until the scoreboard confirmed he was out." He did hang around, but I don't think he quite had the gall to make the T-shape and ask for a review. It was more of a teapot.

block-time published-time 6.52am GMT

28th over: India 108-3 (Sharma 80, Rahane 7) Root sticks with Stone, who has two slips, a gully, a short leg and a leg slip, and rightly so. He draws a leading edge from Ajinkya Rahane as there appears to be some seam movement, of all the strange things. Maybe it was a fast leg-cutter.

block-time published-time 6.49am GMT

27th over: India 106-3 (Sharma 80, Rahane 5) Root gives Leach an in-out field - slip and short leg, men on the rope at cover and long-off, with himself at short extra. The aim is to lure Rohit into an uppish drive, but he's not playing along - he leaves the ball when he can, and blocks when he can't. That's a maiden, only the second for Leach today.

block-time published-time 6.46am GMT

The players are out there again  and it's going to be Jack Leach to continue.

block-time published-time 6.44am GMT

The moment of the day so far is Moeen's delivery to Kohli.  My colleague Ali Martin has a clip for you here.

block-time published-time 6.21am GMT

"This is the first time in Test cricket," says Deepu Narayanan on Twitter, "[that] Virat Kohli has been dismissed for a DUCK by a spinner. (11th duck overall)"

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.21am GMT

block-time published-time 6.14am GMT

"Morning Tim," says Andy in Brum. "I liked that Kohli refused to go until he'd seen the glory of that dismissal on the big screen himself. Also looking at how the pitch is behaving, India can declare now and be batting again by tea."

block-time published-time 6.13am GMT

"Just crawled out of bed to check on progress," says Patrick Shafe, "and over 10 minutes went from disappointed at losing the toss to elated at taking two quick wickets. Morning England!"

block-time published-time 6.11am GMT

But first here's Ian Forth. "The Bannerman ," he declares, "is officially in peril."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.12am GMT

block-time published-time 6.09am GMT

Lunch: England's morning - and Rohit's

26th over: India 106-3 (Sharma 80, Rahane 5) A nice surprise from Root, who brings back Stone to dish up some pace before lunch. It nearly works as Rahane glances uppishly, not far from Ollie Pope at leg slip. And it nearly works again as Rohit edges for four, low through the slips. Then Rahane inside-edges on to his thigh pad as the commentators detect the first hint of reverse swing. By the end of the over there are two short legs and Stone is bowling 148kph, which is 92mph. He finishes with a bouncer, safely evaded by Rahane.

And that's lunch after a morning of turn and twists. Stone struck early, Sharma struck back, and then England's spinners struck twice, removing Pujara and Kohli. It's been a game of two ends, with Rohit cruising to 80 for none off 78 balls, while his mates have mustered only 26 for three. See you in half an hour.

block-time published-time 6.00am GMT

25th over: India 100-3 (Sharma 75, Rahane 4) Leach overpitches and Rohit straight-drives, effortlessly, for his 12th four, to bring up India's hundred.

"First thoughts on the day's play so far," says Kim Thonger. "Can't help thinking Northamptonshire bootmaker Loake are missing a trick here. Surely now is the perfect moment for them to enter the cricket boot market with gusto, and sponsoring Stokes, Woakes and Foakes seems the obvious first step. A white variant of their classic Chelsea boot Chatsworth should be put into production immediately. Put me down for a pair of size 9s in a G fit." Is that a wittily disguised plug?

block-time published-time 5.57am GMT

24th over: India 96-3 (Sharma 71, Rahane 4) Moeen tosses it up outside off and Rohit sweeps for four. This field is better - slip, silly point, short leg. Moeen has been expensive, going for 32 off six overs, but it's a price worth paying for the wicket of Kohli.

block-time published-time 5.54am GMT

23rd over: India 91-3 (Sharma 65, Rahane 4) It's a different game now, though you might not know it from the field, which remains conservative (slip, gully, no one at bat-pad). Sharma, recognising the need not to lose another wicket, is careful too against Leach, who now has fine figures - 8-1-19-1.

block-time published-time 5.50am GMT

22nd over: India 90-3 (Sharma 65, Rahane 4) Moeen comes straight back down to earth with a full toss, gratefully pushed for four by Rahane. He won't mind that: the ball to Kohli was just superb, drifting away towards slip, luring him into the drive, then turning sharply to clip the off bail. After a tough 18 months, going from a nasty bout of Steve Smith to catching Covid-19, Moeen now has something to add his highlights reel.

block-time published-time 5.46am GMT

WICKET!! Kohli b Moeen 0 (India 86-3)

Castled! Through the gate, by a classic off-break. Kohli, who was playing an expansive drive, is so stunned that he tries to convince the umpire that the ball has ricocheted off the keeper. It hasn't! And the master batsman has gone for a duck. The crowd watch him go in silence, like the MCC members greeting Ian Botham in 1981.

India captain Virat Kohli is bowled by Moeen Ali of England. Photograph: Saikat Das/BCCI      Ali celebrates taking Kohli's wicket. Photograph: Saikat Das/BCCI      Meanwhile. there's a rueful look back at his bail-less stumps as Kohli walks back to the pavilion. Photograph: Pankaj Nangia/BCCI

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.44am GMT

block-time published-time 5.43am GMT

21st over: India 85-2 (Sharma 64, Kohli 0) So here comes Virat Kohli, under a bit of pressure after losing his last four Tests. He starts by leaving Leach's arm ball, prompting a few oohs and aahs from the fielders as it's not far from the off stump.

"Perfect timing in Melbourne," says Andy Stead. "A five-day lockdown to coincide with a five-day Test." Ha. Lockdown isn't too bad for cricket lovers, is it? We've had so much practice.

block-time published-time 5.40am GMT

Wicket! Pujara c Stokes b Leach 21 (India 85-2)

Leach makes the ball grip and turn, Pujara tries to run it down to backward point, but he can only nick it to slip, where Stokes takes a neat low catch. And England get a wicket just when they need it.

block-time published-time 5.38am GMT

20th over: India 84-1 (Sharma 63, Pujara 21) Another short ball from Moeen, another cut for four from Rohit. This is beginning to feel ominous.

"Was that just me, or did that edge keep low?" wonders Sunjay Vatul. "Didn't carry either. Also, you might be pleased to note Pujara's judgement of length [18th over] is intact. It was Rohit that edged the cherry." D'oh!

block-time published-time 5.34am GMT

19th over: India 77-1 (Sharma 57, Pujara 20) Another minor victory for Leach, who finds the inside edge of Sharma's broad blade, but it goes for a single.

"Great coverage once again and lots of early risers tuning in," says Ian Wilson in Side, Turkey. "Seeing Rohit's contribution to the 50 partnership reminds me of a game I was playing in for Wessex Wanderers in Dorset in the late 70s, chasing 105 in a rain-affected club match. I contributed 46 to a opening stand of 52 and then got myself out and watched my opening partner carry his bat for 24 and hitting the winning runs as the heavens opened above us. Surprising how memories are triggered."

block-time published-time 5.30am GMT

18th over: India 75-1 (Sharma 56, Pujara 19) Pujara is famous for his judgment of length but Moeen manages to lure him into no-man's-land - only for the edge to drop short of Stokes again. The last ball of the over is less good, short and wide, and Sharma cuts it for four off the toe of the bat.

block-time published-time 5.26am GMT

17th over: India 67-1 (Sharma 51, Pujara 16) Leach has an LBW appeal against Sharma, but England don't review this time and rightly so. It may have struck him outside the line of off and it was missing anyway, because there was some bounce.

"I don't know which hope I feel more ashamed for believing in," says Dwight Johnson. "The hope that England can produce a replica performance, or the hope that my friend was right and Argos actually will release some PlayStation 5s between 3 and 4am."

block-time published-time 5.22am GMT

16th over: India 64-1 (Sharma 50, Pujara 14) Pujara is mostly defending, the old-school way with bat and pad together, but he skips down to whip Moeen for four. And Root comes back onto the field.

"Twelve overs in the first hour, " says Richard Hirst. "Poor. England already sensing a long day ahead and slowing the game down?" Perhaps, but there was a hold-up while Pujara was with the physio.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am GMT

block-time published-time 5.19am GMT

15th over: India 60-1 (Sharma 50, Pujara 10) As Root goes off for treatment, Sharma takes a leaf out of his book by sweeping Leach, crisply, for four, and again for four more, to go to fifty off only 47 balls. He's been so good, he could almost be one of India's young guns.

block-time published-time 5.15am GMT

14th over: India 51-1 (Sharma 42, Pujara 9) So Moeen has the red ball in his hands for the first time since the start of the Ashes in August 2019, when he took a pummelling from Steve Smith at Edgbaston. Moeen looks loose and fit, after his bout of Covid. But off his first ball, Pujara drives to mid-off, where Joe Root seems to hurt his ankle, or is it his knee? A couple more singles and that's the fifty partnership.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.16am GMT

block-time published-time 5.10am GMT

13th over: India 48-1 (Sharma 41, Pujara 7) Leach makes something happen now - turn and bounce, a kiss of the glove as Sharma props forward, and it drops just short of Stokes at slip. A moral victory for Leach, who manages to keep Sharma quiet for six balls. Moeen is about to join him in the attack.

block-time published-time 5.05am GMT

"For us in Mexico,"  says David Grant, "cricket in Asia is a terrible time, play starts at 10pm. However, the Ashes down over starts at 5pm - perfect." Down over! That could catch on.

block-time published-time 5.03am GMT

12th over: India 48-1 (Sharma 41, Pujara 7) Stokes drops short and Sharma pulls for six ! So Stokes drops short again, and Sharma hooks for four. The crowd make the sort of noise you hear at a concert by Taylor Swift - sheer unadulterated idolatry.

And that's drinks, with India taking control on a flat pitch after that early shock from Olly Stone.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.04am GMT

block-time published-time 5.00am GMT

11th over: India 37-1 (Sharma 30, Pujara 7) While Sharma goes for his shots, Pujara is happy to block. Leach does have a short leg now, but only because silly point has moved across the strip. The commentators mention Leach's record in the first innings of a Test, which is not encouraging: an average of 50-something, as opposed to 20 in the second innings. The only crumb of comfort for him is that this may already be a second-innings pitch.

"Barring injury," says Sohid Ahmed, "I wish teams would not replace so many of their players from one match to the next. If England lose, their fans will forever ponder what might have happened if they had stuck to the winning combination. If India wins, their fans will always question if the victory is truly deserved. Just last night, I watched a super insightful documentary, The Edge, and the mental toll it takes on a cricketer. Perhaps the replacements have something to do with that. It was heartbreaking and an eye-opener hearing Jonathan Trott talk about his mental struggles and how isolated he felt during the heights of England's dominance in Test cricket."

block-time published-time 4.55am GMT

10th over: India 36-1 (Sharma 29, Pujara 7) It's a double change as Ben Stokes replaces Stone. His loosener is greeted warmly by Sharma, who sees a half-volley and dispatches it through the covers. He has played as if he's thrilled to have the crowd back in. Rohit Showman.

block-time published-time 4.51am GMT

9th over: India 31-1 (Sharma 24, Pujara 7) Joe Root, who has become a much more self-confident captain, takes Broad off and turns to spin, bringing Jack Leach on. He gives him a slip and a silly point, but no short leg - confident, but still not very attacking. The review is the only alarm for the batsmen.

"Good middle of the night, Tim." Nice one, Phil Sawyer. "I had a filling fall out around midnight, so I'm waiting to ring the dentist first thing. To be honest, I'm not actually experiencing any pain. It was just a good excuse to stay up drinking Jura for medicinal purposes and wait for the cricket to start. Mind you, Jura's a powerful medicine so I'm not sure how long I'll be with yzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz"

block-time published-time 4.49am GMT

Review! For LBW against Sharma

Root reviews at the last second. Sharma swept at Leach and missed, but it's leg-stump-ish... Impact outside the line, so the decision is upheld.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.49am GMT

block-time published-time 4.44am GMT

8th over: India 29-1 (Sharma 23, Pujara 6) Sharma is playing more like Gill, or even Pant. He sees something short and wide from Stone and flays it for four to go to 23 off 24 balls.

"Good arvo Mr de Lisle!!" It's David Melhuish. "First day of the new Chinese New Year, the year of the Ox here in Macao/Macau. This does feel like a New Dawn after some darkened days. Broad looking fit, on fire, focussed. Crowds within giving some atmosphere. Ch 4 delivering the visuals. It's gonna be an absorbing day's play!" It is.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44am GMT

block-time published-time 4.40am GMT

7th over: India 22-1 (Sharma 17, Pujara 5) A single to each batsman as Broad continues to be uncharacteristically generous. He bounces back with an LBW appeal against Sharma, and when it's turned down he of course wants a review, but Stokes at second slip points out that there was a big inside edge. And then it's Sharma's turn to come up with a riposte as he chips over mid-on for four. That ball produced a puff of dust, which will excite the spinners on both sides.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.40am GMT

block-time published-time 4.35am GMT

6th over: India 16-1 (Sharma 12, Pujara 4) Stone makes an impact again, on Pujara's hand as he fends off a short ball. The physio comes on and is clearly trying to work out whether there's a broken finger, but Pujara grits his teeth and bats on. That's another maiden for Stone. In his second Test, he has the sort of figures you expect from Broad, who's in his 145th: 3-2-1-1.

block-time published-time 4.27am GMT

5th over: India 16-1 (Sharma 12, Pujara 4) Broad v Sharma, and it's a good contest. A square drive for two, an off-drive for four, but in between Broad gets Sharma where he wants him, in two minds, as he tries to play no stroke at the last moment and gets a bottom edge.

block-time published-time 4.23am GMT

4th over: India 10-1 (Sharma 6, Pujara 4) Stone concedes a run but saves three as he half-stops an off-drive from Sharma. Then he bowls a sharp bouncer to Pujara, who sways out of the line, immaculately. The pitch is not quick, Nick Knight reckons, but it's offering "good carry".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.28am GMT

block-time published-time 4.19am GMT

3rd over: India 9-1 (Sharma 5, Pujara 4) Runs! Four of them to Sharma as he pushes Broad through the covers. This goes down a treat with the crowd. It's so good to hear something that isn't fake noise. Sharma adds a single and then Pujara edges - but safely, along the ground, for four more. Suddenly, Broad's figures lie in ruins.

block-time published-time 4.14am GMT

2nd over: India 0-1 (Sharma 0, Pujara 0) Stone starts with a maiden too, a wicket-maiden. Easy game, this.

block-time published-time 4.10am GMT

Wicket!! Gill LBW b Stone 0 (India 0-1)

Wow. Stone bowls an inswinger in the channel and Shubman Gill shoulders arms! If he'd played a shot, he would have saved his skin. As it is, Sharma says don't even bother reviewing, and that's England's first LBW of this series - plus a big, big moment for Olly Stone.

England's Olly Stone celebrates the wicket of Shubman Gill of India. Photograph: Pankaj Nangia/BCCI

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.50am GMT

block-time published-time 4.07am GMT

1st over: India 0-0 (Sharma 0, Gill 0) Broad, in his bandana, is on the spot, giving Rohit Sharma a mixture of full deliveries and back-of-a-length. And that's a maiden.

block-time published-time 4.02am GMT

The players are out there AND SO ARE THE FANS,  who are making some noise, chanting and hooting.  Stuart Broad has the ball in his hands.

Some of the fans queueing for tickets for the match on Thursday. Photograph: Arun Sankar/AFP/Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.44am GMT

block-time published-time 3.55am GMT

"This seems like it will be our only ever chance for Stokes-Foakes-Woakes," says McAllister Riptide on Twitter. "Why do they keep dragging poor Chris everywhere when they (wrongly) seem to think he's shit?" Yes, it's hard on him. But there may be another chance for Stokes-Foakes-Woakes in the next match, as it's a day-nighter with the pink ball and the prospect of swing - Jimmy Anderson will come back in, and Woakes could join him.

block-time published-time 3.51am GMT

Teams: chop and change

England, as expected, make four changes to a winning team, which may be the first time they've ever done so in mid-series. As well as Stone replacing Archer (sore elbow), Ben Foakes takes over behind the stumps from Jos Buttler (on leave), Stuart Broad replaces Jimmy Anderson (rested), Moeen Ali is preferred to Dom Bess - dropped after bowling three full tosses in a row to Kohli, but also after getting him out.

India make just the three changes, bringing in Patel for Shahbaz Nadeem, Siraj for Bumrah, and Kuldeep for Sundar. But that's three of their five bowlers, so they'll all be fresh apart from Ishant and Ashwin. All told, five bowlers out of the frontline ten from last time will not be playing here.

India 1 Rohit Sharma, 2 Shubman Gill, 3 Cheteshwar Pujara, 4 Virat Kohli (capt), 5 Ajinkya Rahane, 6 Rishabh Pant (wkt), 7 Axar Patel, 8 Ravi Ashwin, 9 Ishant Sharma, 10 Kuldeep Yadav, 11 Mohammed Siraj.

England  1 Rory Burns, 2 Dom Sibley, 3 Dan Lawrence, 4 Joe Root (capt), 5 Ben Stokes, 6 Ollie Pope, 7 Moeen Ali, 8 Ben Foakes (wkt), 9 Jack Leach, 10 Stuart Broad, 11 Olly Stone.

block-time published-time 3.42am GMT

Also out is Washington Sundar, who batted better than he bowled in the first Test. His slot goes to Kuldeep Yadav, the left-arm wrist-spinner, and as expected Axar Patel comes in as the slow left-armer in place of Shahbaz Nadeem, who laboured with the ball and made a pair with the bat. Patel, who has 49 white-ball caps, becomes India's sixth Test debutant in seven weeks since Melbourne, and adds to the multitude of all-rounders. Tails are gonna wag.

block-time published-time 3.40am GMT

Quick, quick...

Bumrah is rested! His place goes to Mohammed Siraj, who did so well in Australia. And Jofra Archer's place goes to Olly Stone, who will play his second Test and be the fastest man in the match. This is not good news for the Stokes-Foakes-Woakes fan club, but it should be entertaining.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.44am GMT

block-time published-time 3.36am GMT

"Just coming up to midday here in Wuxi, China," says Richard Woods.  "A two-sweater day but the sun is out, the OBO is on and after the first Test, the glass is half full. Play!" Only two sweaters? London is minus 3. But I'm with you on the glass.

block-time published-time 3.34am GMT

Toss: India win and guess what

Joe Root puts a foot wrong! Virat Kohli says thank you very much, we'll have a bat. It's probably what the series needed.

India's captain Virat Kohli tosses the coin while England captain Joe Root calls incorrectly. Photograph: Saikat Das/BCCI

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.40am GMT

block-time published-time 3.31am GMT

One brings two.  "Friday night in Vancouver," says Pau; Done. "I may only catch the first couple of hours tonight, but an 8pm start time after a few Friday beers on a long weekend seems the optimal way to enjoy tTst cricket. If you can't be in the stands. Cheers and thank you for getting up so early." It's a pleasure. Well, a privilege, anyway.

block-time published-time 3.29am GMT

The first email of the match is from Matthew Doherty. "How can the series go flat if England go 3-0 up?" he remonstrates. "This lot can't do anything like that easily!" It's a good point.

block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT

Preamble: questions, questions

Morning everyone and welcome to our coverage of the second Test.  It's the middle of the night if you're in Europe, it's the middle of February, and it's the middle of lockdown - but you can still jump out of bed with a spring in your step, because England won the first Test. Nothing sets up a series like a famous victory for the visiting team, especially when it marks the fall of a fortress - before last weekend, India had lost just once in 34 home Tests. The only way this series can go flat now is for England to win the next two Tests, which doesn't seem all that great a danger.

As the teams go back out onto the same field of battle, the air is full of questions. Can India bounce back? (Yes - they just proved that in Australia.) Can England make it seven away wins in a row? (Yes - as long as they play out of their skins, and more than three batsmen make runs.) Can Joe Root keep piling up huge scores? (Probably not, but he's in the zone as never before.) What happens if India bat first? (A lot of hard yakka.) Will Virat Kohli show everyone who's the king? (Very possibly - if he can make 72 on the fifth day, he can make 172 on the first. And his unlikely nemesis, Dom Bess, isn't playing.) Will the pitch be a raging turner? (Yes, according to Ajinkya Rahane, who says it looks "completely different" from the first-Test pitch: "I am sure it will turn from day one.")

Can Moeen Ali find his mojo again after 17 months out of Test cricket? (A better bet as a batsman than a bowler: last time he played a Test here , he scored 190 in two innings and conceded 190 in one.) Can Olly Stone play the nasty fastie like Jofra Archer? (Perhaps. He's got the pace, but not the same startling bouncer.) Or will Root prefer Chris Woakes, the not-at-all-nasty not-so-fastie? (It seems a long shot, since it would make the attack less varied, but it would transform the tail as Woakes would be at No.9.) And how will the players respond to the return of the crowd? (With relief or delight, I suspect, though one or two may get drunk on the atmosphere.)

It's all highly intriguing. Play starts at 4am GMT, which is 9.30am in Chennai. Do join me about 25 minutes before that, for the toss and the teams.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.46pm GMT