Diplomatic tensions between Australia and China may be reignited with an extraordinary threat by a Coalition backbencher to summons the Chinese ambassador to answer questions from a parliamentary committee.

While the attempt to compel the ambassador to appear at a hearing in Canberra is almost certain to fail because of diplomatic immunity, the push interrupts a pause in public sparring between the two governments over the response to Covid-19.

Queensland Coalition MP George Christensen, who has a record of threatening to cross the floor, issued the latest threat in his capacity as chair of the Joint Standing Committee on Trade and Investment Growth.

The committee was already conducting an inquiry into "whether there is a need to diversify Australia's trade markets and Australia's level of reliance on foreign investment" - but Christensen wants to sharpen the focus on China and has raised the prospect of calling the Chinese ambassador, Cheng Jingye, to give evidence.

Christensen appears to have not sought the backing of senior government members such as the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, for the plans and it is unclear whether the entire committee has held a vote yet to back the move.

Responding to the development, Birmingham emphasised it should be seen in the context of political debate.

"We live in a robust democracy where different views can be heard," the minister said in a statement, adding the government believed investment and exports were important to the jobs of Australians.

Under article 31 of the Vienna convention on diplomatic relations, diplomatic agents are "not obliged to give evidence as a witness". While diplomatic immunities could be waived by China, this is considered highly unlikely.

Christensen wants Cheng to appear before the committee as early as August, according to a report in News Corp's Sunday Mail, which also reported the notice to appear could be sent to the ambassador "as early as tomorrow".

"I'd like to know why the ambassador felt the need to mention the possibility of a trade boycott in response to Australia's request for an international inquiry into the origins of the Wuhan coronavirus," the MP told the Sunday Mail.

He is also setting up a "China inquiry" website with a welcome message that says: "We must stand up for Australia's sovereignty and economic independence, and against threats from Communist China."

The governments of China and Australia were entangled in a messy war of words last month over the shape of a proposed international inquiry into Covid-19 and Beijing's apparent threat to retaliate economically.

At the height of those tensions, the Chinese embassy released details of a call from Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and in an attempt to embarrass the Morrison government, claimed the departmental secretary had conceded it was "not the time to commence the review now and Australia has no details of the proposal".

Cheng, the ambassador, had warned earlier that consumer boycotts were possible as he argued Australia's push for an international inquiry was part of a US-backed "political campaign against China".

In an interview with the Australian Financial Review published on 26 April, Cheng said Chinese tourists and students may rethink their plans to visit in the future "if the mood is going from bad to worse", while consumers may also decide against buying Australian wine and beef.

Scott Morrison maintained his call for an inquiry was "entirely reasonable and sensible" and the public dispute appeared to have eased since the end of April. In the meantime Australia has played down a theory promoted by US political leaders that the virus may have started in a laboratory in Wuhan.

In recent days, the prime minister has underlined the need for any inquiry to be seen as having "an honest intent and an honest motive".

On Sunday, the health minister, Greg Hunt, said the government would support a European Union-drafted motion at the forthcoming World Health Assembly which he said included "an independent investigation, regulatory work on wet markets and also the potential for independent inspection powers".

Hunt said the government had disagreed with the World Health Organization over Australia's decision on 1 February to close the border to visitors from China in a bid to contain the spread of the virus.

"We believe that we made not just the right the decision but one of the most important decisions made by an Australian government in decades," Hunt told Sky News.

Guardian Australia has contacted Christensen and the Chinese embassy for comment.