Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

Global cases pass 1.4m and death toll exceeds 82,000

There are now more than 1.43m confirmed cases worldwide and in excess of 82,100 global deaths. The US has more than 399,000 cases and close to 13,000 deaths. In the UK there are close to 56,000 cases and more than 6,100 deaths.

Boris Johnson spends his second night in intensive care

The foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who is running the government while Boris Johnson receives treatment in hospital for coronavirus, says he is confident the prime minister will recover. Johnson spent his second night in intensive care on Tuesday.

Modelling suggests UK will have worst coronavirus death toll in Europe

Leading disease data analysts have projected that the UK will become the worst-affected country in Europe, accounting for more than 40% of total deaths across the continent. The Institute for            Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) in Seattle predicts 66,000 UK deaths from Covid-19 by August, with a peak of nearly 3,000 a day, based on a steep climb in daily deaths early in the outbreak. The modelling is contested.

First train departs Wuhan after 11 weeks of lockdown

Nearly three months after Wuhan, the origin point for the coronavirus pandemic, was locked down, travel in and out of the city has been allowed.

Donald Trump threatens to withdraw funding from the World Health Organization

The US president has labelled the global body "China-centric". At Monday evening's press briefing, after saying he would withdraw funding. Trump later walked back that statement and said he was "looking into it".

Schools and workplaces will be closed in Indonesia's capital of Jakarta

Greater restrictions have been imposed in the city to slow the spread of coronavirus, where a sudden rise in burials has raised concerns over undetected cases. So far, officials have confirmed 2,738 cases of coronavirus, and 221 deaths, most of which have occurred in Jakarta. Indonesia has been criticised for failing to act quickly in response to the coronavirus threat and for downplaying the threat of the virus in the country.

US folk and country singer John Prine has died aged 73 from Covid-19

Prine was hospitalised on 26 March, and was in intensive care for 13 days before dying on Tuesday at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Tennessee.

The death toll in Italy continues to rise

Deaths from coronavirus in Italy rose by 604 on Tuesday, although the country marked the lowest day-to-day increase in new infections since it was quarantined.