block-time published-time 3.52pm GMT

The World Health Organization is coordinating with the African Union to prepare the continent's countries for potential arrivals of people infected with coronavirus.

Last week, the first case of coronavirus in Africa was confirmed when a case emerged in Egypt.

enltr"We're partnering with the @AfricaCDC to coordinate our efforts to prepare African countries for the potential arrival of the            #coronavirus "-            @DrTedros           #COVID19

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.00pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.31pm GMT

The World Health Organization has issued a plea to a dozen manufacturers of personal protective equipment to help in a bid to protect health workers from the spread of coronavirus.

"I've written to 12 chief executives of manufacturers of personal protective equipment to seek their cooperation to ensure supply to protect health workers," said the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom.

enltr"I've written to 12 chief executives of manufacturers of personal protective equipment to seek their cooperation to ensure supply to protect #healthworkers "-            @DrTedros           #COVID19           #coronavirus

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.31pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.24pm GMT

WHO: more than half of coronavirus cases outside China occurred onboard Diamond Princess

Over half of the coronavirus cases outside of China are onboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan, the World Health Organization's director general has said.

Giving the WHO's daily update, Tedros Adhanom said there were now more than 1,000 cases outside mainland China, and seven deaths.

enltr"As of 6am GVA time this morning, #China has reported 74,675 cases of            #COVID19 to WHO, including 2121 deaths. The data from ???? continue to show a decline in new cases. Once again, we're encouraged by this trend, but this is no time for complacency"-            @DrTedros           #coronavirus

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

enltr"Outside #China, there are now 1076            #COVID19 cases in 26 countries, with seven deaths. In the past 24 hours the Islamic Republic of            #Iran has reported 5 cases, 2 of which have died"-            @DrTedros           #coronavirus

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

enltr"Of all cases outside #China, over 1/2 are among passengers on the            #DiamondPrincess cruise ship. The first passengers have now disembarked, providing they have a negative test, no symptoms and no contact with a confirmed case in the past 14 days"-            @DrTedros           #COVID19           #coronavirus

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

enltr" #Japan has also advised passengers to stay at home for a further 14 days and monitor their temperature and has set up a hotline for passengers to call if they have concerns"-            @DrTedros           #COVID19           #coronavirus

- World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 20, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.31pm GMT

block-time published-time 3.15pm GMT

Here's the latest country-by-country breakdown of the coronavirus outbreak, as the number of those infected worldwide hits nearly 75,000.

According to Associated Press, the latest figures provided by each government's health authority as of Thursday are:

Mainland China: 2,118 deaths among 74,576 cases, mostly in the central province of HubeiHong Kong: 65 cases, 2 deaths Macau: 10 Japan: 727 cases, including 634 from a cruise ship docked in Yokohama, 3 deaths Singapore: 84 South Korea: 51, 1 death ( the number of cases has since risen after reports of new cases at a 'cult' church have taken the total number to 82 ) Thailand: 35 Taiwan: 24 cases, 1 death Malaysia: 22 Vietnam: 16 Germany: 16 United States: 15 cases; separately, 1 US citizen died in China Australia: 14 France: 12 cases, 1 death United Kingdom: 9 United Arab Emirates: 9 Canada: 8 Iran: 5 cases, 2 deaths Philippines: 3 cases, 1 death India: 3 Italy: 3 Russia: 2 Spain: 2 Belgium: 1 Nepal: 1 Sri Lanka: 1 Sweden: 1 Cambodia: 1 Finland: 1 Egypt: 1

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.33pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.00pm GMT

Summary

Here are the main things that have happened today:

•Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.•China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections in total.•New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.•Scientists have signed an open letter in support of Chinese colleagues who have been targeted on social media with conspiracy theories about the origins of the coronavirus.•UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out from Tokyo on Friday. They will land at Boscombe Down airbase in Wiltshire. The Foreign Office is also helping Britons who were on the Westerdam cruise ship to come home from Cambodia.•The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total cases.•Iran has reported two deaths from the coronavirus, and an additional three cases in the city of Qom.•Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week. It will last until 29 February.

Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.

China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections in total.

New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.

Scientists have signed an open letter in support of Chinese colleagues who have been targeted on social media with conspiracy theories about the origins of the coronavirus.

UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out from Tokyo on Friday. They will land at Boscombe Down airbase in Wiltshire. The Foreign Office is also helping Britons who were on the Westerdam cruise ship to come home from Cambodia.

The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total cases.

Iran has reported two deaths from the coronavirus, and an additional three cases in the city of Qom.

Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week. It will last until 29 February.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.39pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.10pm GMT

Scientists sign open letter of support for Chinese colleagues over social media conspiracy theories

Our health editor, Sarah Boseley, reports that 27 prominent public health scientists from nine countries have signed a joint statement of support for Chinese colleagues who are being criticised on social media, and even threatened with violence as false rumours circulate about the origins of the coronavirus.

"We work very closely with the Chinese scientists. We have had incredible openness with the labs in China for the last 15 years, since Sars," said Dr Peter Daszak, the president of EcoHealth Alliance in the United States.

"We collaborate on what are dangerous viruses and get incredible information that helps public health around the world. That is all under threat right now."

There is a worry that the open and transparent relationship between the Chinese scientists and their western counterparts will come to an abrupt end, impeding the sharing of data and the hunt for treatments and vaccines against Covid-19.

The scientists cite conspiracy theories circulating on social media which claim that the coronavirus was artificially manufactured in a lab conducting bioweapons research. They are "crackpot theories that need to be addressed, but in the age of social media it is just impossible", Daszak said.

Related:  Experts fear false rumours could harm Chinese cooperation on coronavirus

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.49pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.53pm GMT

UK companies have begun to flag up the economic impact of the coronavirus. Aveva, which is one of Britain's biggest tech groups and earns 5% of its revenues from China, said Chinese sales had been knocked by the disruption. Shares in the FTSE 100-listed firm dropped 4% after its update.

Shares in the kitchen and bathroom supplier Norcros plummeted 13% when it alerted over profits because of the impact of the disease on Chinese-based suppliers.

And the recruitment group Hays says its business in China has slowed. Its chief executive, Alistair Cox, told PA Media that recruitment in China had been "very subdued". "Everyone has been concerned about their own health and safety and that of their families - it has to be everyone's priority."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.51pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.48pm GMT

US military forces in South Korea have just issued a statement about their response to the situation in Daegu.

enltrPlease visit our website for the latest COVID-19 update. We have taken prudent precautionary health measures at U.S. Army Garrison Daegu out of continued caution. https://t.co/OWTfWP4AWX

- U.S. Forces Korea (@USForcesKorea) February 20, 2020

The measures are intended to restrict unnecessary travel, and schools and children's centres used by military staff have been closed.

Daegu, which is two hours south of the capital, Seoul, accounts for nearly half the confirmed cases of coronavirus in the country. Infections have centred on a controversial "cult" church. A 61-year-old woman who worships there has been linked to the 37 other members of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus who have been confirmed as infected.

Daegu's mayor, Kwon Young-jin, has said the city faces "an unprecedented crisis".

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.47pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.09pm GMT

While, naturally, people's health is the primary concern with the coronavirus outbreak, it is also undoubtedly having a global economic impact as well.

Air France-KLM, Qantas, and the global container shipping giant Maersk have become the latest businesses to warn about the financial impact from the continued spread of the coronavirus.

My colleague Joanna Partridge has the full story.

Related:  How coronavirus has hit the airline and shipping industry

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.18pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.55am GMT

There is some more detail from Iran of the coronavirus cases there. Three cases have been confirmed today, in addition to the two people who were known to have died from it.

The cases have all been in Qom, which is around 140km (86 miles) south of the capital, Tehran. According to the official IRNA news agency all schools and universities, including religious Shia seminaries, were shut down in the city.

Mohammad Mahdi Gouya, Iran's deputy health minister, said the three people with the coronavirus did not appear to have had any contact with Chinese nationals. Authorities were now investigating the origin of the disease, and its possible link with religious pilgrims from Pakistan or other countries.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.35pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.32am GMT

British Airways have announced a further round of flight cancellations. A spokesperson for the airline said: "In line with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office's continued advice against all but essential travel to mainland China, we are cancelling flights to and from Beijing and Shanghai until April 17 2020. We continue to fly to and from Hong Kong. We will keep the situation under review."

The company said it would be contacting customers on cancelled flights to discuss their travel options, which includes the possibility of rebooking on to other carriers, refunds, or flying on a later date.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.18am GMT

Summary

Here's a summary of the main events so far today.

•Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.•China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections in total.•New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.•UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out from Tokyo on Friday. They will land at Boscombe Down airbase in Wiltshire. The Foreign Office is also helping Britons who were on the Westerdam cruise ship come home from Cambodia.•The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total virus cases.•Iran has reported two deaths from the coronavirus.•Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week. It will last until 29 February.

Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.

China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections in total.

New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.

UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out from Tokyo on Friday. They will land at Boscombe Down airbase in Wiltshire. The Foreign Office is also helping Britons who were on the Westerdam cruise ship come home from Cambodia.

The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total virus cases.

Iran has reported two deaths from the coronavirus.

Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week. It will last until 29 February.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.43pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.59am GMT

PA is reporting that the plane carrying British passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise ship will land at the MoD base Boscombe Down in Wiltshire. Around 70 Britons will be on the repatriation flight, which is expected to leave Tokyo late tomorrow night.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.44pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.27am GMT

Sources have told the PA news agency that the Britons in Cambodia who left the Westerdam cruise ship are being assisted by the Foreign Office to make their way home. They are being quite coy about it though - refusing to disclose how many Britons are involved, or indeed whether they may have already arrived back in the country.

The group, who have all tested negative for coronavirus while in Cambodia, are receiving health advice and being helped with commercial flight bookings.

Public Health England said airport health teams would meet the flights and speak to Westerdam passengers about any symptoms, and they would be asked to self-isolate at home for 14 days.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.45pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.17am GMT

Hong Kong's Information Services Department has issued some photos of passengers arriving at Hong Kong international airport on a flight from Tokyo. A total of 106 Hong Kong residents, who were quarantined on the Diamond Princess cruise liner in Yokohama, were permitted to leave Japan and have flown back to Hong Kong. Upon arrival they were taken straight to a designated quarantine site.

Passengers from the Diamond Princess arrive back in Hong Kong Photograph: Isd Handout/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.48pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.10am GMT

Australia may have extended its ban on foreign travellers from China for another week until 29 February, but Melbourne is trying to do something to make the Chinese population currently there feel more welcome. The Victoria state government has decided to light up a series of landmarks including the Arts Centre, the National Gallery Victoria and Melbourne town hall in red and gold as a show of solidarity with China over the coronavirus outbreak.

Perhaps more practically, it has proposed that as soon as it is safe to visit China again, the city will send a 100-strong trade delegation.

The premier, Daniel Andrews, has also urged people to support Chinese businesses. "Go and visit a Chinese restaurant, go to a precinct which is dominated by Asian businesses, go and show your support for them, because a lot of them are having it very, very tough at the moment as people stay away."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.00pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.34am GMT

A British couple who published video diaries from a cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Japan have confirmed that they have the coronvirus as they posted Facebook updates from hospital.

Sally and David Abel, who were among thousands of passengers on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, said that Japanese doctors had told them that vaccinations which they had in the past for the flu had stopped the virus from spreading further.

The were not displaying any symptoms and were in good spirits, their son Steve added in a live post on Facebook as they awoke on Thursday morning to see photos of his smiling parents in two beds in the same hospital room.

David Abel posted: "Outside the hospital I came over a bit weird and nearly passed out. Every pore on my body opened and i was wheelchaired to our room."

"Full health inspection and now we know what's going on. We both contracted a cold (unaware of) and it has not yet turned into pneumonia. (we do have corona virus).

"Tomorrow the big tests commence. chest x-rays, ECG, chest scan, urine + more."

block-time published-time 9.10am GMT

Three Iranian patients have tested positive for the new coronavirus disease, according to the state's semi-official ISNA news agency.

The latest development in Iran comes after its health ministry said on Wednesday that two people had died after preliminary tests came back as positive for Covid-19.

ISNA reports that five hospitals have been designated for the treatment of cases.

block-time published-time 8.44am GMT

A Japanese government official has described coronavirus as the biggest risk to the economy in a country which has already been heavily criticised by others, including US authorities for its handling of quarantined cruise ship passengers.

His comments came monthly report said that the Japanese labour market remained solid, but warned about risks to the outlook from the coronavirus epidemic.

Japan's financial watchdog has begun conducting an emergency survey on domestic financial institutions with business operations in China to gauge how the coronavirus outbreak could affect credit costs.

block-time published-time 8.36am GMT

The Wall Street Journal (WSJ)is continuing to cover the crisis in China after the state expelled three of its reporters from the country, a move which the news outlet criticised in an editorial on Wednesday night.

The WSJ's latest report (paywall) reports that overburdened hospitals are struggling to provide care to other patients in Hubei, the province at the centre of the outbreak, with some facilities turning away pregnant women with complications.

The editorial said: "The truth is that Beijing's rulers are punishing our reporters so they can change the subject from the Chinese public's anger about the government's management of the coronavirus scourge."

Related:  China to expel WSJ journalists over 'malicious' coronavirus column

block-time published-time 8.22am GMT

Two more Russians aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship quarantined in Japan have been diagnosed with the virus, the Russian Embassy in Japan has said.

The two will be transferred to a hospital in Japan for treatment, according to the embassy statement published on Facebook.

The Diamond Princess has been docked in the Yokohama port near Tokyo since Feb. 4, when 10 people on board tested positive for the virus. So far 621 cases of the virus, which has been named COVID-19, have been confirmed among the the Diamond Princess's original 3,711 people on board.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.26am GMT

block-time published-time 8.08am GMT

An evacuation flight for Britons stuck on a cruise ship docked off the coast of Japan over coronavirus fears will leave Tokyo on Friday, the UK's foreign secretary has said.

Dominic Raab said information had been provided to those registered for the flight, but he urged other British nationals still seeking to leave to contact the Foreign Office. He added: "We will continue to support British nationals who wish to stay in Japan."

Those repatriated from the Diamond Princess will be quarantined at Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral on their return, a Department of Health and Social Care spokesman said.

There were 78 British passengers on the cruise liner when cases of the coronavirus strain known as Covid-19 started to emerge. Four British cases have since been confirmed by the Foreign Office.

enltrI can confirm the evacuation flight out of Tokyo on Friday for British nationals from the Diamond Princess cruise ship: https://t.co/vBYNRkvBbK

- Dominic Raab (@DominicRaab) February 20, 2020

This is Ben Quinn picking up the blog now in London

block-time published-time 7.05am GMT

Summary

Here's a summary of events so far on Thursday on the coronavirus.

•Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.•The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total virus cases.•New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.•China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections.•Iran reported two deaths from the coronavirus.•Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week.•UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out on Friday.

Two Japanese passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner have died after becoming infected onboard. Both were in their 80s.

The South Korean city of Daegu is facing an "unprecedented crisis", its mayor has said, after a cluster of cases at a church grew to account for nearly half of the nation's total virus cases.

New cases of the virus in China have dropped, partly because the way cases are counted was changed for the second time in a week.

China's national death toll stands at 2,118, with 74,576 confirmed infections.

Iran reported two deaths from the coronavirus.

Australia has extended its travel ban for arrivals from China into a fourth week.

UK passengers on the Diamond Princess are expected to be flown out on Friday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.40am GMT

block-time published-time 6.12am GMT

The mayor of a South Korean city of Daegu has ordered the shutdown of all kindergartens and public libraries, as a surge in confirmed Covid-19 cases linked to a local church raised the prospect of wider transmission.

Reuters reported that malls in Daegu, the country's fourth largest city (population of 2.5 million), were largely empty.

"We are in an unprecedented crisis," the city's mayor, Kwon Young-jin, said.

Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) reported 31 new cases of the virus on Thursday, following 20 a day earlier, taking the total across the country to 82.

Of that national tally, 49 patients are from Daegu or nearby and have been traced to an infected person who attended a local church, a scenario that KCDC described as a "super-spreading event".

You can read our full story here.

South Korean health officials wearing protective suits spray disinfectant near a church in the South Korean city of Daegu. Photograph: YONHAP/AFP via Getty Images

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.58pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.41am GMT

The Global Times is reporting that Beijing has postponed some student exams that were due to be held in March.

enltrBeijing has postponed exams due in March, including some college entrance tests and high school recruitments, because of the #COVID19 outbreak, Beijing Education Examinations Authority announced Thursday.            pic.twitter.com/xhkbkVzM0j

- Global Times (@globaltimesnews) February 20, 2020

block-time published-time 5.38am GMT

China's state-run media says small- and medium-sized enterprises may lay off 30% of staff because of the coronavirus.

enltr #China 's small- and medium-sized enterprises,            #SMEs may lay off over 30% staff due to            #coronavirus impact: Zhou Dewen, deputy director of the China Association of Small and Medium Enterprises            #COVID19           https://t.co/0ylieRYk4z           pic.twitter.com/HPgIJlunM3

- Global Times (@globaltimesnews) February 20, 2020

block-time published-time 5.36am GMT

UK to repatriate Diamond Princess passengers on Friday

An evacuation flight for Britons stuck on the Diamond Princess will leave Tokyo on Friday, according to the British foreign secretary, Dominic Raab.

There were 78 British passengers on the cruise liner when cases of the coronavirus strain known as Covid-19 started to emerge. Four British cases have since been confirmed.

It is understood that only healthy passengers with no symptoms of the virus will be able to travel on the evacuation flight, with all to spend 14 days at quarantined in the UK.

Anyone who develops symptoms during the flight will be taken to hospital, Press Association reports, while it is understood any pre-existing cases will be treated in Japan.

Meanwhile, the European Commission has announced the EU will be financing the repatriation of citizens from any of the EU27 still stuck on the Diamond Princess.

Workers in protective gear escort disembarking passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked at Yokohama Port, south of Tokyo. Photograph: Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters

block-time published-time 5.24am GMT

Indonesia to evacuate passengers from Diamond Princess

Indonesia has announced it will evacuate 74 of its nationals  from the stricken Diamond Princess cruise liner.

Passengers are continuing to disembark from the ship docked at Yokohama, south of Tokyo.

As of Wednesday, a total of 621 passengers and crew had tested positive for the new coronavirus.

block-time published-time 5.18am GMT

Indonesia currently has no reported cases of coronavirus, but the idyllic holiday island of Bali has been hit by the ripple effect of the crisis, with tourism plummeting. At least one expert says Bali "does not have the capacity" to treat patients if they become sick.

You can read our full story on it below.

Related:  'Bali's been through a lot': holiday island's tourism industry hit by coronavirus fears

block-time published-time 4.46am GMT

The director of disaster response who has been out at the facility housing the new arrivals near Darwin said she is awaiting final number of arrivals but believes it's 170.

Six New Zealanders also arrived on the flight carrying Australians from Japan and were transferred to New Zealand.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06am GMT

block-time published-time 4.42am GMT

Australian passengers from Diamond Princess arrive home

We are just seeing a press conference from Australia, where passengers from the Diamond Cruise ship recently arrived to carry out 14 days of quarantine. The Northern Territory's deputy chief health minister, Dianne Stephens, said some arrivals had minor cold symptoms and will be tested for Covid-19.

There were six people off that plane identified as having minor sniffles and sore throat that we have separated completely, and they will be swabbed this afternoon, and those people have gone straight into an isolation area of the HowardSprings facility, in the same way that we have done that for the work and cohort, people who have had sniffles and colds. If somebody does test positive for COVID-19, we are fully prepared to manage that situation out at Howard Springs, or in the Royal Darwin Hospital and the jurisdictions are ready to come and retrieve patients who require that.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06am GMT

block-time published-time 4.34am GMT

China deaths from virus stand at 2,118

Deaths in China in the past 24 hours were recorded as 114, of which 108 were in Hubei province. This compares to 136 recorded the previous day. The new total for people who have died from Covid-19 in China is now 2,118.

block-time published-time 4.27am GMT

New virus cases drop in China as counting of cases changes again

Let's take a look at today's national figures from China on infections due to the virus.

The national health commission said that in the 24 hours to midnight on Wednesday, there were 394 new cases,  taking confirmed cases across the country to 74,576.

This new cases figure is a significant drop from the 1,749  reported the previous day. It seems to be largely due to another change in the way Hubei province reports cases.

According to the Hubei health commission, "suspected cases" and "confirmed cases" have been separated out again... which I will try to explain below.

You may recall that Hubeichanged its reporting criteria last week to include "clinically diagnosed" cases as confirmed cases. That meant cases diagnosed by a doctor (i.e by using scans and assessing symptoms) were included in "new cases" along with patients who had tested positive using the nucleic  acid test.

At the time, Chinese authorities said this change was to ensure patients who had symptoms but hadn't yet had the tests, could access treatment immediately. There was also the suggestion the change was a way of mitigating anger over insufficient numbers of testing kits.

Last week's change saw the number of cases shoot up by approximately 15,000 on one day, but in reality it reflected the counting change.

From my reading,  the new system as of today  has removed some of those people who were clinically diagnosed if they subsequently tested negative using the nucleic acid test.

"Based on comprehensive analysis, cases with negative nucleic acid test results were subtracted from the confirmed cases, and a total of 279 cases were corrected," the health commission's report said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.27pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.00am GMT

South Korea outbreak centred on church in Daegu

South Korea has recorded 31 news cases today, taking its total to 82.

The country's disease control centre said 30 of the new cases were in the city of Daegu and surrounding Gyeongbuk province south of Seoul.

Of those, 23 are linked with the Shincheonji Church of Jesus, The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony, where the a 61-year-old woman believed to be at the centre of the cluster was a worshipper. The woman is known as Patient 31 because sher was the 31st person recorded with the virus in South Korea.

It is now believed that 37 out of the 82 cases are members of the church's congregation.

Workers from a disinfection service company sanitise the street outside the Shincheonji Church of Jesus in Daegu, South Korea, which is linked to 37 cases of Covid-19. Photograph: Reuters

Of the remaining eight cases announced today, one is in Seoul, two are in hospital in Cheongdo Daenam hospital in Gyeongbuk. The remaning five are being investigated.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.01am GMT

block-time published-time 3.32am GMT

Japanese media says both Diamond Princess ship fatalities were from Japan

The two Diamond Princess passengers who died on Thursday were both Japanese, NHK reported -  an 87-year-old man and an 84-year-old woman. Both victims reportedly had pre-existing medical conditions, the broadcaster said, adding that the man had been hospitalised on 11 February and the woman the following day.

Passengers on board the Diamond Prince Cruise Ship at Yokohama Japan were in quarantine for fourteen days due to the coronavirus outbreak inside the cruise Photograph: Ramiro Agustin Vargas Tabares/ZUMA Wire/REX/Shutterstock

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.38am GMT

block-time published-time 3.30am GMT

On Wednesday, a video by Prof Kentaro Iwata, a specialist in infectious diseases at Kobe University Hospital, was circulated widely on social media.

In it he criticised quarantine measures on the cruise liner, including that there were no designated "green" or "red" zones on the ship that indicated areas that were clear of the virus, or ones where it was present.

He subsequently took the clip down, saying he was informed conditions on the ship had improved.

But on Wednesday he had told BBC radio:

I felt much safer when I was in Africa [during the Ebola crisis] because you know where the virus exists and you know where the patient is. But inside the Diamond Princess you have no idea where the virus is.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41am GMT

block-time published-time 3.21am GMT

Over the past few days there has been increasing criticism of the Japanese authorities' handling of the infection on the cruise line, as infections continued to mount, despite infection control measures being in place.

Japan's health minister, Katsunobu Kato, on Thursday defended Japan's response to the outbreak in parliament, telling lawmakers that officials had taken expert advice and responded to issues on a daily basis.

In a move to reassure the public, the health ministry also issued a statement in both English and Japanese that said all passengers had been required to stay in their cabins since 5 February to contain the virus.

The Guardian's Tokyo correspondent, Justin McCurry,  reports that Kentaro Iwata, a specialist in infectious diseases at Kobe University hospital, said he was not surprised to hear reports that two passengers on the Diamond Princess had died.

"Cruise ships have a lot of elderly passengers, many of whom have chronic diseases and are on medication, so I am not surprised to hear that people have died," Iwata told reporters by video conference from Yokohama on Thursday.

"They are high risk, and we don't have a specific treatment for the virus."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.21am GMT

block-time published-time 3.07am GMT

Two elderly passengers on Diamond Princess die after contracting Covid-19

Some news just breaking that two elderly passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise liner in Japan, have died. They are believed to be a man and a woman in their 80s, according to Japanese broadcasters Kyodo and NHK. Both outlets are citing government sources. We'll bring you more on this story as soon as we have it.

More than 620 of the passengers on the Diamond Princess liner have been infected on the ship, which has been quarantined since 3 February, initially with about 3,700 people on board.

Nationals from Australia, the US, Canada and Hong Kong who have been quarantined on the ship have been airlifted home.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23am GMT

block-time published-time 3.02am GMT

Hello and welcome to the Guardian's live coverage of the coronavirus outbreak.

Here's an update of what we know so far.

•Two people infected with Covid-19 on the Diamond Princess cruise liner, have died, reports say.•Hong Kong citizens evacuated from the Diamond princess have begun arriving home.•New cases in China have fallen to 394 according to the daily national update, taking cases across the country to 74,576.•Total deaths have risen by 114 to 2,118.•Figures across China for new cases have dropped significantly after Hubei province changed the way it counted cases again, to remove the clinically diagnosed cases who have since tested negative to the virus on the test kit.

Two people infected with Covid-19 on the Diamond Princess cruise liner, have died, reports say.

Hong Kong citizens evacuated from the Diamond princess have begun arriving home.

New cases in China have fallen to 394 according to the daily national update, taking cases across the country to 74,576.

Total deaths have risen by 114 to 2,118.

Figures across China for new cases have dropped significantly after Hubei province changed the way it counted cases again, to remove the clinically diagnosed cases who have since tested negative to the virus on the test kit.

You can get up to date on our latest coverage below, including:

•Coronavirus 'could cost global economy $1.1tn in lost income'•China to expel WSJ journalists over 'malicious' coronavirus column•Cruise passengers relieved to be ashore but stranded in Cambodia

Coronavirus 'could cost global economy $1.1tn in lost income'

China to expel WSJ journalists over 'malicious' coronavirus column

Cruise passengers relieved to be ashore but stranded in Cambodia