block-time published-time 5.55pm GMT

Closing summary: Stimulus hopes boost markets despite coronavirus recession fears

We are going to close down this blog after another historic day for global business and markets. Here are some of the main developments:

•The FTSE 100 recorded its second best day on record, with shares surging by 9.05%, the largest percentage gain ever barring 24 November 2008. The FTSE 250 enjoyed a record gain of 8.37%.•Wall Street also enjoyed big gains, as investors looked forward to a stimulus deal passing US Congress. The S&P 500 had gained 7% at the time of writing.•G7 finance ministers and central bankers pledged to do "whatever is necessary" to help their economies recover from the coronavirus.•It came after a string of dire warnings of global recession from closely followed surveys of businesses in the US, UK, eurozone and Japan.

The FTSE 100 recorded its second best day on record, with shares surging by 9.05%, the largest percentage gain ever barring 24 November 2008. The FTSE 250 enjoyed a record gain of 8.37%.

Wall Street also enjoyed big gains, as investors looked forward to a stimulus deal passing US Congress. The S&P 500 had gained 7% at the time of writing.

G7 finance ministers and central bankers pledged to do "whatever is necessary" to help their economies recover from the coronavirus.

It came after a string of dire warnings of global recession from closely followed surveys of businesses in the US, UK, eurozone and Japan.

For more coverage of the global coronavirus outbreak you can visit our live blogs from around the world:

In the US, Trump says he would love to have the country open by April 12th

Related:  Coronavirus US live: Trump says 'I'd love to have the country open' within a month

In the UK, 12,000 NHS workers are set to come out of retirement to battle the outbreak

Related:  UK coronavirus live: 12,000 former NHS workers to return and emergency hospital to open as death toll rises

And in our global coverage, India has  announced a 21-day lockdown for 1.4bn people

Related:  Coronavirus news: India announces 21-day lockdown as global confirmed cases top 400,000

Thanks for reading today, as ever - and join Graeme Wearden again tomorrow morning for more live coverage of markets, economics and business. JJ

block-time published-time 5.28pm GMT

A trainee engineer from Openreach checks his safety harness at the top of a telegraph pole. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images

BT-owned Openreach, which controls the UK's broadband network, has halted all new broadband connections to keep engineers out of homes.

Exceptions include vulnerable customers, those who have no telephone or broadband and customers critical to national infrastructure operations including the NHS, supermarkets, pharmacies, emergency services and utilities. The government has categorised Openreach's 25,000 engineers as key workers.

The company is also in talks with the government about its ability to continue the pace of roll out of full fibre broadband, which is reaching 30,000 new homes each week.

The government's target of 15m full fibre homes by 2025 could be under threat if the coronavirus pandemic persists for many months.

block-time published-time 5.19pm GMT

A look at the historical comparisons for the US markets makes for similarly amazing reading, with only 2008, 1987's Black Monday and the Great Depression as suitable comparisons.

The Dow Jones industrial average's gain of 9.3% today would put it in the top 10 best days on the index, if those gains hold.

However, six of those days came during the Great Depression and its aftermath. In the last 50 years only the global financial crisis and Black Monday come anywhere close.

The S&P 500 is on track to its strongest day since... the 13 March 2020. However, the current 7.9% gain would also be right up there in the record books, rivalled only by the rebounds from those other market crashes.

(The S&P 5oo is younger than the Dow Jones, tracing its origins merely to 1926 rather than 1885, but it is much preferred by professional investors because it is weighted to the companies' market values and tracks more companies.)

block-time published-time 4.57pm GMT

The closing auction more than confirmed that historically strong FTSE 100 performance... it propelled the index to its second best day in history.

The FTSE 100 ended up by 9.05%, a 452-point gain!

The FTSE 250  enjoyed a record day: the 8.37% gain was the strongest since the FTSE began in 1984.

But the 2008 comparisons are a reminder that one good day does not mean the trouble is behind us by any means...

enltrGERMANY'S DAX RISES 11%, BIGGEST ONE-DAY GAIN SINCE NOV. 2008 - it means we are in 2008. One day up, three weeks down.

- Russian Market (@russian_market) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 4.46pm GMT

FTSE 100 and European stock markets record strongest gains since 2008

The late rally on the FTSE 100 has given it the strongest gain since 2008, the last time the world was threatened by a global recession.

If confirmed in the closing auction today's 7.48% gain on London's blue chip index would be the biggest since 24 November 2008.

Aside from 2008 the only time it has risen more was 1987, in the aftermath of Black Monday.

The FTSE 100 has only gained more five times since it started. Photograph: Refinitiv

Germany's Dax gained 10.1%, its biggest gain since 2008 and France's Cac 40 gained 7.6%. The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 gained 7.5%, its biggest gain since 2008.

block-time published-time 4.34pm GMT

It looks like there was a late rally on the FTSE 100 - matching gains elsewhere.

The preliminary closing reading (which will likely be adjusted) showed a 7.5% gain - more than 370 points today. The FTSE rally may have been prompted in part by a slight retreat in the pound, which is now up by 1.6% for the day against the US dollar.

US stocks have extended their rally, with the Dow Jones up by 9.5%, and the S&P 500 is showing a 8.5% gain.

block-time published-time 4.27pm GMT

British Steel's Scunthorpe plant is pictured at dawn in north Lincolnshire, north east England. Photograph: Lindsey Parnaby/AFP via Getty Images

A private jet due to arrive at Doncaster Sheffield airport on Tuesday evening contains aid from China for the UK , writes the Guardian's Rob Davies.

Chinese company Jingye, which sealed a rescue deal for British Steel earlier this month, is sending a private jet laden with medical equipment to the company's Scunthorpe steelworks to help protect workers and keep its blast furnaces running amid the chaos caused by            Covid-19.

Half of the aid package from China will be donated to the community surrounding the steelworks, as nearby local authorities and Lincolnshire hospitals get to grips with the outbreak.

You can read the full story here:

Related:  Chinese company sends aid package to British Steel in Scunthorpe

block-time published-time 4.18pm GMT

In fact, sterling is on course for its biggest one-day jump against the dollar for a year.

There could be more to come for the pound, according to Dean Turner, UK economist at UBS Global Wealth Management. He said:

As the rate of infections continues to rise, the news flow is all one-way. And sentiment in the markets is following. But we should not lose sight of the fact that this crisis will pass. Indeed, amid all the negative news, the success in containing the coronavirus in China and other Asian countries is being overlooked. And this is where the coordinated policy response will really matter. Assuming that firms and workers emerge from the crisis relatively unscathed, fiscal and monetary easing should lay the foundation for a swift rebound for the economy.

An economic recovery, when it materializes, is not consistent with the pound at its current levels. A number of factors have prompted the pound's slump. Demand for safe-haven dollars is one, but the UK's reliance on the "kindness of strangers" is also important given its large current account deficit.

In our view, the UK will cope no worse than others in the downturn, nor will it miss out on the rebound. Thus, we still think that sterling can trade higher by the end of the year.

block-time published-time 4.14pm GMT

The US dollar has surged in recent weeks as companies have scrambled to find the reserve currency wherever they could - even if that meant the forced selling of safe-haven assets such as Treasury bonds that they might otherwise have wanted to hold.

But the Federal Reserve and other central banks appear to have sated that appetite, and the dollar has fallen back.

So far today it is down by 2.2% against sterling: one pound will buy $1.18. That's a bounce back from below $1.15 earlier this week, although still far below the $1.30 rate at the start of the month.

The pound regained some ground against the US dollar on Tuesday - but it remained far below the levels of even a month ago. Photograph: Refinitiv

Here are some snippets from Reuters to help explain the move, which was also affected by the not insignificant prospect of a $2tn fiscal stimulus from the US government:

The US Federal Reserve's efforts to shield the economy from the effects of the coronavirus have - for now - slowed a scramble for dollars that threatened to clog funding markets.

The dollar had gained almost 9% in 11 days in the rush for cash, but it fell on Tuesday, at one point to its weakest since 19 March. Measures of demand for dollars signalled that many businesses and banks felt they had enough for now.

block-time published-time 3.56pm GMT

EDF halves Hinkley Point workforce after physical distancing concerns

EDF Energy plans to cut the 4,000-strong workforce at the Hinkley Point C nuclear construction site by more than half after an outcry over plans to continue construction despite national efforts to stem the spread of the coronavirus.

The company said it would scale back the number of worker on Britain's biggest construction site to less than 2,000 over the coming days after the prime minister told Britons they "must stay at home" through a 21-day lockdown.

The project will keep only skilled workers required for its specialist nuclear supply chain and focus on critical work on nuclear-specific parts of the project.

It will also introduce split shifts, extra buses and staggered breaks to allow for easier social distancing.

EDF Energy's decision follows a report from the Guardian which revealed concerns over the close proximity of workers from across the country who have no choice but to use shared onsite accommodation and transit buses to access the site.

EDF Energy's initial plan included increasing the number of buses to help staff maintain two metres of space between them, as well as banning handshakes.

The slowdown is likely to reignite concerns over the project's costs. EDF Energy said last year that difficult ground conditions on the site meant that costs for the first new nuclear reactor in a generation had climbed by between £1.9bn to £2.9bn from the company's last estimates to around £22bn.

block-time published-time 3.53pm GMT

Neil Armstrong planting an American flag on the moon, Apollo 11 lunar landing, 1969. Photograph: The Art Archive/REX/Shutterstock

If you are among our British readers you were probably watching the prime minister last night as he announced lockdown.

Broadcasting figures show the address on BBC One has rivalled the moon landing for reach (albeit with a much higher population now), as Guardian media business correspondent Mark Sweney says:

enltrBoris Johnson's national address on the coronavirus lock down drew 27.5m across all TV channels. Context: Apollo 13 successful splash down managed 28.6m in 1970, while the Eastenders ep when Dirty Den served Angie divorce papers drew 30m on Christmas Day 1986.

- Mark Sweney (@marksweney) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 3.39pm GMT

The Wall Street gains have also gained a little bit of steam (although a rocky ride may not be out of the question today, given past wrangling over the details of the stimulus).

The benchmark S&P 500 has gained 6.8% so far on Tuesday. The Dow Jones industrial average has now gained 7.7% today, taking it back above 20,000 points. The Nasdaq has gained 6%.

block-time published-time 3.32pm GMT

The prospect of a big fiscal stimulus from the US is doing the trick for equity markets around the world, as well as on Wall Street.

The FTSE 100 in London is up by 6.6% back to 5,320 points, while the Dax in Germany is pushing 8%.

European stock markets rose on Tuesday. Photograph: Refinitiv

The mid-cap FTSE 250 has gained 6.9%.

block-time published-time 3.26pm GMT

Back in construction, Multiplex has become the first major contractor to shut sites voluntarily.

(We reported earlier that the housebuilder Taylor Wimpey has also decided to close all its building sites, show homes and sale centres).

Building Design reports that Multiplex's chief operating officer Callum Tuckett wrote to the firm's 900 staff last night to tell them of the decision, following the government's announcement of a nationwide lockdown.

In London the firm has been working on the 22 Bishopsgate tower in the City, which is nearing completion, the One Nine Elms twin-tower scheme and the revamp of the Elephant & Castle shopping centre.

block-time published-time 3.17pm GMT

Lloyds Banking Group has suspended plans to cut 780 bank branch staff, as it deals with both a surge in customers needing emergency financing and uncertainty over the number of staff needing to self-isolate.

It's yet another example of how companies are having to make u-turns amid these unprecedented circumstances.

In an internal letter to staff seen by the Guardian, Lloyds' retail banking boss Vim Maru said:

We have stopped the structure changes which were due to take place in our customer facing branch teams (announced 26th February) because now is not the right time, either for colleagues or for customers.

The cuts, announced in February, represented a 6% cut to Lloyds' entire bank branch workforce - including those at Bank of Scotland, Lloyds and Halifax - and had been blamed on changing consumer behaviour and a bigger take-up of digital banking.

block-time published-time 3.16pm GMT

The McLaren 765LT at the McLaren headquarters in Woking. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Reuters

More UK factories are shutting up shop as companies digest the implications of the coronavirus lockdon.

Sportscar maker McLaren has stopped all production until the end of April at its Woking plant, while Lotus, owned by China's Geely, is suspending production at its Norfolk plant - adding to Aston Martin's announcement from earlier.

McLaren said:

We are taking this action to ensure the safety of our workforce in light of the latest government advice and so that the company is well placed to resume operations as smoothly as possible in the future.

In Northern Ireland Bombardier is stopping production at the historic Short Brothers aerospace operations, which employ about 3,500 workers.

The factory, which makes wings for Airbus's A220 planes, is in the process of being sold to US company Spirit Aerosystems.

And it's Jasper Jolly here taking over the blog for the next while from Graeme Wearden.

block-time published-time 2.58pm GMT

Data tracking service Now-Casting has crunched today's economic data...and concluded that Europe is topping into recession fast:

enltrA number of economic indicators are out today and the @NowCastingIdeas live model has been crunching numbers to track the European economies. They're all nosediving into recession. Not unexpected but still impressive.            pic.twitter.com/gHZHBSLqbU

- Giovanni Ricco (@ricco_giovanni) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 2.55pm GMT

European commissioner Paolo Gentiloni (a former Italian PM) has tweeted about the G7 conference call today :

enltrAt the #G7 conference call clear commitment for coordination to respond to the global health and economic impacts of            #COVID -19. I shared with finance ministers the strong decisions already taken by            #Eu institutions and member states

- Paolo Gentiloni (@PaoloGentiloni) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 2.44pm GMT

US PMI's plunge: What the experts say

Andrew Hunter of Capital Economics  says today's grim survey of US purchasing managers shows America is heading towards a severe contraction in the next few months.

On past form, the composite PMI is consistent with GDP contracting at a 5% annualised pace, which would be one of the biggest quarterly declines on record. But with the virus continuing to spread rapidly and the lockdowns already in place across parts of the country only likely to be extended, we now suspect that the second-quarter hit will be substantially larger than that.

This further underlines the need for a major fiscal stimulus, if only to help underpin an eventual recovery when the virus is brought under control.

Economist Adam Wolfe of Absolute Strategy Research  agree that the slump in US and Europe is just beginning, given the contraction seen in China already:

enltrThe US and Euro area economies are following in China's wake in response the Covid-19 shock. The composite output PMIs probably have further to fall. pic.twitter.com/d1hlrFIXMu

- adam wolfe (@adamkwolfe) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 2.10pm GMT

US 'already in recession' as output slumps

NEWSFLASH: America's private sector is shrinking at the fastest rate since at least the financial crisis in 2008.

The latest survey of US purchasing managers, from IHS Markit, shows that activity in the U.S. services and manufacturing sectors contracted sharply in March.

This dragged Markit's Flash US composite output index down to 40.5 (from 49.6 in February) the lowest since the survey was created in October 2009. Any reading below 50 shows a contraction.

US companies reported that new business fell, including new exports, as clients responded to the Covid-19 outbreak.

Service sector shrank at a record pace (again, since 2009), while factories had the worst month since the financial crisis over a decade ago.

enltrPreliminary US Markit Composite PMI for March plunged -9.1 points to 40.5, a record low, and biggest one-month drop in over a decade, signaling severe economic contraction. pic.twitter.com/9fVhOJNBwZ

- Patrick Chovanec (@prchovanec) March 24, 2020

This largely mirrors the slump seen in the UK, the eurozone, and Japan earlier today :

Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, fears America is sliding into recession:

"US companies reported the steepest downturn since 2009 in March as measures to limit the COVID-19 outbreak hit businesses across the country.

The service sector has been especially badly affected, with consumer-facing industries such as restaurants, bars and hotels bearing the brunt of the social distancing measures, while travel and tourism has been decimated. However, manufacturing is also reporting a slump in demand, with production falling at a rate not seen since 2009, linked to either weak client demand, lost exports or supply shortages.

"Jobs are already being slashed at a pace not witnessed since the global financial crisis in 2009 as firms either close or reduce capacity amid widespread cost-cutting.

"The survey underscores how the US is likely already in a recession that will inevitably deepen further. The March PMI is roughly indicative of GDP falling at an annualised rate approaching 5%, but the increasing number of virus-fighting lockdowns and closures mean the second quarter will likely see a far steeper rate of decline.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.13pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.54pm GMT

The new Aston Martin Valhalla Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA

Back in the UK, Aston Martin Lagonda plans to stop production at its two factories on Wednesday because of the coronavirus lockdown.

The move brings the struggling luxury carmaker in line with other British automotive brands.

The factories will close from 25 March until at least 20 April, the carmaker said in a statement on Tuesday.

The company had been an outlier among British and EU carmakers, after every high-volume manufacturer across Europe closed factories as lockdowns stopped crucial supplies and threatened the health of workers.

Aston Martin has struggled in the last year as sales of its sports cars have disappointed and costs have overrun. It was forced to accept a bailout investment in January from billionaire investor Lawrence Stroll in return for a short-term cash injection. However, this month it asked Stroll for another £20m to stave off bankruptcy.

The latest closures affect Aston Martin's main site at Gaydon, which employs about 850 workers, alongside its newer facility at St Athan in south Wales, which had been preparing to start production of its DBX.

The DBX, a new SUV, is a key part of Aston Martin's plan to expand sales, targeting female buyers in China in particular. However, the investments required in building a new factory had put the company under financial pressure, leaving it exposed when the coronavirus outbreak caused sales in China to slump.

Aston Martin said it was working with its suppliers and business partners to be ready to restart production when the suspension ends. It also said it was cutting costs such as marketing and changing the timing of spending plans "in order to protect the company's financial position".

block-time published-time 1.51pm GMT

Wall Street surges on US stimulus hopes

Stocks have jumped in New York at the start of trading, on hopes that US politicians could finally agree a stimulus package to combat the economic cost of Covid-19.

The Dow Jones surged by over 1,100 points, bouncing back from its lowest levels since January 2017. The other indices are also up over 5% too.

The open of Wall Street, March 24 2020 Photograph: Bloomberg TV

The rally was sparked by signs that the White House and the Democratic party are - finally - close to agreeing a package of aid measures.

My colleague Ed Helmore explains:

Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer and US treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin appeared on Tuesday morning to be close to a deal over a coronavirus stimulus bill, even as Donald Trump signaled his wish to reopen the economy and continued to attack House speaker Nancy Pelosi over her own stimulus proposal.

"I think we've made a lot of progress," Mnuchin told reporters on Capitol Hill, just before midnight on Monday. "There's still a couple of open issues, but I think we're very hopeful that this can be closed out [on Tuesday]."

Mnuchin said he and Schumer had consulted with the president and Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell on the details of the deal, which is believed to secure around $2tn in aid for workers and businesses.

"We expect to have an agreement tomorrow morning," Schumer said. "There's still a few little differences. Neither of us think they're in any way going to get in the way of a final agreement."

He also added that Trump seemed "very positive" about the talks.

Related:  Coronavirus stimulus bill: Democrats and Republicans appear close to $2tn deal

block-time published-time 1.43pm GMT

G7: We will do what's necessary to fight Covid-19

NEWSFLASH: We're moving towards the 'whatever it takes moment' in the Covid-19 crisis.   The world's most powerful finance ministers and central bankers have just issued a joint statement, pledging to take the necessary steps to address the coronavirus crisis.

They say:

We will do whatever is necessary to restore confidence and econonomic growth, and to protect jobs, businesses and the resilience of the financial system.

Significantly, the G7 says they are committed to "deliver the fiscal effort necessary" to help economies recover rapidly from the current shock, and resume their path towards "stronger and more sustainable economic growth".

That, they say, will include expanding health systems, and taking liquitity support and fiscal expansion (ie government spending) to negate the negative impact of Covid-19

The finance chiefs also insist they are sharing ideas and experiences as they try to tackle the worst recession in decades:

We are cooperating closely to share experiences and strategies so that we may effectively target our efforts to support our citizens and businesses. We are instituting new policies such as providing assistance for employment, telework, and vulnerable populations, and expanding access to childcare and unemployment benefits.

We are also providing liquidity enhancements, guarantees, subsidized loans, tax deferrals, and loan repayment deferrals and, where appropriate, grants for affected companies, especially small and medium-sized businesses.

The finance ministers also pledge to "promote global trade and investment", and to "coordinate on a weekly basis" as they implement these measures and take "further timely and effective actions".

Encouraging.  There's no new commitment for exactly how much governments will spend. But, as a reader points out, you can't put a price tag on 'whatever's necessary' :)

frltrNew: Joint statement from G7 finance ministers and central bankers pledging cooperation in economic efforts. Reminiscent of an important joint communiqué in October 2008. pic.twitter.com/EATe5Pg8jT

- Neil Irwin (@Neil_Irwin) March 24, 2020

enltrStatement of G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. https://t.co/vKdaVhhOFK

- Treasury Department (@USTreasury) March 24, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.10pm GMT

Pub chain Wetherspoons is facing heavy criticism today after telling its staff to get a job in Tesco instead.

The row began after 'Spoons boss Tim Martin told employees they wouldn't be paid until the company had reached a deal with the government to cover 80% of their wages.

That, Labour MP Rachel Reeves points out, isn't acceptable -- as staff could be out of pocked until the end of April. Unions are also shocked that the company isn't providing more help.

Wetherspoons, though, insists it's doing the right thing - and looking to keep staff on despite being forced to shut down, saying:

As we understand it, tens of thousands of hospitality workers and others have already lost their jobs, but Wetherspoon is retaining all its employees, using the government scheme for the purpose for which it is intended,"

"Wetherspoon chairman Tim Martin said to employees in a video that supermarkets were urgently looking for staff, since all trade from pubs, restaurants and cafes had transferred to supermarkets in the last few days.

"Wetherspoon has had urgent calls from supermarkets asking for help in recruitment. Tesco alone urgently needs 20,000 staff, we understand.

"Tim Martin said in the video that staff who wanted to work for Tesco should do so and they will be given first priority when Wetherspoon pubs reopen.

"Wetherspoon believes that the actions it has taken are responsible and sensible in the difficult circumstances."

Related:  Wetherspoons denies 'abandoning' staff in coronavirus crisis

block-time published-time 12.43pm GMT

Amid all the gloom, here's a heartening tale from my colleague Jasper Jolly:

Ineos, the chemicals company controlled by the billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe, is planning to build two hand sanitiser factories in just 10 days as part of the effort to prevent the spread of coronavirus.

The UK's biggest private company by sales aims to produce a million bottles of hand sanitiser a month when the plant is in operation, with talks under way with the NHS on supplying the products to hospitals for free.....

Related:  UK chemicals firm plans to build two hand sanitiser factories in 10 days

Yesterday, drinks giant Diageo  announced it is donating large amounts of alcohol for use in hand sanitisers, following a surge in demand from anxious customers. Some businesses are keen to do their bit.

block-time published-time 12.40pm GMT

Airline's Covid-19 losses doubled to $252bn!

The global airlines body, Iata, has now said that the industry will lose $252bn in revenues this year - more than double its forecast "worst case scenario" from earlier this month as the coronavirus crisis has grown. Iata said European airlines were the most likely to collapse, following earlier warnings that most carriers worldwide would be bankrupt by May. Countries that cover 98% of commercial air passenger revenues now have restricted travel. Director general Alexandre de Juniac called for government aid to airlines "with maximum speed".

We are in an emergency situation - we need a full-speed, massive rescue package now."

block-time published-time 12.24pm GMT

Noon recap

Right, time for a quick summary after another busy morning

Britain's economy is heading into a deep recession, according to the latest survey of UK purchasing managers. Service sector activity is slumping at a record rate as customer-facing firms shut down, while manufacturers are also suffering from weak demand.

Markit, which compiles the report, fears the recession could be on a scale 'not seen in modern history'.

The Eurozone PMIs were equally weak , suggesting the region is also falling into contraction. Both France and Germany's service sectors are weakening at a faster rate than after the 2008 crisis, or the debt crisis.

Construction firms are being hit too - with Taylor Wimpey halting work at its building sites today, and London's Crossrail project being            suspended a few minutes ago.

Many UK shops are now shut, with the government rejecting Sports Direct's claim to be an essential service.

Related:  Mike Ashley's Sports Direct bows to pressure and closes stores

Supermarkets are facing unprecedented pressures - with Waitrose now limiting the number of people allowed in stores, and Sainsbury keeping its Argos outlets open.

Related:  Waitrose limits shopper numbers as physical-distancing measure

Nationwide is cutting opening hours, as banks and building societies come to terms with new 'physical distancing' rules.

Ryanair is asking passengers to be patient, as it struggles with compensation claims after grounding most of its planes.

The Bank of England has predicted that UK banks are strong enough to cope with the Covid-19.....and defended            asking some staff to attend work in person.

Despite the looming recession, the markets are more buoyant today.

•FTSE 100: up 200 points or 4% at 5194•Sterling: up 1.3% at $1.17 vs the US dollar; up 0.3% at (EURO)1.0805 vs the euro•Brent crude: up 2.75% at $27.87 per barrel

FTSE 100: up 200 points or 4% at 5194

Sterling: up 1.3% at $1.17 vs the US dollar; up 0.3% at (EURO)1.0805 vs the euro

Brent crude: up 2.75% at $27.87 per barrel

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT

Coronavirus will likely also spell a further delay to the opening of Crossrail, my colleague Gwyn Topham explains:Transport for London said that all construction sites would be shut temporarily to limit the spread of the virus.  The opening of the London high-capacity rail line has already been delayed by more than two years, with its expected cost now around £18bn rather than £14.8bn. Mike Brown, London's Transport Commissioner, said:

"The Government and the Mayor have given clear instructions to stay safe and to stop travelling in all cases other than critical workers making absolutely essential journeys.

"In line with this, TfL and Crossrail will be bringing all project sites to a temporary Safe Stop unless they need to continue for operational safety reasons. This means that work on all such projects will be temporarily suspended as soon as it is safe to do so. Essential maintenance of the transport network will of course continue."

block-time published-time 12.19pm GMT

Just in: Work on London's massive Crossrail scheme has been suspended.

enltrWork suspended on all Tfl project sites including Crossrail pic.twitter.com/UPl6i4sFeu

- Tom Edwards (@BBCTomEdwards) March 24, 2020

Crossrail, Europe's largest infrastructure project, was already running badly behind schedule -- but clearly authorities have realised that workers can't maintain safe distances while building a massive tunnel underground.

This might also take some pressure off the London transport network, so that purely essential workers (NHS staff, for example) can travel more safely.

block-time published-time 11.59am GMT

A very quiet Bank of England during the Coronavirus outbreak. Photograph: Nils Jorgensen/REX/Shutterstock

Despite the government's tough new lockdown, some staff at the Bank of England and the Financial Conduct Authority (the City watchdog) are at their desks today.

Shruti Chopra of Financial News reports that a "very small percentage" of BoE staff are still required to attend work in Threadneedle Street in the Square Mile today, with a "handful" of essential FCA employees also in their offices.

Boris Johnson was adamant last night that people should do the right thing, and stay at home if at all possible. Despite that instruction to conduct physical distancing, some London underground trains have been packed this morning.

But a spokeswoman for the BoE insists that the central bank is complying with official advice:

"The Bank of England has instigated a number of operational measures to protect the welfare of its staff and ensure that its critical functions will continue to be delivered unhampered.

"In line with latest government guidelines, the bank is asking the maximum number of staff to work at home, consistent with being able to continue delivering its core functions seamlessly."

Here's the full story.

She also has good news about one early Covid-19 victim, an HSBC analyst, who seems to have recovered from the virus:

enltrRemember that HSBC analyst who got coronavirus? He's back to work. Encouraging that it does get better if you strictly follow advice et al https://t.co/rGU9wHcMGs

- Shruti Tripathi Chopra (@shrutitripathi6) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 11.53am GMT

Back in the markets, Wall Street is expected to rally sharply when trading begins in just over 90 minutes.

The Dow Jones industrial average and the S&P 500 are both up over 4% in pre-market trading (a strong recovery from yesterday's 3% slump).

enltrUS future off their up limits: #DOW 19428 +4.50%            #SPX 2336 +4.83%            #NASDAQ 7292 +4.09%            #RUSSELL 1046 +4.66%            #FANG 2797 +3.71%

- IGSquawk (@IGSquawk) March 24, 2020

Traders are watching for signs that Congress is getting close to agreeing a stimulus package to protect the US economy.

But there's also concern that the White House is considering relaxing lockdown measures, because of their impact on growth (as we've seen in t he UK and            the eurozone this morning).

Marketwatch reports:

How much damage can be inflicted on the U.S. economy to try to mitigate the death toll from the coronavirus pandemic before it kills the economy? The Trump White House is increasingly raising that question.

The answer could have grave implications for the health and livelihood of all Americans, amid the outbreak of COVID-19, the infectious disease that has been contracted by more than 300,000 people and claimed nearly 16,000 lives so far since it was first identified in December.

President Trump on Monday signaled a potential shift in his administration's strategy with a late Sunday night tweet saying " we cannot let the cure be worse than the problem itself." He said he would evaluate the administration's containment strategy early next week after a 15-day period elapses.

block-time published-time 11.27am GMT

Full story: Coronavirus is historically bad hit to business activity

Here's my colleague Richard Partington on today's dire PMI reports :

The scale of the global economic damage amid the coronavirus outbreak is becoming clearer after early warning signs showed the steepest plunge in business activity ever recorded in Britain, Japan and the eurozone.

As the pandemic intensifies and more countries shut down large parts of their economies to contain the spread of the virus, the closely-watched purchasing managers indices (PMI) for several of the world's biggest economies fell to the lowest levels since records began more than two decades ago.

With the world sinking into a deep recession, the UK flash PMI for the service sector - which includes restaurants, hotels and banks and accounts for about 80% of the UK economy - crashed to 35.7 on an index where anything above 50.0 separates growth from contraction.

The collapse on the index, which is closely monitored by the Treasury and the Bank of England, outstripped the slump recorded during the depths of the 2008 financial crisis, as emergency public health measures disrupt supply chains and demand for goods and services evaporates.

Related:  Coronavirus: data shows biggest hit to business activity since records began

block-time published-time 11.13am GMT

Ryanair pleads for patience as flights are grounded     A Ryanair passenger jet on the tarmac at Dublin airport yesterday Photograph: Paul Faith/AFP via Getty Images

Ryanair boss Michael O'Leary has asked customers for patience with the processing of refunds or rebooking, in the midst of some passenger disgruntlement with the carrier's response to the coronavirus.

O'Leary said that Ryanair had reduced its office staff by 50% "for social distancing reasons" and was struggling to deal with anything but the most urgent cases and rescue flights. He urged customers not to call, and they would be emailed in the next fortnight.

However, the consumer association Which? said that Ryanair was leaving customers stranded, especially in Spain. It warned passengers abroad not to accept refunds from airlines if they needed to get home, as it would mean they were no longer responsible for rerouting them onto alternative flights.

The Irish carrier, which has not over the years built a store of goodwill from customers, expects virtually all flights to be grounded from today. O'Leary said it had offered its aircraft to EU governments for rescue flights and for the movement of vital medicines and supplies.

O'Leary added that "this crisis will pass" and the airline was doing everything to keep its planes and crew operational and ready to return to flying when Europe is clear of the pandemic.

block-time published-time 11.09am GMT

Back in UK retail.... Sainsbury's is to keep Argos concessions within its supermarkets open despite the chain falling outside the "essential retail" category of stores ordered to close by the government on Monday night.

The retail group's standalone Argos stores and Habitat outlets have shut.

Shopworkers' union Usdaw raised concerns that staff from Argos standalone stores had also been asked to work in Sainsbury's supermarkets.

Dave Gill, Usdaw national officer said:

"With the overwhelming pressure on all food retailers it is inevitable that companies are going to look at redeploying staff within the business. However, this is extremely unsettling for staff in what are already difficult and testing times for everyone.

block-time published-time 10.52am GMT

Bank of England: UK banks are strong enough to handle Covid-19

The Bank of England believes UK banks are strong enough to survive the coronavirus outbreak,  despite forecasting a "more severe" short-term impact than its annual stress tests have been able to simulate.

In the minutes of its latest meeting, released this morning, the Financial Policy Committee said:

The FPC considered that the economic disruption associated with Covid-19 should have less impact on the core banking system than recent stress tests run by the Bank have shown the system can withstand.

It added:

The disruption from Covid-19 would likely be more severe than the stress test in the first phase but the FPC expected that it would ultimately be less protracted and lead to less output loss overall over the course of two years than the ACS [ or annual cyclical scenario ] which contained a very prolonged fall in output.

That should be reassuring, given that the bank's most recent stress tests involved a 4.7% fall in UK GDP, a rise in unemployment to 9.2%, a 33% drop in house prices, an increase in interest rates to 4% and a near-30% drop in the value of the pound versus the US dollar.

block-time published-time 10.45am GMT

The coronavirus outbreak is forcing Nationwide to cut its opening hours.

The building society says most of its 650 branches will now open 10am-2pm Monday to Friday and 9am-12pm on Saturdays. It says 50 have closed.

Nationwide is ending an early opening hours trial for vulnerable people, following last night's order to stay at home.

block-time published-time 10.34am GMT

Despite today's stormy economic data, the pound is rallying this morning.

Sterling has jumped by almost two cents against the US dollar -- lifting it back to $1.1737.

That takes the pound away from the 35-year lows hit last week, but is still a very weak position (it was $1.30 last month, before the market panic over Covid-19 began).

With shares still rallying in Europe too (the FTSE is still up 4%), investors appear to be hoping that the massive stimulus measures taken by central banks and governments around the globe will pay off.

enltrPotential double bottom on cable, looking to break through 1.19 and the it's game time??? pic.twitter.com/Ue9hoVdG77

- Neil Wilson (@marketsneil) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 10.31am GMT

Taylor Wimpey shuts construction sites, axes dividend

UK housebuilders are also reeling from the crisis.

Taylor Wimpey, one of the UK's biggest house builders, has just announced it is closing all its construction sites, show homes and sales centres.

It has axed its 2020 final dividend worth £125m and a planned special dividend worth £360m, and like other companies, is unable to give any financial guidance. It has moved its annual meting on 23 April to its head office in High Wycombe and will provide a dial-in to shareholders.

Rival housebuilder Redrow scrapped its dividend payment to shareholders due on 9 April, worth £37m, and said:

"As the government's escalating measures to contain the spread of the virus take effect, it is inevitable our sales rate will be seriously impaired over the coming weeks and build output will be significantly affected by labour and material shortages.

We also expect outlet openings to slip as local authorities delay planning committee meetings."

block-time published-time 10.19am GMT

Confirmation that UK firms are slammed on the brakes:

enltrJob postings on @IndeedUK are now 15% below last year's trend. They're almost down the 1st Jan level (usually the annual low point). This shows how much hiring slows down when the economic outlook worsens.            https://t.co/4d3qVrw3AX           pic.twitter.com/rYiM4jZMVT

- Pawel Adrjan (@PawelAdrjan) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 10.09am GMT

The slump in activity across the UK this month is just a taste of the economic downturn ahead.

With more firms shutting their doors and cancelling orders, output will keep slumping and unemployment will keep rising.

Duncan Brock,  Group Director at CIPS  [Chartered Institute of Procurement & Supply] agrees that firms are in an unprecedented crisis.

Here's his take on today's PMI report (based on surveys of hundreds of purchasing managers at UK firms):

"Just as the economy began to strengthen at the beginning of the year, the shock of this deepening global health crisis has flung businesses into the abyss, with the worst overall downturn in manufacturing and services for more than two decades.

"The services sector received the largest blow as citizens reduced their social activity and leisure activities were abandoned. The sector recorded its worst drop in activity since 1996 when the survey began. New orders also took a significant hit as the rapid realisation of the significance of COVID-19 applied an abrupt brake on consumer-facing businesses.

"Shortages of manufacturing components following global factory closures dislocated manufacturing supply chains and led to the greatest lengthening of delivery times since the index began in 1992. A surge in demand for food and pharmaceutical products led to rising output in some parts of the manufacturing sector, but this was more than offset by a slump in production elsewhere.

"As more serious measures are considered by the UK Government, the effect of coronavirus on businesses will get much worse. Even with interest rates cuts and an injection of cash into the economy to support struggling businesses, the inevitable rise in unemployment is sure to follow along with business failures especially amongst SMEs.

"As more initiatives are rightly introduced to protect the health of the nation, this emergency will have a long-lasting impact on business life as we know it."

block-time published-time 9.56am GMT

Customer-facing UK companies such as hotels & restaurants, sports centres, gyms and hair salons have suffered the steepest fall in activity seen since Markit's PMI survey began in 1996.

And with many now forced to close, the economy will clearly keep shrinking in the months ahead.

Markit adds:

The initial impact of emergency public health measures was also reflected in record downturns in activity across transport & travel and the vast business-to-business services category

block-time published-time 9.52am GMT

Overall, UK manufacturing output is shrinking at the sharpest pace since July 2012 - with transport companies (understandably) having a brutal month as Britain self-isolates:

But food and drink firms have been busy, as families prepare for the lockdown.

Markit says:

Only producers in the food & drink and chemicals & plastics sectors reported growth of output in March. The former reflected higher demand due to stockpiling by households, while the latter was driven by a surge in production within the pharmaceuticals sector.

At the other end of the scale, the transport goods sector registered the largest slump in output during March.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.53am GMT

block-time published-time 9.50am GMT

There's broad agreement that today's UK PMI report is really, really bad.... (although we already know the causes, of course!)

enltrBlimey. Britain's services sector, the engine of the UK economy, contracted more than ever in March. Purchasing Manager's Index down from 53.2 points to 35.7. Anything below 50 points is a contraction. Worst since the data series began in 1998 pic.twitter.com/tRcuTcOALm

- Ed Conway (@EdConwaySky) March 24, 2020

enltrUnsurprisingly terrible plunge in surveyed economic activity - record UK PMI low not even required in current circumstances to tell us, like rest of Europe, US etc, economy undergoing sharp contraction pic.twitter.com/UzTLuvzD6Y

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) March 24, 2020

enltrFlash #PMI shows major hit to            #UK economy in March from            #coronavirus as            #services &            #manufacturing output contracted most in series history; composite index down to 37.1 (53.0 in Feb). Services took biggest hit as PMI at record low of 35.7 (53.2); manufacturing PMI at 48.0 (51.7)

- Howard Archer (@HowardArcherUK) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 9.42am GMT

UK heads for deep recession as economy shrinks in March

NEWSFLASH: The UK economy is contracting at its fastest rate in at least two decades, as the service sector is hit extremely hard by the Covid-19 outbreak.

Data firm Markit reports that business activity across services and manufacturing has slumped this month, as the coronavirus deals the UK economy "a more severe blow than at any time since comparable figures were first available over 20 years ago".

Output has slumped, new orders have contracted at their fastest pace since 2008, and business expectations have absolutely cratered.

This has dragged Markit's survey of UK purchasing managers down to just 37.1  in March, down from 53.0  in February. That shows an extremely sharp fall in activity.

It's the worst reading since the survey began in 1998, and means the economy is contracting much faster than after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008.

Such a low number suggests a deep recession is inevitable this year (understandably, with so many businesses now closed due to coronavirus measures).

The services sector PMI (which covered much of the UK economy) slumped to just 35.7, from 53.2 in February.

The manufacturing PMI fell to 48.0 from 51.7 ( but the true picture is worse, as the PMI calculation assumes that long delays for supplies are a sign of a strong economy )

enltrFlash UK PMI drops to record low of 37.1 in March, as the COVID-19 pandemic dealt a more severe blow to the UK economy than during the financial crisis, even before more stringent measures for shops, pubs and restaurants announced last Friday. More here: https://t.co/l6mZjC7JDw           pic.twitter.com/F4nMuCgYtV

- IHS Markit PMI(TM) (@IHSMarkitPMI) March 24, 2020

Chris Williamson, Chief Business Economist at IHS Markit, says a recession 'not seen in modern history' is now likely:

"The surveys highlight how the COVID-19 outbreak has already dealt the UK economy an initial blow even greater than that seen at the height of the global financial crisis.

With additional measures to contain the spread of the virus set to further paralyse large parts of the economy in coming months, such as business closures and potential lockdowns, a recession of a scale we have not seen in modern history is looking increasingly likely.

"Historical comparisons indicate that the March survey reading is consistent with GDP falling at a quarterly rate of 1.5-2.0%, a decline which is sufficiently large to push the economy into a contraction in the first quarter. However, this decline will likely be the tip of the iceberg and dwarfed by what we will see in the second quarter as further virus containment measures take their toll and the downturn escalates.

"Any growth was confined to small pockets of the economy such as food manufacturing, pharmaceuticals and healthcare. Demand elsewhere has collapsed, both for goods and services, as increasing numbers of households and businesses at home and abroad close their doors.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47am GMT

block-time published-time 9.16am GMT

Economists agree that the eurozone is plunging into a deep downturn, although it's hard to say quite how bad it will be....

enltrEurozone preliminary PMI estimate plunges to a record low 31.4 in March from 51.5 in Feb. Services 28.4, manufacturing 39.5. Data was collected between 12-23 March, so I suspect final PMI will be even lower. Equates to big GDP fall, but can't put a real fig on it (see 08 crisis). pic.twitter.com/SsXayqT72a

- Rupert Seggins (@Rupert_Seggins) March 24, 2020

enltrItalian and Spanish PMIs will be published on 1-3 April but today's flash releases already confirm that the economic slump will be worse than in core countries, and much deeper than during the Global Financial Crisis. pic.twitter.com/M3FHQepZkj

- Frederik Ducrozet (@fwred) March 24, 2020

enltr????Euro area PMIs confirm that the economy suffered an unprecedented collapse in business activity in March?? The unprecedented slumps in demand and business sentiment prompted the largest monthly cull in staffing levels since July 2009. pic.twitter.com/KoVarK4lwr

- Danske Bank Research (@Danske_Research) March 24, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.20am GMT

block-time published-time 9.14am GMT

Today's dire PMI survey shows that the eurozone economy is shrinking fast, says Chris Williamson, Chief Business Economist at IHS Markit:

"Business activity across the eurozone collapsed in March to an extent far exceeding that seen even at the height of the global financial crisis. Steep downturns were seen in France, Germany and across the rest of the euro area as governments took increasingly tough measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus.

"The March PMI is indicative of GDP slumping at a quarterly rate of around 2%, and clearly there's scope for the downturn to intensify further as even more draconian policies to deal with the virus are potentially implemented in coming months.

"Demand for many goods and services has fallen dramatically, while near-record supply chain delays have stymied production and business closures mean an increasingly large proportion of the economy is being mothballed.

"Employment is already falling at a rate not seen since July 2009 as despair about the outlook broadens. Business sentiment about the year ahead has plunged to the gloomiest on record, suggesting policymakers' efforts to date have failed to brighten the darkening picture."

block-time published-time 9.09am GMT

Eurozone business activity collapses as Covid-19 pandemic rages

NEWSFLASH: Eurozone economic output is slumping this month, at a rate that far exceeds the worst moments of the financial crisis or the euro debt crisis.

Data firm Markit's monthly survey of purchasing managers, just released, has crashed to its lowest level since it was created in 1998 -- at just 31.4.

That's a dramatic slump from February's 51.6 -- showing "an unprecedented collapse in business activity" (echoing what we've already heard from France and Germany) [reminder: anything below 50 = contraction].

Europe's services sector was especially hard hit, especially consumer-facing industries such as travel, tourism and restaurants. But factories are also shrinking sharply, due to weak demand and restrictions on workers' travel.

•Flash Eurozone Services PMI Activity Index(2) at 28.4 (52.6 in February). Record low (since July 1998).•Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI Output Index(4) at 39.5 (48.7 in February). 131-month low.•Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI (3) at 44.8 (49.2 in February). 92-month low

Flash Eurozone Services PMI Activity Index(2) at 28.4 (52.6 in February). Record low (since July 1998).

Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI Output Index(4) at 39.5 (48.7 in February). 131-month low.

Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI (3) at 44.8 (49.2 in February). 92-month low

enltrCOVID-19 caused the largest collapse in business activity ever recorded in the eurozone, according to our data. The Composite Output PMI fell to 31.4, falling over 20 points and signalling a quarterly contraction of approximately -2%. More: https://t.co/hKFPEEwKhI           pic.twitter.com/kT7tGWLN9p

- IHS Markit PMI(TM) (@IHSMarkitPMI) March 24, 2020

Eurozone bosses are also extremely gloomy about the future, and slashing their workforces in response. Markit says:

Expectations of future output also deteriorated markedly to reach an all-time low, with record degrees of pessimism about the year ahead seen in both manufacturing and services.

The unprecedented slumps in demand and business sentiment prompted the largest monthly cull in staffing levels since July 2009.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.11am GMT

block-time published-time 8.44am GMT

Germany heads for steep recession

Germany's service sector has also contracted extremely sharply this month.

Data firm Markit reports that its flash Germany Services PMI Activity Index has slumped to just 34.5, from 52.5 in February - a record low.

Factory output also contracted again, with the manufacturing PMI sliding to 45.7 from 48.0 (further away from the 50-point mark showing stagnation).

enltrGerman PMIs consistent with GDP contraction of over 8% annualised. Manufacturing PMI comes out *6 points* above consensus, but once again due to supply-side disruptions (delivery times). Markit: "the situation is much worse than the headline PMI suggests". pic.twitter.com/KUF3Ut2GXL

- Frederik Ducrozet (@fwred) March 24, 2020

Phil Smith, Principal Economist at IHS Markit, says Germany is heading for a deep recession:

"The unprecedented collapse in the PMI underscores how Germany is headed for recession, and a steep one at that. The March data are indicative of GDP falling at a quarterly rate of around 2%, and the escalation of measures to contain the virus outbreak mean we should be braced for the downturn to further intensify in the second quarter.

The service sector has so far borne the brunt of the government's measures to stem the spread of COVID-19, with activity falling to the greatest extent in almost 23 years of data collection, and at a rate that already far surpasses anything seen even during the depths of the global financial crisis.

Smith also warns that the manufacturing sector is probably worse than today's report suggests -- because long delivery times and low stock levels boost  the PMI (because they typically show a strong economy).

block-time published-time 8.37am GMT

French PMI slumps at a record pace

Good grief! France's economy is shrinking at an alarmingly fast rate, as the coronavirus outbreak hurts businesses badly.

The latest survey of French purchasing managers shows that activity shrank at a record pace in March (the survey goes back to the late 1990s).

Overall new orders placed with French businesses fell at the fastest pace in the series history too, with services firms particularly badly hit. This forced firms cut their staff numbers for the first time in nearly three and-a-half years, at the fastest rate since April 2013

This dragged the Flash France Composite Output Index down to just 30.2 in March, from 51.9 in February - a record low. Anything below 50 shows a contraction.

The service sector was particularly badly hit too:

•Flash France Services Activity Index at 29.0 in March (52.6 in February), series low•Flash France Manufacturing Output Index at 35.6 in March (49.0 in February), 132-month low•Flash France Manufacturing PMI at 42.9 in March (49.7 in February), 86-month low

Flash France Services Activity Index at 29.0 in March (52.6 in February), series low

Flash France Manufacturing Output Index at 35.6 in March (49.0 in February), 132-month low

Flash France Manufacturing PMI at 42.9 in March (49.7 in February), 86-month low

It's an extremely worrying sign for France's economy, and the wider economy.

enltrFrench PMI: there's no word for that. ?? pic.twitter.com/5x6wSFo3zG

- Frederik Ducrozet (@fwred) March 24, 2020

enltrFrance services sector PMI plunges below GFC levels according to @IHSMarkitPMI (preliminary data).            #Covid19           #recession           pic.twitter.com/iWco6LTxdn

- Marc Brütsch (@MarcBruetsch) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 8.28am GMT

Gove: Sports Direct will not be opening.

It appears that Sports Direct has been forced to abandon its attempt to defy the government's lockdown, and keep its stores open.

Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove just told the BBC Today Programme that the government has made it clear that this decision was wrong.

Management have got the message, and Sports Direct stores will not be open, he insisted.

enltrMichael Gove says on Radio 4's Today: "the management of that store have got the message and Sports Direct will now not be open." The message should not have been necessary. Mike Ashley was prepared to put lives at risk - workers and customers - for money. Disgusting.

- George Caulkin (@GeorgeCaulkin) March 24, 2020

enltrMichael Gove says the government told Sports Direct not to open stores and Mike Ashley has now agreed.

- Jim Waterson (@jimwaterson) March 24, 2020

Clearly the government wasn't convinced by SPD's argument that the public needed to nip to the high street to buy home gym equipment....

block-time published-time 8.24am GMT

European stock markets are also bouncing, despite the prospect of a dire recession this year:

block-time published-time 8.12am GMT

UK stock market opens higher

In a welcome relief to investors, Britain's stock market is rebounding from Monday's rout.

The blue-chip FTSE 100 has jumped by almost 4% in early trading, up 199 points at 5190 (last night it closed at its lowest point since 2011).

The London Stock Exchange itself is the top riser (+10%), followed by life insurance and financial services group Prudential  (8.3%), and cruise operator Carnival  (9%) (whose cruises are currently mothballed).

The FTSE 250  index of mid-sized companies has also bounced, up nearly 3% at 13,504.

Ipek Ozkardeskay a, senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, warns that the markets are pinning their hopes on a US stimulus deal -- where there's still conflict on Capitol Hill.

Investors have their hopes tied to the $2-trillion rescue package that needs to get signed by the Congress, yet apparently there are controversies among policymakers on how to spend this money.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says the help is destined to corporations first, not workers and their families. While spending on climate change related issues are said to pull politicians apart and prevent the deal from getting signed. Yet a delayed deal is damaging for both parties, especially now that the coronavirus-induced lockdowns accelerate across the United States as well.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.13am GMT

block-time published-time 8.01am GMT

A currency trader in Seoul, South Korea, today Photograph: Lee Jin-man/AP

Asia-Pacific stock markets have rallied overnight, despite the dire PMI reports from Japan and Australia.

All the main indices have rebounded from Monday's slump, led by Japan and South Korea.

•Japan's Nikkei: up 7.1%•South Korea's KOSPI: 9%•China's CSI 300: up 2.7%•Australia's S&P/ASX 200: +4%

Japan's Nikkei: up 7.1%

South Korea's KOSPI: 9%

China's CSI 300: up 2.7%

Australia's S&P/ASX 200: +4%

enltrAsian stocks bask in their best day in four years buoyed by the Fed's unprecedented bond buying program https://t.co/xnXflim7oJ           pic.twitter.com/oKuITwtqsL

- Bloomberg (@business) March 24, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.45am GMT

block-time published-time 7.56am GMT

Australia's economy is also having a torrid month.

The Australian Services PMI, released today, has slumped to a record low of 39.8 as restaurants, cafes and tourism were hit hard by travel bans and cancellations of events and concerts.

That shows a very sharp contraction.

enltrFlash #PMI data indicated business activity across            #Australia private sector fell at a steeper rate in March, led by a sharp fall in services activity as COVID-19 hits demand. Read more:            https://t.co/sTGq4z87dX           pic.twitter.com/Tciyp8Xy1S

- IHS Markit PMI(TM) (@IHSMarkitPMI) March 24, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.57am GMT

block-time published-time 7.43am GMT

Japanese PMIs show economic slump

Japan's economy has suffered a slump in activity this month, according to the latest purchasing managers survey.

Activity at Japanese services sectors shrank at the fastest pace since at least 2007 in March, while factories contracted at the fastest rate since the aftermath of Lehman Brothers' collapse.

It's a clear sign that Japan's economy is weakening fast, and of course they're not alone!

Reuters has the details:

The au Jibun BankFlash Japan Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) fell to a seasonally adjusted 44.8 from a final 47.8 in February, its lowest since April 2009.

The au Jibun BankFlash Japan Services PMI index slumped to a seasonally adjusted 32.7 from the previous month's 46.8, its lowest since the start of the services sector survey in September 2007.

enltr #Japan 's economic downturn deepens drastically in March, dragged down by a sharp contraction in the service sector, according to            #PMI data as            #coronavirus outbreak led to plummeting tourism, event cancellations and supply chain disruptions. Read more:            https://t.co/t8fIv8YsoD           pic.twitter.com/2UUJKAN9i7

- IHS Markit PMI(TM) (@IHSMarkitPMI) March 24, 2020

enltrJapan services PMI is in full financial crisis territory, worse than during the 2011 earthquake and Fukushima nuclear disaster, and this is a country that's less visibly impacted by coronavirus now than any other large advanced economy in the world. pic.twitter.com/THy3OYoUsK

- Mike Brrrrrd (@Birdyword) March 24, 2020

block-time published-time 7.20am GMT

The agenda: UK and eurozone PMIs to show economic slump

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business.

With Britain now in lockdow n, we're about to learn how badly the coronavirus has hurt the UK economy. And it's going to be grim.

A new survey of purchasing managers at service sector firms and factories across the country is going to show just how badly exports and output have fallen this month, and how many firms have slashed jobs.

These PMI surveys are designed to give a really up-to-date healthcheck on what's happening in the economy right now. But of course, we already know that self-isolation measures to slow Covid-19 are having a chilling impact on growth.

So the UK 'composite PMI', which covers much of the economy, is certain to tumble into contraction territory (below 50 points).

The eurozone PMIs are likely to show an even more painful contraction, as lockdowns in Italy, France, Spain and Germany have already hurt businesses badly.

With factories and services firms in Asia also badly hit by Covid-19, and American cities now enforcing lockdowns, a global recession in 2020 looks inevitable.

Last night, the International Monetary Fund warned that it could be worse than 2008.

IMF Kristalina Georgieva said:

First, the global economic outlook for 2020 is expected to be negative. We will face recession at least as bad as during the global financial crisis or worse, but we expect recovery in 2021.

enltrFirst, the global economic outlook for 2020 is expected to be negative. We will face recession at least as bad as during the global financial crisis or worse, but we expect recovery in 2021. Countries should undertake more bold fiscal actions. (2/4) https://t.co/Ek1DT1ZpSQ

- Kristalina Georgieva (@KGeorgieva) March 23, 2020

enltrThird, many countries are turning to the IMF for financial assistance. To date, we have received close to 80 requests and we stand ready to deploy all our US$1 trillion lending capacity. (4/4) https://t.co/Ek1DT1ZpSQ           #COVID19           #coronavirus           pic.twitter.com/0bPD9V7iyC

- Kristalina Georgieva (@KGeorgieva) March 23, 2020  Also coming up today

Global stock markets are expected to rebound today, after slumping yesterday.

Investors have had time to digest the latest extraordinary action from the US Federal Reserve ( unlimited money printing until morale improves ), and are still hoping American politicians will agree a stimulus package.

enltrEuropean Opening Calls: #FTSE 5166 +3.45%            #DAX 9101 +4.12%            #CAC 4056 +3.61%            #AEX 441 +4.16%            #MIB 16315 +4.85%            #IBEX 6499 +4.32%            #OMX 1340 +3.72%            #STOXX 2575 +3.59%            #IGOpeningCall

- IGSquawk (@IGSquawk) March 24, 2020

Non-essential UK retailers will be shutting their doors today - it's your last chance to buy a meaty, or vegany, treat from Greggs, or a new outfit from

But essential services will continue to operate..... which (believe it or not) Sports Direct believes it qualifies for as a 'sports and fitness retailer'.

Related:  Sports Direct says it will stay open amid coronavirus lockdown

WH Smith is also "positioning itself to government as an essential retailer", as it sells newspapers and magazines.

We'll keep an eye on whether these arguments holds water through the day....

The agenda •9am GMT: Eurozone composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump from 51.6 to 38.8•9.30am GMT: UK composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump to 45.1 from 53.0•1.45pm GMT: US composite 'flash' PMI for March•2pm GMT: US New Home sales for February

9am GMT: Eurozone composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump from 51.6 to 38.8

9.30am GMT: UK composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump to 45.1 from 53.0

1.45pm GMT: US composite 'flash' PMI for March

2pm GMT: US New Home sales for February

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.27am GMT

8644 2020-03-24T18:15:00Z true 2020-03-24T07:39:25Z false false 2020-03-24T17:58:48Z false UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/dgdkg

false true https://media.guim.co.uk/119e78808492e9201febe156fcc24743c27a5921/0_137_5385_3231/500.jpg false en true We are going to close down this blog after another historic day for global business and markets. Here are some of the main developments: The FTSE 100 recorded its second best day on record, with shares surging by 9.05%, the largest percentage gain ever barring 24 November 2008. The FTSE 250 enjoyed a record gain of 8.37%. Wall Street also enjoyed big gains, as investors looked forward to a stimulus deal passing US Congress. The S&P 500 had gained 7% at the time of writing. G7 finance ministers and central bankers pledged to do "whatever is necessary" to help their economies recover from the coronavirus. It came after a string of dire warnings of global recession from closely followed surveys of businesses in the US, UK, eurozone and Japan. For more coverage of the global coronavirus outbreak you can visit our live blogs from around the world: In the US, Trump says he would love to have the country open by April 12th In the UK, 12,000 NHS workers are set to come out of retirement to battle the outbreak And in our global coverage, India has announced a 21-day lockdown for 1.4bn people Thanks for reading today, as ever - and join Graeme Wearden again tomorrow morning for more live coverage of markets, economics and business. JJ BT-owned Openreach, which controls the UK's broadband network, has halted all new broadband connections to keep engineers out of homes. Exceptions include vulnerable customers, those who have no telephone or broadband and customers critical to national infrastructure operations including the NHS, supermarkets, pharmacies, emergency services and utilities. The government has categorised Openreach's 25,000 engineers as key workers. The company is also in talks with the government about its ability to continue the pace of roll out of full fibre broadband, which is reaching 30,000 new homes each week. The government's target of 15m full fibre homes by 2025 could be under threat if the coronavirus pandemic persists for many months. A look at the historical comparisons for the US markets makes for similarly amazing reading, with only 2008, 1987's Black Monday and the Great Depression as suitable comparisons. The Dow Jones industrial average's gain of 9.3% today would put it in the top 10 best days on the index, if those gains hold. However, six of those days came during the Great Depression and its aftermath. In the last 50 years only the global financial crisis and Black Monday come anywhere close. The S&P 500 is on track to its strongest day since... the 13 March 2020. However, the current 7.9% gain would also be right up there in the record books, rivalled only by the rebounds from those other market crashes. (The S&P 5oo is younger than the Dow Jones, tracing its origins merely to 1926 rather than 1885, but it is much preferred by professional investors because it is weighted to the companies' market values and tracks more companies.) The closing auction more than confirmed that historically strong FTSE 100 performance... it propelled the index to its second best day in history. The FTSE 100 ended up by 9.05%, a 452-point gain! The FTSE 250 enjoyed a record day: the 8.37% gain was the strongest since the FTSE began in 1984. But the 2008 comparisons are a reminder that one good day does not mean the trouble is behind us by any means... The late rally on the FTSE 100 has given it the strongest gain since 2008, the last time the world was threatened by a global recession. If confirmed in the closing auction today's 7.48% gain on London's blue chip index would be the biggest since 24 November 2008. Aside from 2008 the only time it has risen more was 1987, in the aftermath of Black Monday. Germany's Dax gained 10.1%, its biggest gain since 2008 and France's Cac 40 gained 7.6%. The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 gained 7.5%, its biggest gain since 2008. It looks like there was a late rally on the FTSE 100 - matching gains elsewhere. The preliminary closing reading (which will likely be adjusted) showed a 7.5% gain - more than 370 points today. The FTSE rally may have been prompted in part by a slight retreat in the pound, which is now up by 1.6% for the day against the US dollar. US stocks have extended their rally, with the Dow Jones up by 9.5%, and the S&P 500 is showing a 8.5% gain. A private jet due to arrive at Doncaster Sheffield airport on Tuesday evening contains aid from China for the UK, writes the Guardian's Rob Davies. Chinese company Jingye, which sealed a rescue deal for British Steel earlier this month, is sending a private jet laden with medical equipment to the company's Scunthorpe steelworks to help protect workers and keep its blast furnaces running amid the chaos caused by Covid-19. Half of the aid package from China will be donated to the community surrounding the steelworks, as nearby local authorities and Lincolnshire hospitals get to grips with the outbreak. You can read the full story here: In fact, sterling is on course for its biggest one-day jump against the dollar for a year. There could be more to come for the pound, according to Dean Turner, UK economist at UBS Global Wealth Management. He said: As the rate of infections continues to rise, the news flow is all one-way. And sentiment in the markets is following. But we should not lose sight of the fact that this crisis will pass. Indeed, amid all the negative news, the success in containing the coronavirus in China and other Asian countries is being overlooked. And this is where the coordinated policy response will really matter. Assuming that firms and workers emerge from the crisis relatively unscathed, fiscal and monetary easing should lay the foundation for a swift rebound for the economy. An economic recovery, when it materializes, is not consistent with the pound at its current levels. A number of factors have prompted the pound's slump. Demand for safe-haven dollars is one, but the UK's reliance on the "kindness of strangers" is also important given its large current account deficit. In our view, the UK will cope no worse than others in the downturn, nor will it miss out on the rebound. Thus, we still think that sterling can trade higher by the end of the year. The US dollar has surged in recent weeks as companies have scrambled to find the reserve currency wherever they could - even if that meant the forced selling of safe-haven assets such as Treasury bonds that they might otherwise have wanted to hold. But the Federal Reserve and other central banks appear to have sated that appetite, and the dollar has fallen back. So far today it is down by 2.2% against sterling: one pound will buy $1.18. That's a bounce back from below $1.15 earlier this week, although still far below the $1.30 rate at the start of the month. Here are some snippets from Reuters to help explain the move, which was also affected by the not insignificant prospect of a $2tn fiscal stimulus from the US government: The US Federal Reserve's efforts to shield the economy from the effects of the coronavirus have - for now - slowed a scramble for dollars that threatened to clog funding markets. The dollar had gained almost 9% in 11 days in the rush for cash, but it fell on Tuesday, at one point to its weakest since 19 March. Measures of demand for dollars signalled that many businesses and banks felt they had enough for now. EDF Energy plans to cut the 4,000-strong workforce at the Hinkley Point C nuclear construction site by more than half after an outcry over plans to continue construction despite national efforts to stem the spread of the coronavirus. The company said it would scale back the number of worker on Britain's biggest construction site to less than 2,000 over the coming days after the prime minister told Britons they "must stay at home" through a 21-day lockdown. The project will keep only skilled workers required for its specialist nuclear supply chain and focus on critical work on nuclear-specific parts of the project. It will also introduce split shifts, extra buses and staggered breaks to allow for easier social distancing. EDF Energy's decision follows a report from the Guardian which revealed concerns over the close proximity of workers from across the country who have no choice but to use shared onsite accommodation and transit buses to access the site. EDF Energy's initial plan included increasing the number of buses to help staff maintain two metres of space between them, as well as banning handshakes. The slowdown is likely to reignite concerns over the project's costs. EDF Energy said last year that difficult ground conditions on the site meant that costs for the first new nuclear reactor in a generation had climbed by between £1.9bn to £2.9bn from the company's last estimates to around £22bn. If you are among our British readers you were probably watching the prime minister last night as he announced lockdown. Broadcasting figures show the address on BBC One has rivalled the moon landing for reach (albeit with a much higher population now), as Guardian media business correspondent Mark Sweney says: The Wall Street gains have also gained a little bit of steam (although a rocky ride may not be out of the question today, given past wrangling over the details of the stimulus). The benchmark S&P 500 has gained 6.8% so far on Tuesday. The Dow Jones industrial average has now gained 7.7% today, taking it back above 20,000 points. The Nasdaq has gained 6%. The prospect of a big fiscal stimulus from the US is doing the trick for equity markets around the world, as well as on Wall Street. The FTSE 100 in London is up by 6.6% back to 5,320 points, while the Dax in Germany is pushing 8%. The mid-cap FTSE 250 has gained 6.9%. Back in construction, Multiplex has become the first major contractor to shut sites voluntarily. (We reported earlier that the housebuilder Taylor Wimpey has also decided to close all its building sites, show homes and sale centres). Building Design reports that Multiplex's chief operating officer Callum Tuckett wrote to the firm's 900 staff last night to tell them of the decision, following the government's announcement of a nationwide lockdown. In London the firm has been working on the 22 Bishopsgate tower in the City, which is nearing completion, the One Nine Elms twin-tower scheme and the revamp of the Elephant & Castle shopping centre. Lloyds Banking Group has suspended plans to cut 780 bank branch staff, as it deals with both a surge in customers needing emergency financing and uncertainty over the number of staff needing to self-isolate. It's yet another example of how companies are having to make u-turns amid these unprecedented circumstances. In an internal letter to staff seen by the Guardian, Lloyds' retail banking boss Vim Maru said: We have stopped the structure changes which were due to take place in our customer facing branch teams (announced 26th February) because now is not the right time, either for colleagues or for customers. The cuts, announced in February, represented a 6% cut to Lloyds' entire bank branch workforce - including those at Bank of Scotland, Lloyds and Halifax - and had been blamed on changing consumer behaviour and a bigger take-up of digital banking. More UK factories are shutting up shop as companies digest the implications of the coronavirus lockdon. Sportscar maker McLaren has stopped all production until the end of April at its Woking plant, while Lotus, owned by China's Geely, is suspending production at its Norfolk plant - adding to Aston Martin's announcement from earlier. McLaren said: We are taking this action to ensure the safety of our workforce in light of the latest government advice and so that the company is well placed to resume operations as smoothly as possible in the future. In Northern Ireland Bombardier is stopping production at the historic Short Brothers aerospace operations, which employ about 3,500 workers. The factory, which makes wings for Airbus's A220 planes, is in the process of being sold to US company Spirit Aerosystems. And it's Jasper Jolly here taking over the blog for the next while from Graeme Wearden. Data tracking service Now-Casting has crunched today's economic data...and concluded that Europe is topping into recession fast: European commissioner Paolo Gentiloni (a former Italian PM) has tweeted about the G7 conference call today: Andrew Hunter of Capital Economics says today's grim survey of US purchasing managers shows America is heading towards a severe contraction in the next few months. On past form, the composite PMI is consistent with GDP contracting at a 5% annualised pace, which would be one of the biggest quarterly declines on record. But with the virus continuing to spread rapidly and the lockdowns already in place across parts of the country only likely to be extended, we now suspect that the second-quarter hit will be substantially larger than that. This further underlines the need for a major fiscal stimulus, if only to help underpin an eventual recovery when the virus is brought under control. Economist Adam Wolfe of Absolute Strategy Research agree that the slump in US and Europe is just beginning, given the contraction seen in China already: NEWSFLASH: America's private sector is shrinking at the fastest rate since at least the financial crisis in 2008. The latest survey of US purchasing managers, from IHS Markit, shows that activity in the U.S. services and manufacturing sectors contracted sharply in March. This dragged Markit's Flash US composite output index down to 40.5 (from 49.6 in February) the lowest since the survey was created in October 2009. Any reading below 50 shows a contraction. US companies reported that new business fell, including new exports, as clients responded to the Covid-19 outbreak. Service sector shrank at a record pace (again, since 2009), while factories had the worst month since the financial crisis over a decade ago. This largely mirrors the slump seen in the UK, the eurozone, and Japan earlier today: Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, fears America is sliding into recession: "US companies reported the steepest downturn since 2009 in March as measures to limit the COVID-19 outbreak hit businesses across the country. The service sector has been especially badly affected, with consumer-facing industries such as restaurants, bars and hotels bearing the brunt of the social distancing measures, while travel and tourism has been decimated. However, manufacturing is also reporting a slump in demand, with production falling at a rate not seen since 2009, linked to either weak client demand, lost exports or supply shortages. "Jobs are already being slashed at a pace not witnessed since the global financial crisis in 2009 as firms either close or reduce capacity amid widespread cost-cutting. "The survey underscores how the US is likely already in a recession that will inevitably deepen further. The March PMI is roughly indicative of GDP falling at an annualised rate approaching 5%, but the increasing number of virus-fighting lockdowns and closures mean the second quarter will likely see a far steeper rate of decline. Back in the UK, Aston Martin Lagonda plans to stop production at its two factories on Wednesday because of the coronavirus lockdown. The move brings the struggling luxury carmaker in line with other British automotive brands. The factories will close from 25 March until at least 20 April, the carmaker said in a statement on Tuesday. The company had been an outlier among British and EU carmakers, after every high-volume manufacturer across Europe closed factories as lockdowns stopped crucial supplies and threatened the health of workers. Aston Martin has struggled in the last year as sales of its sports cars have disappointed and costs have overrun. It was forced to accept a bailout investment in January from billionaire investor Lawrence Stroll in return for a short-term cash injection. However, this month it asked Stroll for another £20m to stave off bankruptcy. The latest closures affect Aston Martin's main site at Gaydon, which employs about 850 workers, alongside its newer facility at St Athan in south Wales, which had been preparing to start production of its DBX. The DBX, a new SUV, is a key part of Aston Martin's plan to expand sales, targeting female buyers in China in particular. However, the investments required in building a new factory had put the company under financial pressure, leaving it exposed when the coronavirus outbreak caused sales in China to slump. Aston Martin said it was working with its suppliers and business partners to be ready to restart production when the suspension ends. It also said it was cutting costs such as marketing and changing the timing of spending plans "in order to protect the company's financial position". Stocks have jumped in New York at the start of trading, on hopes that US politicians could finally agree a stimulus package to combat the economic cost of Covid-19. The Dow Jones surged by over 1,100 points, bouncing back from its lowest levels since January 2017. The other indices are also up over 5% too. The rally was sparked by signs that the White House and the Democratic party are - finally - close to agreeing a package of aid measures. My colleague Ed Helmore explains: Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer and US treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin appeared on Tuesday morning to be close to a deal over a coronavirus stimulus bill, even as Donald Trump signaled his wish to reopen the economy and continued to attack House speaker Nancy Pelosi over her own stimulus proposal. "I think we've made a lot of progress," Mnuchin told reporters on Capitol Hill, just before midnight on Monday. "There's still a couple of open issues, but I think we're very hopeful that this can be closed out [on Tuesday]." Mnuchin said he and Schumer had consulted with the president and Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell on the details of the deal, which is believed to secure around $2tn in aid for workers and businesses. "We expect to have an agreement tomorrow morning," Schumer said. "There's still a few little differences. Neither of us think they're in any way going to get in the way of a final agreement." He also added that Trump seemed "very positive" about the talks. NEWSFLASH: We're moving towards the 'whatever it takes moment' in the Covid-19 crisis. The world's most powerful finance ministers and central bankers have just issued a joint statement, pledging to take the necessary steps to address the coronavirus crisis. They say: We will do whatever is necessary to restore confidence and econonomic growth, and to protect jobs, businesses and the resilience of the financial system. Significantly, the G7 says they are committed to "deliver the fiscal effort necessary" to help economies recover rapidly from the current shock, and resume their path towards "stronger and more sustainable economic growth". That, they say, will include expanding health systems, and taking liquitity support and fiscal expansion (ie government spending) to negate the negative impact of Covid-19 The finance chiefs also insist they are sharing ideas and experiences as they try to tackle the worst recession in decades: We are cooperating closely to share experiences and strategies so that we may effectively target our efforts to support our citizens and businesses. We are instituting new policies such as providing assistance for employment, telework, and vulnerable populations, and expanding access to childcare and unemployment benefits. We are also providing liquidity enhancements, guarantees, subsidized loans, tax deferrals, and loan repayment deferrals and, where appropriate, grants for affected companies, especially small and medium-sized businesses. The finance ministers also pledge to "promote global trade and investment", and to "coordinate on a weekly basis" as they implement these measures and take "further timely and effective actions". Encouraging. There's no new commitment for exactly how much governments will spend. But, as a reader points out, you can't put a price tag on 'whatever's necessary' :) Pub chain Wetherspoons is facing heavy criticism today after telling its staff to get a job in Tesco instead. The row began after 'Spoons boss Tim Martin told employees they wouldn't be paid until the company had reached a deal with the government to cover 80% of their wages. That, Labour MP Rachel Reeves points out, isn't acceptable -- as staff could be out of pocked until the end of April. Unions are also shocked that the company isn't providing more help. Wetherspoons, though, insists it's doing the right thing - and looking to keep staff on despite being forced to shut down, saying: As we understand it, tens of thousands of hospitality workers and others have already lost their jobs, but Wetherspoon is retaining all its employees, using the government scheme for the purpose for which it is intended," "Wetherspoon chairman Tim Martin said to employees in a video that supermarkets were urgently looking for staff, since all trade from pubs, restaurants and cafes had transferred to supermarkets in the last few days. "Wetherspoon has had urgent calls from supermarkets asking for help in recruitment. Tesco alone urgently needs 20,000 staff, we understand. "Tim Martin said in the video that staff who wanted to work for Tesco should do so and they will be given first priority when Wetherspoon pubs reopen. "Wetherspoon believes that the actions it has taken are responsible and sensible in the difficult circumstances." Amid all the gloom, here's a heartening tale from my colleague Jasper Jolly: Ineos, the chemicals company controlled by the billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe, is planning to build two hand sanitiser factories in just 10 days as part of the effort to prevent the spread of coronavirus. The UK's biggest private company by sales aims to produce a million bottles of hand sanitiser a month when the plant is in operation, with talks under way with the NHS on supplying the products to hospitals for free..... Yesterday, drinks giant Diageo announced it is donating large amounts of alcohol for use in hand sanitisers, following a surge in demand from anxious customers. Some businesses are keen to do their bit. The global airlines body, Iata, has now said that the industry will lose $252bn in revenues this year - more than double its forecast "worst case scenario" from earlier this month as the coronavirus crisis has grown. Iata said European airlines were the most likely to collapse, following earlier warnings that most carriers worldwide would be bankrupt by May. Countries that cover 98% of commercial air passenger revenues now have restricted travel. Director general Alexandre de Juniac called for government aid to airlines "with maximum speed". We are in an emergency situation - we need a full-speed, massive rescue package now." Right, time for a quick summary after another busy morning Britain's economy is heading into a deep recession, according to the latest survey of UK purchasing managers. Service sector activity is slumping at a record rate as customer-facing firms shut down, while manufacturers are also suffering from weak demand. Markit, which compiles the report, fears the recession could be on a scale 'not seen in modern history'. The Eurozone PMIs were equally weak, suggesting the region is also falling into contraction. Both France and Germany's service sectors are weakening at a faster rate than after the 2008 crisis, or the debt crisis. Construction firms are being hit too - with Taylor Wimpey halting work at its building sites today, and London's Crossrail project being suspended a few minutes ago. Many UK shops are now shut, with the government rejecting Sports Direct's claim to be an essential service. Supermarkets are facing unprecedented pressures - with Waitrose now limiting the number of people allowed in stores, and Sainsbury keeping its Argos outlets open. Nationwide is cutting opening hours, as banks and building societies come to terms with new 'physical distancing' rules. Ryanair is asking passengers to be patient, as it struggles with compensation claims after grounding most of its planes. The Bank of England has predicted that UK banks are strong enough to cope with the Covid-19.....and defended asking some staff to attend work in person. Despite the looming recession, the markets are more buoyant today. FTSE 100: up 200 points or 4% at 5194 Sterling: up 1.3% at $1.17 vs the US dollar; up 0.3% at (EURO)1.0805 vs the euro Brent crude: up 2.75% at $27.87 per barrel Coronavirus will likely also spell a further delay to the opening of Crossrail, my colleague Gwyn Topham explains: Transport for London said that all construction sites would be shut temporarily to limit the spread of the virus. The opening of the London high-capacity rail line has already been delayed by more than two years, with its expected cost now around £18bn rather than £14.8bn. Mike Brown, London's Transport Commissioner, said: "The Government and the Mayor have given clear instructions to stay safe and to stop travelling in all cases other than critical workers making absolutely essential journeys. "In line with this, TfL and Crossrail will be bringing all project sites to a temporary Safe Stop unless they need to continue for operational safety reasons. This means that work on all such projects will be temporarily suspended as soon as it is safe to do so. Essential maintenance of the transport network will of course continue." Just in: Work on London's massive Crossrail scheme has been suspended. Crossrail, Europe's largest infrastructure project, was already running badly behind schedule -- but clearly authorities have realised that workers can't maintain safe distances while building a massive tunnel underground. This might also take some pressure off the London transport network, so that purely essential workers (NHS staff, for example) can travel more safely. Despite the government's tough new lockdown, some staff at the Bank of England and the Financial Conduct Authority (the City watchdog) are at their desks today. Shruti Chopra of Financial News reports that a "very small percentage" of BoE staff are still required to attend work in Threadneedle Street in the Square Mile today, with a "handful" of essential FCA employees also in their offices. Boris Johnson was adamant last night that people should do the right thing, and stay at home if at all possible. Despite that instruction to conduct physical distancing, some London underground trains have been packed this morning. But a spokeswoman for the BoE insists that the central bank is complying with official advice: "The Bank of England has instigated a number of operational measures to protect the welfare of its staff and ensure that its critical functions will continue to be delivered unhampered. "In line with latest government guidelines, the bank is asking the maximum number of staff to work at home, consistent with being able to continue delivering its core functions seamlessly." Here's the full story. She also has good news about one early Covid-19 victim, an HSBC analyst, who seems to have recovered from the virus: Back in the markets, Wall Street is expected to rally sharply when trading begins in just over 90 minutes. The Dow Jones industrial average and the S&P 500 are both up over 4% in pre-market trading (a strong recovery from yesterday's 3% slump). Traders are watching for signs that Congress is getting close to agreeing a stimulus package to protect the US economy. But there's also concern that the White House is considering relaxing lockdown measures, because of their impact on growth (as we've seen in the UK and the eurozone this morning). Marketwatch reports: How much damage can be inflicted on the U.S. economy to try to mitigate the death toll from the coronavirus pandemic before it kills the economy? The Trump White House is increasingly raising that question. The answer could have grave implications for the health and livelihood of all Americans, amid the outbreak of COVID-19, the infectious disease that has been contracted by more than 300,000 people and claimed nearly 16,000 lives so far since it was first identified in December. President Trump on Monday signaled a potential shift in his administration's strategy with a late Sunday night tweet saying " we cannot let the cure be worse than the problem itself." He said he would evaluate the administration's containment strategy early next week after a 15-day period elapses. Here's my colleague Richard Partington on today's dire PMI reports: The scale of the global economic damage amid the coronavirus outbreak is becoming clearer after early warning signs showed the steepest plunge in business activity ever recorded in Britain, Japan and the eurozone. As the pandemic intensifies and more countries shut down large parts of their economies to contain the spread of the virus, the closely-watched purchasing managers indices (PMI) for several of the world's biggest economies fell to the lowest levels since records began more than two decades ago. With the world sinking into a deep recession, the UK flash PMI for the service sector - which includes restaurants, hotels and banks and accounts for about 80% of the UK economy - crashed to 35.7 on an index where anything above 50.0 separates growth from contraction. The collapse on the index, which is closely monitored by the Treasury and the Bank of England, outstripped the slump recorded during the depths of the 2008 financial crisis, as emergency public health measures disrupt supply chains and demand for goods and services evaporates. Ryanair boss Michael O'Leary has asked customers for patience with the processing of refunds or rebooking, in the midst of some passenger disgruntlement with the carrier's response to the coronavirus. O'Leary said that Ryanair had reduced its office staff by 50% "for social distancing reasons" and was struggling to deal with anything but the most urgent cases and rescue flights. He urged customers not to call, and they would be emailed in the next fortnight. However, the consumer association Which? said that Ryanair was leaving customers stranded, especially in Spain. It warned passengers abroad not to accept refunds from airlines if they needed to get home, as it would mean they were no longer responsible for rerouting them onto alternative flights. The Irish carrier, which has not over the years built a store of goodwill from customers, expects virtually all flights to be grounded from today. O'Leary said it had offered its aircraft to EU governments for rescue flights and for the movement of vital medicines and supplies. O'Leary added that "this crisis will pass" and the airline was doing everything to keep its planes and crew operational and ready to return to flying when Europe is clear of the pandemic. Back in UK retail.... Sainsbury's is to keep Argos concessions within its supermarkets open despite the chain falling outside the "essential retail" category of stores ordered to close by the government on Monday night. The retail group's standalone Argos stores and Habitat outlets have shut. Shopworkers' union Usdaw raised concerns that staff from Argos standalone stores had also been asked to work in Sainsbury's supermarkets. Dave Gill, Usdaw national officer said: "With the overwhelming pressure on all food retailers it is inevitable that companies are going to look at redeploying staff within the business. However, this is extremely unsettling for staff in what are already difficult and testing times for everyone. The Bank of England believes UK banks are strong enough to survive the coronavirus outbreak, despite forecasting a "more severe" short-term impact than its annual stress tests have been able to simulate. In the minutes of its latest meeting, released this morning, the Financial Policy Committee said: The FPC considered that the economic disruption associated with Covid-19 should have less impact on the core banking system than recent stress tests run by the Bank have shown the system can withstand. It added: The disruption from Covid-19 would likely be more severe than the stress test in the first phase but the FPC expected that it would ultimately be less protracted and lead to less output loss overall over the course of two years than the ACS [or annual cyclical scenario] which contained a very prolonged fall in output. That should be reassuring, given that the bank's most recent stress tests involved a 4.7% fall in UK GDP, a rise in unemployment to 9.2%, a 33% drop in house prices, an increase in interest rates to 4% and a near-30% drop in the value of the pound versus the US dollar. The coronavirus outbreak is forcing Nationwide to cut its opening hours. The building society says most of its 650 branches will now open 10am-2pm Monday to Friday and 9am-12pm on Saturdays. It says 50 have closed. Nationwide is ending an early opening hours trial for vulnerable people, following last night's order to stay at home. Despite today's stormy economic data, the pound is rallying this morning. Sterling has jumped by almost two cents against the US dollar -- lifting it back to $1.1737. That takes the pound away from the 35-year lows hit last week, but is still a very weak position (it was $1.30 last month, before the market panic over Covid-19 began). With shares still rallying in Europe too (the FTSE is still up 4%), investors appear to be hoping that the massive stimulus measures taken by central banks and governments around the globe will pay off. UK housebuilders are also reeling from the crisis. Taylor Wimpey, one of the UK's biggest house builders, has just announced it is closing all its construction sites, show homes and sales centres. It has axed its 2020 final dividend worth £125m and a planned special dividend worth £360m, and like other companies, is unable to give any financial guidance. It has moved its annual meting on 23 April to its head office in High Wycombe and will provide a dial-in to shareholders. Rival housebuilder Redrow scrapped its dividend payment to shareholders due on 9 April, worth £37m, and said: "As the government's escalating measures to contain the spread of the virus take effect, it is inevitable our sales rate will be seriously impaired over the coming weeks and build output will be significantly affected by labour and material shortages. We also expect outlet openings to slip as local authorities delay planning committee meetings." Confirmation that UK firms are slammed on the brakes: The slump in activity across the UK this month is just a taste of the economic downturn ahead. With more firms shutting their doors and cancelling orders, output will keep slumping and unemployment will keep rising. Duncan Brock, Group Director at CIPS [Chartered Institute of Procurement & Supply] agrees that firms are in an unprecedented crisis. Here's his take on today's PMI report (based on surveys of hundreds of purchasing managers at UK firms): "Just as the economy began to strengthen at the beginning of the year, the shock of this deepening global health crisis has flung businesses into the abyss, with the worst overall downturn in manufacturing and services for more than two decades. "The services sector received the largest blow as citizens reduced their social activity and leisure activities were abandoned. The sector recorded its worst drop in activity since 1996 when the survey began. New orders also took a significant hit as the rapid realisation of the significance of COVID-19 applied an abrupt brake on consumer-facing businesses. "Shortages of manufacturing components following global factory closures dislocated manufacturing supply chains and led to the greatest lengthening of delivery times since the index began in 1992. A surge in demand for food and pharmaceutical products led to rising output in some parts of the manufacturing sector, but this was more than offset by a slump in production elsewhere. "As more serious measures are considered by the UK Government, the effect of coronavirus on businesses will get much worse. Even with interest rates cuts and an injection of cash into the economy to support struggling businesses, the inevitable rise in unemployment is sure to follow along with business failures especially amongst SMEs. "As more initiatives are rightly introduced to protect the health of the nation, this emergency will have a long-lasting impact on business life as we know it." Customer-facing UK companies such as hotels & restaurants, sports centres, gyms and hair salons have suffered the steepest fall in activity seen since Markit's PMI survey began in 1996. And with many now forced to close, the economy will clearly keep shrinking in the months ahead. Markit adds: The initial impact of emergency public health measures was also reflected in record downturns in activity across transport & travel and the vast business-to-business services category Overall, UK manufacturing output is shrinking at the sharpest pace since July 2012 - with transport companies (understandably) having a brutal month as Britain self-isolates: But food and drink firms have been busy, as families prepare for the lockdown. Markit says: Only producers in the food & drink and chemicals & plastics sectors reported growth of output in March. The former reflected higher demand due to stockpiling by households, while the latter was driven by a surge in production within the pharmaceuticals sector. At the other end of the scale, the transport goods sector registered the largest slump in output during March. There's broad agreement that today's UK PMI report is really, really bad.... (although we already know the causes, of course!) NEWSFLASH: The UK economy is contracting at its fastest rate in at least two decades, as the service sector is hit extremely hard by the Covid-19 outbreak. Data firm Markit reports that business activity across services and manufacturing has slumped this month, as the coronavirus deals the UK economy "a more severe blow than at any time since comparable figures were first available over 20 years ago". Output has slumped, new orders have contracted at their fastest pace since 2008, and business expectations have absolutely cratered. This has dragged Markit's survey of UK purchasing managers down to just 37.1 in March, down from 53.0 in February. That shows an extremely sharp fall in activity. It's the worst reading since the survey began in 1998, and means the economy is contracting much faster than after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Such a low number suggests a deep recession is inevitable this year (understandably, with so many businesses now closed due to coronavirus measures). The services sector PMI (which covered much of the UK economy) slumped to just 35.7, from 53.2 in February. The manufacturing PMI fell to 48.0 from 51.7 (but the true picture is worse, as the PMI calculation assumes that long delays for supplies are a sign of a strong economy) Chris Williamson, Chief Business Economist at IHS Markit, says a recession 'not seen in modern history' is now likely: "The surveys highlight how the COVID-19 outbreak has already dealt the UK economy an initial blow even greater than that seen at the height of the global financial crisis. With additional measures to contain the spread of the virus set to further paralyse large parts of the economy in coming months, such as business closures and potential lockdowns, a recession of a scale we have not seen in modern history is looking increasingly likely. "Historical comparisons indicate that the March survey reading is consistent with GDP falling at a quarterly rate of 1.5-2.0%, a decline which is sufficiently large to push the economy into a contraction in the first quarter. However, this decline will likely be the tip of the iceberg and dwarfed by what we will see in the second quarter as further virus containment measures take their toll and the downturn escalates. "Any growth was confined to small pockets of the economy such as food manufacturing, pharmaceuticals and healthcare. Demand elsewhere has collapsed, both for goods and services, as increasing numbers of households and businesses at home and abroad close their doors. Economists agree that the eurozone is plunging into a deep downturn, although it's hard to say quite how bad it will be.... Today's dire PMI survey shows that the eurozone economy is shrinking fast, says Chris Williamson, Chief Business Economist at IHS Markit: "Business activity across the eurozone collapsed in March to an extent far exceeding that seen even at the height of the global financial crisis. Steep downturns were seen in France, Germany and across the rest of the euro area as governments took increasingly tough measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus. "The March PMI is indicative of GDP slumping at a quarterly rate of around 2%, and clearly there's scope for the downturn to intensify further as even more draconian policies to deal with the virus are potentially implemented in coming months. "Demand for many goods and services has fallen dramatically, while near-record supply chain delays have stymied production and business closures mean an increasingly large proportion of the economy is being mothballed. "Employment is already falling at a rate not seen since July 2009 as despair about the outlook broadens. Business sentiment about the year ahead has plunged to the gloomiest on record, suggesting policymakers' efforts to date have failed to brighten the darkening picture." NEWSFLASH: Eurozone economic output is slumping this month, at a rate that far exceeds the worst moments of the financial crisis or the euro debt crisis. Data firm Markit's monthly survey of purchasing managers, just released, has crashed to its lowest level since it was created in 1998 -- at just 31.4. That's a dramatic slump from February's 51.6 -- showing "an unprecedented collapse in business activity" (echoing what we've already heard from France and Germany) [reminder: anything below 50 = contraction]. Europe's services sector was especially hard hit, especially consumer-facing industries such as travel, tourism and restaurants. But factories are also shrinking sharply, due to weak demand and restrictions on workers' travel. Flash Eurozone Services PMI Activity Index(2) at 28.4 (52.6 in February). Record low (since July 1998). Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI Output Index(4) at 39.5 (48.7 in February). 131-month low. Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI (3) at 44.8 (49.2 in February). 92-month low Eurozone bosses are also extremely gloomy about the future, and slashing their workforces in response. Markit says: Expectations of future output also deteriorated markedly to reach an all-time low, with record degrees of pessimism about the year ahead seen in both manufacturing and services. The unprecedented slumps in demand and business sentiment prompted the largest monthly cull in staffing levels since July 2009. Germany's service sector has also contracted extremely sharply this month. Data firm Markit reports that its flash Germany Services PMI Activity Index has slumped to just 34.5, from 52.5 in February - a record low. Factory output also contracted again, with the manufacturing PMI sliding to 45.7 from 48.0 (further away from the 50-point mark showing stagnation). Phil Smith, Principal Economist at IHS Markit, says Germany is heading for a deep recession: "The unprecedented collapse in the PMI underscores how Germany is headed for recession, and a steep one at that. The March data are indicative of GDP falling at a quarterly rate of around 2%, and the escalation of measures to contain the virus outbreak mean we should be braced for the downturn to further intensify in the second quarter. The service sector has so far borne the brunt of the government's measures to stem the spread of COVID-19, with activity falling to the greatest extent in almost 23 years of data collection, and at a rate that already far surpasses anything seen even during the depths of the global financial crisis. Smith also warns that the manufacturing sector is probably worse than today's report suggests -- because long delivery times and low stock levels boost the PMI (because they typically show a strong economy). Good grief! France's economy is shrinking at an alarmingly fast rate, as the coronavirus outbreak hurts businesses badly. The latest survey of French purchasing managers shows that activity shrank at a record pace in March (the survey goes back to the late 1990s). Overall new orders placed with French businesses fell at the fastest pace in the series history too, with services firms particularly badly hit. This forced firms cut their staff numbers for the first time in nearly three and-a-half years, at the fastest rate since April 2013 This dragged the Flash France Composite Output Index down to just 30.2 in March, from 51.9 in February - a record low. Anything below 50 shows a contraction. The service sector was particularly badly hit too: Flash France Services Activity Index at 29.0 in March (52.6 in February), series low Flash France Manufacturing Output Index at 35.6 in March (49.0 in February), 132-month low Flash France Manufacturing PMI at 42.9 in March (49.7 in February), 86-month low It's an extremely worrying sign for France's economy, and the wider economy. It appears that Sports Direct has been forced to abandon its attempt to defy the government's lockdown, and keep its stores open. Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove just told the BBC Today Programme that the government has made it clear that this decision was wrong. Management have got the message, and Sports Direct stores will not be open, he insisted. Clearly the government wasn't convinced by SPD's argument that the public needed to nip to the high street to buy home gym equipment.... European stock markets are also bouncing, despite the prospect of a dire recession this year: In a welcome relief to investors, Britain's stock market is rebounding from Monday's rout. The blue-chip FTSE 100 has jumped by almost 4% in early trading, up 199 points at 5190 (last night it closed at its lowest point since 2011). The London Stock Exchange itself is the top riser (+10%), followed by life insurance and financial services group Prudential (8.3%), and cruise operator Carnival (9%) (whose cruises are currently mothballed). The FTSE 250 index of mid-sized companies has also bounced, up nearly 3% at 13,504. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, warns that the markets are pinning their hopes on a US stimulus deal -- where there's still conflict on Capitol Hill. Investors have their hopes tied to the $2-trillion rescue package that needs to get signed by the Congress, yet apparently there are controversies among policymakers on how to spend this money. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says the help is destined to corporations first, not workers and their families. While spending on climate change related issues are said to pull politicians apart and prevent the deal from getting signed. Yet a delayed deal is damaging for both parties, especially now that the coronavirus-induced lockdowns accelerate across the United States as well. Asia-Pacific stock markets have rallied overnight, despite the dire PMI reports from Japan and Australia. All the main indices have rebounded from Monday's slump, led by Japan and South Korea. Japan's Nikkei: up 7.1% South Korea's KOSPI: 9% China's CSI 300: up 2.7% Australia's S&P/ASX 200: +4% Australia's economy is also having a torrid month. The Australian Services PMI, released today, has slumped to a record low of 39.8 as restaurants, cafes and tourism were hit hard by travel bans and cancellations of events and concerts. That shows a very sharp contraction. Japan's economy has suffered a slump in activity this month, according to the latest purchasing managers survey. Activity at Japanese services sectors shrank at the fastest pace since at least 2007 in March, while factories contracted at the fastest rate since the aftermath of Lehman Brothers' collapse. It's a clear sign that Japan's economy is weakening fast, and of course they're not alone! Reuters has the details: The au Jibun BankFlash Japan Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) fell to a seasonally adjusted 44.8 from a final 47.8 in February, its lowest since April 2009. The au Jibun BankFlash Japan Services PMI index slumped to a seasonally adjusted 32.7 from the previous month's 46.8, its lowest since the start of the services sector survey in September 2007. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. With Britain now in lockdown, we're about to learn how badly the coronavirus has hurt the UK economy. And it's going to be grim. A new survey of purchasing managers at service sector firms and factories across the country is going to show just how badly exports and output have fallen this month, and how many firms have slashed jobs. These PMI surveys are designed to give a really up-to-date healthcheck on what's happening in the economy right now. But of course, we already know that self-isolation measures to slow Covid-19 are having a chilling impact on growth. So the UK 'composite PMI', which covers much of the economy, is certain to tumble into contraction territory (below 50 points). The eurozone PMIs are likely to show an even more painful contraction, as lockdowns in Italy, France, Spain and Germany have already hurt businesses badly. With factories and services firms in Asia also badly hit by Covid-19, and American cities now enforcing lockdowns, a global recession in 2020 looks inevitable. Last night, the International Monetary Fund warned that it could be worse than 2008. IMF Kristalina Georgieva said: First, the global economic outlook for 2020 is expected to be negative. We will face recession at least as bad as during the global financial crisis or worse, but we expect recovery in 2021. Also coming up today Global stock markets are expected to rebound today, after slumping yesterday. Investors have had time to digest the latest extraordinary action from the US Federal Reserve (unlimited money printing until morale improves), and are still hoping American politicians will agree a stimulus package. Non-essential UK retailers will be shutting their doors today - it's your last chance to buy a meaty, or vegany, treat from Greggs, or a new outfit from But essential services will continue to operate..... which (believe it or not) Sports Direct believes it qualifies for as a 'sports and fitness retailer'. WH Smith is also "positioning itself to government as an essential retailer", as it sells newspapers and magazines. We'll keep an eye on whether these arguments holds water through the day.... The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump from 51.6 to 38.8 9.30am GMT: UK composite 'flash' PMI for March: expected to slump to 45.1 from 53.0 1.45pm GMT: US composite 'flash' PMI for March 2pm GMT: US New Home sales for February 51304 false false  Graeme Wearden (earlier) and Jasper Jolly      An unusually quiet St David's shopping centre in Cardiff, United Kingdom.        A trainee engineer from Openreach checks his safety harness at the top of a telegraph pole.        The FTSE 100 has only gained more five times since it started.        British Steel's Scunthorpe plant is pictured at dawn in north Lincolnshire, north east England.        The pound regained some ground against the US dollar on Tuesday - but it remained far below the levels of even a month ago.        Neil Armstrong planting an American flag on the moon, Apollo 11 lunar landing, 1969.        European stock markets rose on Tuesday.        The McLaren 765LT at the McLaren headquarters in Woking.        The new Aston Martin Valhalla        The open of Wall Street, March 24 2020        A very quiet Bank of England during the Coronavirus outbreak.        A Ryanair passenger jet on the tarmac at Dublin airport yesterday          A currency trader in Seoul, South Korea, today