The World Health Organization has urged countries to look for more early cases of Covid-19 and urged a full exploration of the pandemic's origins and early path, as Germany took preventive action to head off any future rise in infections.

As European countries continued to ease their lockdown restrictions, the WHO said news that a French hospital re-testing old samples from pneumonia patients had identified a coronavirus infection dating to 27 December, weeks before France confirmed its first cases, "gives us a whole new picture on everything".

A spokesman, Christian Lindmeier, urged more countries to look for other early incidences of the virus, which was first reported by Chinese authorities to the WHO on 31 December and not previously thought to have spread to Europe until January.

"The findings help to better understand the potential virus circulation," Lindmeier said, adding that it was "really, really important" to gain a fuller understanding of the early path of the virus and that further WHO missions to China may be needed.

Sweden 's chief epidemiologist, Anders Tegnell, said the country - one of the few in Europe not to impose a mandatory lockdown - would not carry out retrospective testing yet, but also called for a full investigation of how the virus spread in China.

It was important to know "how it behaved in the early stages of its spread", Tegnell told Sweden's TT news agency, particularly "if it it was an individual spread from an animal to a person, or if it spread to a group of people over a longer period of time."

The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, has alleged the Trump administration has "evidence" that the virus emerged from a laboratory in Wuhan, China, but scientists have advised the WHO that it is of animal origin.

With several European countries now cautiously lifting lockdown measures, Angela Merkel's office announced on Tuesday that local authorities in Germany would have to close schools and all but non-essential shops once again if the number of new cases rose to more than 35 in every 100,000 in a particular area within a seven-day period.

The move came on the eve of a key meeting between the chancellor and leaders of the country's 16 states, several of which - particularly in the less hard-hit east - want restrictions lifted faster. Germany's largest state, Bavaria, said on Tuesday it would allow restaurants to resume outdoor service from 18 May, with indoor dining permitted a week later.

The health minister of Austria - one of the first countries to start lifting restrictions, three weeks ago - declared its outbreak was under control, with the daily increase in new infections down to 0.2%.

The situation was "very constant, very stable," Rudolf Anschober said, adding that the first phase of exiting the country's strict, month-long lockdown had succeeded "excellently". People must, however, remain vigilant, he said.

Small shops reopened in Austria in mid-April, with face masks mandatory in shops and public transport. Bigger shops followed last weekend, classes in schools are gradually resuming, and restaurants are expected to reopen by mid-May.

France's president said it was too early to say if foreign holidays would be possible this summer. As the country prepares to lift its first lockdown restrictions on 11 May, Emmanuel Macron said travel would be limited "even during the summer holidays. We will remain among Europeans, and maybe we will have to limit that even more."

Spanish schools, meanwhile, may need to operate at half-capacity when classes resume in September, the country's education minister said. "Until we have a remedy or a vaccine, the only tool we have to fight the virus is confinement," Isabel Celaá told the Spanish newspaper 20 Minutos.

"We can't jeopardise all the gains we've made. If we've got 3 million primary school children, each accompanied by an adult, turning up at school, you can imagine the huge movement that involves. If they all turn up at once, we won't be able to maintain the required distance."

Separate studies in Israel and the Netherlands, meanwhile, claimed to have created antibodies that could eventually help treat or prevent the development of Covid-19, a potentially significant development until a vaccine becomes available.

The Israeli defence minister announced a state-run research centre had developed an antibody that "can neutralise [the coronavirus] inside carriers' bodies", while a Dutch-led team of scientists said they had managed to halt infection in a lab setting.

The Guardian understands the antibody has not yet been trialled on humans, however.

In further developments:

•Russia cemented its place as the European country reporting the highest number of new infections, with total cases soaring past 155,000, although at 1,451 its fatality rate has remained low compared to other countries.•Hong Kong announced plans to ease major social distancing measures, including reopening schools, cinemas, bars and beauty parlours, from Friday.•Overcrowded, unhygienic prisons in Latin America and the spread of the coronavirus in regional prisons in the US are a source of "major concern", the UN human rights office said.•India embarked on a "massive" operation using passenger jets and naval ships to bring back some of the hundreds of thousands of nationals stranded abroad.•Virgin Atlantic airline said it was cutting 3,000 jobs.

Russia cemented its place as the European country reporting the highest number of new infections, with total cases soaring past 155,000, although at 1,451 its fatality rate has remained low compared to other countries.

Hong Kong announced plans to ease major social distancing measures, including reopening schools, cinemas, bars and beauty parlours, from Friday.

Overcrowded, unhygienic prisons in Latin America and the spread of the coronavirus in regional prisons in the US are a source of "major concern", the UN human rights office said.

India embarked on a "massive" operation using passenger jets and naval ships to bring back some of the hundreds of thousands of nationals stranded abroad.

Virgin Atlantic airline said it was cutting 3,000 jobs.