block-time published-time 11.49am BST

French Ministers have added some details to fill out the broad brush strokes of Emmanuel Macron's televised address yesterday evening, which was watched by an estimated 36.7 million people - more than half the French population.

In the 30-minute broadcast, the president announced France would remain in strict lockdown until Monday 11 May when he said crêches, schools, colleges and lycées would "progressively" reopen. He called on people to be "civic, responsible and to respect the lockdown rules".

People watch as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, speaks during a televised address to the nation on Monday evening. Photograph: Marc Piasecki/Getty Images

On Tuesday, interior minister, Christophe Castaner, stressed that the 11 May was not "a certainty but an objective", while in a separate interview the education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, said not all education establishments would open their doors at 9am on 11 May as it would be "out of the question to have packed classrooms".

Following up on Macron's promise to shake up the country's health system, especially the wages and conditions for staff, the health minister, Olivier Véran, reiterated that there will be a complete overhaul of medical personnel salaries and working conditions when the coronavirus crisis is over.

A fourth cabinet member, the economy minister, Bruno Le Maire, went on television to warn that the French economy will shrink by around 8% in 2020 as a result of the crisis.

The French government is spending the next two weeks drawing up a "After Covid-19 Plan" to be announced in a fortnight.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.58am BST

block-time published-time 11.29am BST

Belgian authorities have announced 4,157 people have now died from coronavirus, making the country among the worst affected in Europe.

Deaths from coronavirus in Belgium exceeded the 4,000 mark with 262 new deaths confirmed in the last 24 hours, the National Crisis Centre reported in its daily briefing on Tuesday. Cases rose to 31,119, as testing was stepped up. The number of new patients admitted to hospital each day is continuing on a slow downward trend that has been evident since the end of March.

According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, the number of deaths in Belgium is behind only Italy, Spain, France and the UK, all significantly more populous countries. Belgium, which has a population of 11.5m, has recorded more deaths than its neighbour the Netherlands, which has a population of 17.1 million and 2,727 deaths at the latest ECDC count.

Comparisons are difficult as all countries are at different phases of the outbreak and calculate the death rate in varying ways. Belgium includes deaths in care homes, which so far account for 46% of all fatalities. Belgian authorities also include people suspected, but not confirmed, of having died from Covid 19.

The country's national security council is due to meet on Wednesday to discuss when to end the lockdown, following a report from an expert group. The francophone state broadcaster RTBF reported that the lockdown was likely to be extended until 3 May.

The mayor of Brussels, Philippe Close, has called on the government to announce a date for ending the lockdown. "It is not enough to ask people to deprive themselves of their individual freedoms without telling them 'we will come back to you and explain the next step,'" he said.

He also said people could forget about any mass events before the end of June.

Employees pose for a photo wearing face masks at a care home in Brussels. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.54am BST

block-time published-time 11.16am BST

Coronavirus has pushed the death toll in England to its highest level since official weekly statistics began in 2005, with fatalities running at almost 40% above the average.

The Office for National Statistics said that in the week to 3 April, 16,387 people died in England and Wales, an increase of 5,246 deaths compared with the previous week and 6,082 more than the five-year average, reports Robert Booth.

The figures also showed the increasing impact of Covid-19 on mortality in England and Wales with 22% of all deaths relating to the disease in the week ending 3 April compared to 5% in the week ending 27 March.

In London, nearly half of deaths registered involved Covid-19 and the West Midlands also suffered one of the high proportions of Covid-19 deaths, accounting for 22.1% of all deaths registered in the region.

Related:  Coronavirus pushes England and Wales death rate to record high

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.25am BST

block-time published-time 11.02am BST

Coronavirus deaths in Spain rose slightly over the past 24 hours to 567, compared to 510 yesterday, according the ministry of health. This brings the total number of deaths to 18,056, and the total number of recorded cases to 172,451.

Businesses in the construction and manufacturing sectors tentatively reopened yesterday - a public holiday - after the Spanish government relaxed some lockdown measures put in place two weeks ago that confined most people to their homes.

There have been no reports of crowded buses and trains. The Barcelona transport authority said there had been increased passenger traffic but still fewer than on 24 March, the last normal Tuesday before the full lockdown was enforced.

Meanwhile, the health ministry has taken control of all private laboratories and clinics to accelerate the process of testing and has introduced measures to avoid abusive pricing of tests.

Many furloughed employees have been unable to collect their benefits as unemployment offices struggle to cope with the huge number of claimants.

Carmen Calvo, the vice-president, and Fernando Simón, the chief medical officer, both returned to work today after recovering from Covid-19.

Spain recorded 48,712 deaths in March, the highest March number since 1975, the last year of the dictatorship.

A woman takes a face mask from a police officer in Madrid, Spain. Photograph: Ely Pineiro/Getty Images

block-time published-time 10.50am BST

Positive news from leading public health body in Germany, the Robert Koch Institute, whose head, Lothar Wieler has said the country's attempts to control the virus' spread are showing "positive tendencies".

"We cannot yet talk of a containment, but of a slowing down," Wieler said in his first briefing since the Easter break.

According to figures from health ministries across Germany, there are just over 130,000 confirmed infections in Germany, and there have been 3,246 deaths. The reproduction rate is currently 1.2 and the aim is to get this under one.

Germany's coronavirus mortality rate is 2.4% and will increase as more elderly people become infected, Wieler said.

But he said if the development of the virus in Germany continues in a similar way, hospitals are not in danger of being overburdened.

"It is good to see that the efforts being made are showing positive results," Wieler said. He appealed to Germans to continue following the hygiene regulations as well as keeping their distance, saying these remained the two most crucial ways to dampen the virus' spread.

He added that in Germany the average age of those infected was 49, and a cough, temperature, blocked nose and loss of taste and smell remained the most commonly reported symptoms. In 2% of cases people developed pneumonia he said, while 16% of cases ended up in hospital.

On Monday, the Academy of Sciences, Leopoldina released a long-awaited study in which it recommended a staggered return to normal life starting with schools reopening. Angela Merkel has said the study's results would be an "influential resource" in her government's decision as to when and how the current lockdown might be relaxed. Merkel is due to meet with the leaders of Germany's 16 states tomorrow after which a decision is expected to be made as to Germany's way forward.

block-time published-time 10.45am BST

The Philippines has introduced a more aggressive testing programme for the coronavirus to locate what it said could be as many as 15,000 unknown infections.

The country has implemented some of Asia's strictest and earliest lockdown measures, reports Reuters. Covid-19 has so far infected 5,223 people locally and killed 335.

Authorities are to start the new programme of ramped-up testing on Tuesday with 8,000 people working at or admitted to Manila hospitals that were treating patients with the virus.

Although the Philippines has Southeast Asia's highest number of coronavirus infections and nearly 40% of its known fatalities, the government believes its swift move to close borders and put half its population under home quarantine may have averted a far greater toll and a healthcare disaster.

The former military chief in charge of the national coronavirus task force said on Tuesday that modelling suggested 75% of infections - or 15,000 people - had yet to be detected.

Carlito Galvez said:

Our strategy is Metro Manila first because this is the epicentre. When we test Manila, we can win this battle against Covid.

block-time published-time 10.38am BST

The Tour de France will not begin as originally planned because French President Emmanuel Macron has cancelled all public events with large crowds until mid-July in response to the coronavirus pandemic.

Tour organisers say it is now impossible for the three-week race to start on 27 June in the Riviera city of Nice as scheduled. It is unclear if cycling's biggest event will be scrapped from the race calendar.

Related:  Tour de France on hold after Macron extends outdoor sports ban till July

block-time published-time 10.16am BST

Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his chief rival have met in a final effort to finalise an agreement on an emergency government that would tackle the coronavirus threat and prevent yet another costly and divisive election amid the crisis.

Reuters reports that the meeting between Netanyahu and former military chief Benny Gantz followed an overnight session in which the two asked for, and received, a deadline extension from President Reuven Rivlin to try to complete the talks.

Should the pair fail to reach agreement, the clock will start ticking toward the dissolution of parliament and a possible, yet still seemingly improbable, fourth election in just over a year.

Last month's election, just like the previous two, ended with no clear winner. Gantz repeatedly vowed not to sit in government with Netanyahu because of the criminal corruption charges against the prime minister.

But with the virus crisis worsening, and his own shaky alliance fraying, Gantz made an about-face late last month and accepted an offer from Netanyahu to pursue a joint government to deal with the pandemic.

Israel has reported over 11,800 cases and at least 117 deaths from the outbreak, which has paralysed the economy, shuttered Israelis in their homes and driven unemployment to record highs.

Benny Gantz, leader of Blue and White party, and Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters

block-time published-time 9.54am BST

Germany's health authorities are appealing to medically qualified migrants to help them tackle the coronavirus, reports Kate Connolly in Berlin.

As increasing numbers of doctors and nurses fall ill or are quarantined, the shortage of medical staff is putting pressure on a usually well-resourced health service.

Government initiatives have already increased the number of intensive care beds from around 24,000 to 40,000, most of them with ventilators. Staff are being retrained and non-essential operations across the country have been cancelled.

But the health system still needs more medical personnel to care for patients, increase the levels of testing, and track down people who have been in contact with those who are sick.

MatchlHealthcare, a website backed by medical authorities which was created by a volunteer team of students and hackers, seeks to match healthcare workers and volunteers - both citizens and foreigners living in Germany - to clinics and care homes needing support.

The eastern state of Saxony is at the forefront of a campaign calling on foreign doctors, including the thousands of refugees who arrived in 2015, to help. According to the Facebook group Syrian Doctors in Germany there are 14,000 Syrian doctors waiting for their qualifications to be approved.

Related:  Germany calls on migrant medics to help tackle coronavirus

block-time published-time 9.50am BST

In the UK, the Office for National Statistics has published its figures for deaths from coronavirus up until 3 April. They include all deaths where the virus is mentioned on the death certificate and not just deaths that occur in hospital, as the daily figures from the Department of Health do.

enltrOur data shows that of all deaths in England and Wales that occurred up to 3 April (registered up to 11 April), 6,235 involved COVID-19 compared with the 4,093 deaths reported on 4 April 2020 by @DHSCgovuk           https://t.co/DjWb5AxR5o           #COVID19           #coronavirus           pic.twitter.com/KE45NiBwWp

- Office for National Statistics (ONS) (@ONS) April 14, 2020

enltrThere is a difference in the numbers as we include all deaths where COVID-19 was mentioned on the death certificate even if only suspected, and we include deaths that happened in hospital and in the community. Our blog post explains this is in more detail https://t.co/oI6fFbMkXN

- Office for National Statistics (ONS) (@ONS) April 14, 2020

enltrFor deaths that occurred up to 3 April (registered by 11 April), there were 5,979 deaths in England involving COVID-19 compared with 5,186 deaths reported by @NHSEngland for the same period in their reconciled figures            https://t.co/VmPQDlpI0m           #COVID19           #coronavirus           pic.twitter.com/DtaevwRV2t

- Office for National Statistics (ONS) (@ONS) April 14, 2020

block-time published-time 9.31am BST

Reuters is reporting that Amazon.com Inc has fired two employees for "repeatedly violating internal policies" after they criticised the working conditions at the e-commerce giant's warehouses in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.

The termination of Emily Cunningham and Maren Costa, who worked as user-experience designers in Seattle, came a couple of weeks after the company fired another employee, Christian Smalls, for raising health and safety concerns for people labouring through the outbreak.

The Seattle-based firm has been facing public scrutiny over safety and working conditions of warehouse, delivery and retail gig workers in the United States after cases of Covid-19 were reported in some of its facilities. Amazon workers have also protested in other countries.

Amazon said it supported "every employee's right to criticize their employer's working conditions, but that does not come with blanket immunity against any and all internal policies".

block-time published-time 9.00am BST

More than 100 academics, parliamentarians and public figures from across Europe and Australia have signed an open letter criticising the role of China's government in the global pandemic, saying the current crisis affecting the world "has been caused by the regime so many of you have been tolerating and supporting for decades".

China has faced continued hostility and skepticism over its virus response, in particular because of its suppression of information at the beginning of the outbreak, and the punishment of health workers who sought to warn colleagues of the new virus in December.

The already tense relationship between the US and China has worsened, as each government sought to blame the other for the outbreak - including unfounded allegations about deliberate production of the virus. The pandemic has also fuelled hostilities with Taiwan, which has been left out of the World Health Organisation's response, and with African nations whose citizens have been subject to discrimination in Guangzhou.

"We should never forget that China's Chernobyl moment was a self-inflicted wound," reads the letter, published on Tuesday in the Hong Kong Free Press.

The global pandemic forces us all to confront an inconvenient truth: by politicising all aspects of life including people's health, continued autocratic one-party rule in the People's Republic of China has endangered everyone.

Rather than trusting the CCP's intentions and accepting establishment academics' uncritical approval of the party-state's policies, we should pay greater attention to the voices of what can be termed 'unofficial' China.

These independent-minded academics, doctors, entrepreneurs, citizen journalists, public interest lawyers and young students no longer accept the CCP's rule by fear. Neither should you.

block-time published-time 8.59am BST

Afghanistan prepared for 'worst case scenario'

Afghan's health minister has said the country is prepared for the worst case scenario, as the number of confirmed cases reached 714 amid a surge of infection in Kabul and Kandahar. 49 new Coronavirus cases were recorded in last 24 hours in the war-torn country, 18 of which were confirmed in the capital Kabul, taking the total number of infections to 178. Two Covid-19 patients died in the same period, bringing the total number of deaths to 23. There have been 40 recoveries. Kabul was put into full lockdown last week and all roads to the city of six million people were blocked. 1,600 police officers were appointed to monitor adherence to the new rules. The western province of Herat is the country's worst affected area with 291 positive cases, including 41 health workers. 13 new cases have been confirmed in the southern province of Kandahar, pushing the total number of infections to 86. Thousands of Afghan migrants have poured back into Kandahar from Pakistan in recent days.

Afghanistan's health minister Ferozuddin Feroz. Photograph: Rahmat Gul/AP

Speaking at the opening of a mask and isolation kits factory in Kabul on Tuesday morning, the health minister said the country was prepared for the worst case scenario and asked people to respect the advice of health workers to avoid a "storm". Ferozuddin Feroz, said it would not be possible to test everyone, but that if people heeded hygiene advice "Coronavirus will be ended [in the] next two months". He said the historic Darlaman palace would become a field hospital in coming days. Feroz asked all health workers to join the government's fight against the virus and promised to increase salaries of current employees as well as reduce their working hours.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.41am BST

block-time published-time 8.39am BST

France heading for deficit of 9% says minister

The French government's budget deficit is set to hit a post-war record of 9% of economic output this year, the budget minister has said in the second revision in less than a week.

Budget minister Gerald Darmanin said that financial shortfall would exceed the 7.6% prediction announced last week after President Emmanuel Macron extended a nationwide lockdown until 11 May.

Darmanin told France Info:

We are going from a deficit -7.6% (of GDP) to a deficit of -9%. Our country has never seen such a deficit since World War Two.

French Minister of Public Action and Accounts Gerald Darmanin. Photograph: Reuters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.42am BST

block-time published-time 8.00am BST

German Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative Christian Democrats (CDU) will likely delay the election of a new leader until December due to the coronavirus, current leader Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer has said.

The new leader will be in pole position to run as chancellor in the next federal election as Merkel has said she will not seek a fifth term at the head of Europe's biggest economy.

The party had already cancelled a special congress in April to pick a leader and Kramp-Karrenbauer was quoted by dpa news agency as saying it looked increasingly likely that the decision would not take place until a regular conference in December.

Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer and German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Photograph: Odd Andersen/AFP via Getty Images

block-time published-time 7.53am BST

Heathrow passenger demand down 90% in April

Heathrow Airport, traditionally the busiest in Europe, has forecast that passenger demand will be down 90% in April, as coronavirus restrictions stop most people from travelling.

Heathrow said on Tuesday that its passenger numbers were down 52% in March compared with the same period last year, with many of those journeys being made by Britons returning home from abroad, reports Reuters.

The airport, which is owned by a group of investors including Spain's Ferrovial, the Qatar Investment Authority and China Investment Corp, said it was now only using one of its two runways, as flights continue for cargo.

The concourse at Terminal 5 at Heathrow last Thursday. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.43am BST

block-time published-time 7.35am BST

Southeast Asian leaders have held a meeting via video link to plot a strategy to overcome a crisis that has threatened their economies and kept millions of people in their homes under lockdowns, the Associated Press reports.

The heads of state of the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations were to hold further talks later Tuesday, also through video conferencing, with their counterparts from China, Japan and South Korea who are expected to express their support in helping ASEAN fight the coronavirus.

Thai prime minister attends a video conference of Special ASEAN Summit on COVID-19. Photograph: Royal Thai Government/EPA

Vietnam, ASEAN's leader this year, has postponed an in-person gathering tentatively to June.

In an opening speech, the country's prime minister, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, said it is in these grim hours that the solidarity of the ASEAN community "shines like a beacon in the dark".

He said containment efforts have placed the pandemic under control, but warned against complacency, with a number of member countries, including Indonesia and the Philippines, fearing spikes in infections after large-scale testing is conducted.

Founded in 1967 in the Cold War era, ASEAN - a diverse bloc representing more than 640m - people has held annual summits of its leaders and top diplomats with ceremonies steeped in tradition, protocol and photo-ops. Derided as a talk shop by critics, the bloc is known largely for photographs of its leaders locking arms at annual meetings in a show of unity despite often-thorny differences.

All of ASEAN's member states have been hit by the coronavirus outbreak, with the total number of confirmed cases reaching more than 20,400, including over 840 deaths, despite massive lockdowns, travel restrictions and home quarantines.

block-time published-time 7.27am BST

Hello and welcome to the Guardian's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Frances Perraudin, in London.

I'll be bringing you the latest updates on the crisis for the next few hours. You can contact me directly on Twitter ( @fperraudin ) with tips, questions and comments, and I'll do my best to respond.

block-time published-time 7.08am BST

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan. With you for the next few hours is my colleague Frances Perraudin.

If you're just waking up or checking in, it's worth (at the very least in case you were under the impression it things couldn't get weirder) watching this video of US president Donald Trump's White House press briefing meltdown on Monday evening in Washington:

block-time published-time 7.06am BST

Summary  •The global death toll neared 120,000 as cases passed 1.92 million. According to Johns Hopkins University figures, 1,920,985 people worldwide are known to have been infected with coronavirus, though the total number of infections is likely higher. So far, 119,687 people have died in the pandemic.•France restrictions to ease in May. In a televised address, the French president said France would start returning to normal life on 11 May, if citizens were "civic, responsible and respected the rules" - and if the number of cases of coronavirus continued to drop. He said that only by respecting the confinement rules would the battle against Covid-19 be won.•Brace for 'extraordinary' crisis, says Putin. As Moscow tightened its lockdown measures, Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet. In a video conference with officials on Monday, Putin said the next weeks would be "decisive" for Russia's fight against the virus as the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better."•China cases emerge on Russia border. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on 13 April, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases.•Trump threatens to withdraw funding from WHO again. In a bizarre and antagonistic press briefing that included the airing of a campaign-style video attacking the press and Trump announcing his authority over lockdown rules is "total", the US president said he will also decide this week whether he plans to reopen the US by 1 May. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday, US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said.•Hospitalisations in New York start to plateau. A glimmer of hope. Deaths and hospitalisations are falling in New York. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," governor Andrew Cuomo said, announcing an alliance with six other governors in the region to explore how to lift restrictions. "If you do it wrong, it can backfire, and we've seen that with other places in the globe," Cuomo said.•Japan reports 390 new cases. Monday's new cases were lower than the 530 new cases reported by the health ministry on Sunday. The country's total is 7,645. Japan was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo.•IMF to provide immediate debt relief to 25 countries. The debt relief will be made available under the IMF's Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT). About $215 million of the total will be used for grants to the first 25 countries over the next six months, with extensions possible up to two years.

The global death toll neared 120,000 as cases passed 1.92 million. According to Johns Hopkins University figures, 1,920,985 people worldwide are known to have been infected with coronavirus, though the total number of infections is likely higher. So far, 119,687 people have died in the pandemic.

France restrictions to ease in May. In a televised address, the French president said France would start returning to normal life on 11 May, if citizens were "civic, responsible and respected the rules" - and if the number of cases of coronavirus continued to drop. He said that only by respecting the confinement rules would the battle against Covid-19 be won.

Brace for 'extraordinary' crisis, says Putin. As Moscow tightened its lockdown measures, Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet. In a video conference with officials on Monday, Putin said the next weeks would be "decisive" for Russia's fight against the virus as the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better."

China cases emerge on Russia border. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on 13 April, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases.

Trump threatens to withdraw funding from WHO again. In a bizarre and antagonistic press briefing that included the airing of a campaign-style video attacking the press and Trump announcing his authority over lockdown rules is "total", the US president said he will also decide this week whether he plans to reopen the US by 1 May. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday, US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said.

Hospitalisations in New York start to plateau. A glimmer of hope. Deaths and hospitalisations are falling in New York. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," governor Andrew Cuomo said, announcing an alliance with six other governors in the region to explore how to lift restrictions. "If you do it wrong, it can backfire, and we've seen that with other places in the globe," Cuomo said.

Japan reports 390 new cases. Monday's new cases were lower than the 530 new cases reported by the health ministry on Sunday. The country's total is 7,645. Japan was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo.

IMF to provide immediate debt relief to 25 countries. The debt relief will be made available under the IMF's Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT). About $215 million of the total will be used for grants to the first 25 countries over the next six months, with extensions possible up to two years.

Related:  Coronavirus latest: at a glance

block-time published-time 7.04am BST

Never thought I'd say this but:

enltri love sports https://t.co/4vOk1UN7cV

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) April 14, 2020

block-time published-time 7.03am BST

A spokesperson for the Polish government says decisions on easing restrictions will be taken on Wednesday or Thursday, with limits around shopping being the first to be lifted, Reuters reports.

Poland has 6,934 confirmed cases and 245 deaths according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker.

block-time published-time 6.55am BST

India extends nationwide lockdown to 3 May

In a televised address on Tuesday morning, prime minister Narendra Modi announced that India's nationwide lockdown is to be extended till 3 May.

The lockdown in India, imposed on its population of 1.3bn people, is the largest of its kind anywhere in the world and has been the cause of enormous amounts of human suffering since it was first introduced at midnight on 24 March. India's millions of migrant workers, and the 300 million people who fall below the poverty line and live a hand-to-mouth existence, have struggled without being able to work and travel and it has led to many finding themselves without food.

A spray machine is used to sanitize a locality in New Delhi, India, 13 April 2020. Photograph: EPA

In his speech, Modi thanked people for being "disciplined soldiers" and said that it was "now clear that the road we have taken is the right one". Over the past 24 hours, the number of coronavirus cases in India reached 10,000, with the death toll currently at 339. Modi's speech also emphasised his belief that India had tackled the spread of coronavirus more proactively and successfully than many countries in the west. "Compared to developed countries across the world, India is in a much better position," he said. Modi also announced that from 20 April the lockdown would be eased in a few select areas which had no risk of becoming hotspots for the virus, but that they would be determined on a case by case basis.

block-time published-time 6.50am BST

Human Rights Watch is today launching a campaign demanding that the Greek government free unaccompanied migrant children "from police cells and detention centres" because of the heightened risk of exposure to coronavirus.

The campaign, running under the hashtag #FreetheKids, urges people to call on Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis to release the minors and transfer them to safe, child-friendly facilities.

enltr1 \ The campaign to #FreeTheKids, which starts today, urges people to press            #Greece 's Prime Minister Mitsotakis to immediately release unaccompanied migrant children who are in detention, and to transfer them to safe, child-friendly facilities.            https://t.co/D0xSRDS82I           pic.twitter.com/c5nmqbhCc0

- Wenzel Michalski (@WenzelMichalski) April 14, 2020

"Keeping children locked up in filthy police cells was always wrong, but now it also exposes them to the risk of COVID-19 infection," said Eva Cosse, Greece researcher at the US-based group. "The Greek government has a duty to end this abusive practice and make sure these vulnerable kids get the care and protection they need."

The organisation launched the initiative after what it described as "years of research and advocacy" on the country's practice of detaining and locking up children, with no immediate access to a parent or relative, in police cells and detention centres.

enltrGreece: Free Unaccompanied Migrant Children https://t.co/chnePLsN0V

- Human Rights Watch (@hrw) April 14, 2020

Citing figures released from the state-run National Centre for Social solidarity, it says that as of March 31, some 331 minors were in police custody awaiting transfer to a shelter, almost twice the number who were in detention in January.

According to the group, Greek authorities argue they place unaccompanied children - many who have made perilous journeys to get to Greece - in detention under a form of "protective custody regime" that is in the child's best interest.

HRW claims the facilities are not only inappropriate but overcrowded and highly unhygienic and, as such, provide fertile ground for a Covid-19 outbreak.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.00am BST

block-time published-time 6.45am BST

UK papers

Here are the UK's newspaper front pages for Tuesday, 14 April 2020:

enltrGUARDIAN: Revealed: how Britain missed three chances to bulk buy protective kit #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/XEZFOlaPbO

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

enltrTIMES: Lockdown for 3 more weeks #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/FNSvnz3s5D

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

enltrINDEPENDENT: How the coronavirus does discriminate #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/PtBLXoFIJw

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

enltrTELEGRAPH: Ministers plan gentle path back to normal life #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/2T5UAVeVXO

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

enltrSUN: Thanks for doing your Brit #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/OZqARuBQum

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

enltrTomorrow's front page: NO MORE: Mirror campaign demands more protective equipment for NHS to prevent further lost lives. #tomorrowspaperstoday           https://t.co/BJHLLYhMZJ           pic.twitter.com/RcBTRB3etf

- Daily Mirror (@DailyMirror) April 13, 2020

enltrSCOTSMAN: Scotland could go own way on lockdown rules #TomorrowsPapersToday           pic.twitter.com/hWEztcUodW

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) April 13, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.46am BST

block-time published-time 6.41am BST

Thailand on Tuesday reported 34 new coronavirus cases and a death of a 52-year old Thai female bus driver in Bangkok.

Empty seats are seen at Mo Chit bus terminal during the Songkran holiday which marks the Thai New Year, in Bangkok, Thailand, 14 April 2020. Photograph: Soe Zeya Tun/Reuters

Of the new cases, 27 patients are linked to previous cases, four with no links to old cases, while two people who tested positive are awaiting investigation into how they were infected, said Taweesin Wisanuyothin, a spokesman for the government's Center for COVID-19 Situation Administration. A Thai national who tested positive on Tuesday was already under quarantine after traveling to South Sulawesi province, Indonesia for a religious gathering last month. Since the outbreak escalated in January, Thailand has reported a total of 2,613 cases and 41 fatalities, while 1,405 patients have recovered and gone home.

block-time published-time 6.39am BST

Vietnam's civil aviation authority (CAAV) said on Wednesday that domestic flights would remain suspended, after airlines announced they were set to resume after the expiry of a government order for 15 days of social distancing, Reuters reports.

"In order to strictly implement social distancing and curb the spread of the coronavirus, airlines are not allowed to sell tickets for flights from April 16," the CAAV said in a statement.

People wearing personal protective equipments walk at Noi Bai international airport in Hanoi, Vietnam 12 April 2020. Photograph: Luong Thai Linh/EPA

block-time published-time 6.27am BST

How coronavirus almost brought down the global financial system

In the third week of March, while most of our minds were fixed on surging coronavirus death rates and the apocalyptic scenes in hospital wards, global financial markets came as close to a collapse as they have since September 2008. The price of shares in the world's major corporations plunged. The value of the dollar surged against every currency in the world, squeezing debtors everywhere from Indonesia to Mexico. Trillion-dollar markets for government debt, the basic foundation of the financial system, lurched up and down in terror-stricken cycles.

On the terminal screens, interest rates danced. Traders hunched over improvised home workstations - known in the new slang of March 2020 as " Rona rigs " - screaming with frustration as sluggish home wifi systems dragged behind the movement of the markets. At the low point on 23 March, $26tn had been            wiped off the value of global equity markets, inflicting huge losses both on the fortunate few who own shares, and on the collective pools of savings held by pension and insurance funds.

What the markets were reacting to was an unthinkable turn of events. After a fatal period of hesitation, governments around the world were ordering comprehensive lockdowns to contain a lethal pandemic. Built for growth, the global economic machine was being brought to a screeching halt. In 2020, for the first time since the second world war, production around the world will contract.

It is now clear that we can, if circumstances demand, turn the economy off. But the consequences are catastrophic.

Related:  How coronavirus almost brought down the global financial system

block-time published-time 6.18am BST

Global Covid-19 cases near 2 million as Putin warns Russia faces 'extraordinary' crisis

The number of Covid-19 cases recorded worldwide is nearing 2 million, as Vladimir Putin warned warned officials to brace for "complex and extraordinary" scenarios in Russia as a result of the outbreak.

The country reported 2,558 new cases on Monday, its highest daily figure yet, as officials tightened lockdown restrictions in Moscow. The overall nationwide tally is 18,328 and the death toll is 148. Putin told officials in a video conference the situation was "changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better" and Russia's next few weeks would be "decisive".

China has also voiced concern about spread of the virus in Russia. While China's daily reported infection rate remains far below its peak during the pandemic, the majority of new cases have been in regions bordering its northern neighbour. The area has become the new focus of containment measures, with some lockdown measures brought in for the cities of Hubin and Suifenhe.

"Russia is the latest example of a failure to control imported cases and can serve as a warning to others," said the state-owned English-language Global Times in an editorial.

"The Chinese people have watched Russia become a severely affected country ... This should sound the alarm: China must strictly prevent the inflow of cases and avoid a second outbreak."

Related:  Global Covid-19 cases near 2 million as Putin warns Russia faces 'extraordinary' crisis

block-time published-time 5.55am BST

In New Zealand, new modelling from the Treasury has painted a dire picture of the country's economic prospects for the next year, with a surge in unemployment to as much as 13% even if Covid-19 infections are contained and lockdown rules eased after the initial four weeks.

A jobless rate of up to 26% - and a fall in GDP of 23% - is predicted if the country is forced to remain in its strictest level of shutdown for a total of six months before moving to marginally lighter measures.

However, with a larger fiscal stimulus package than the NZ$20bn (£9.7bn) already pledged by the government, the 13% jobless rate modelled could hit a much lower peak of 8.5% before falling to 5.5% in the year to June 2021. On Tuesday, Robertson pledged to release further support.

All seven of the scenarios modelled - the first released since the pandemic reached New Zealand - predicted that unemployment would be higher in the June quarter of this year than the 6.7% reached during the 2008 global financial crisis. The current jobless rate is just over 4%.

Related:  New Zealand jobless rate could hit 13% even if lockdown ends next week, modelling suggests

block-time published-time 5.41am BST

Summary

•The confirmed global death toll passed 119,687, and at least 1.92 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates.•The majority of new cases in China are in a province bordering Russia. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on April 13, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases.•Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday warned officials to brace for an "extraordinary" virus crisis as Moscow tightened its lockdown measures and Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet, AFP reports.•US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week.•New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said "I think you can say the worst is over," as the number of coronavirus hospitalisations in the state starts to plateau.•The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC : "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now."•The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it would provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries under its Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) to allow them to focus more financial resources on fighting the coronavirus pandemic•Japan's health ministry has reported 390 new coronavirus cases, for a domestic total of 7,645. The country was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo. Japan's health ministry reported 530 new cases and four deaths on Sunday.•The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then.•German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained.•The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial.•The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to.

The confirmed global death toll passed 119,687, and at least 1.92 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates.

The majority of new cases in China are in a province bordering Russia. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on April 13, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases.

Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday warned officials to brace for an "extraordinary" virus crisis as Moscow tightened its lockdown measures and Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet, AFP reports.

US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week.

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said "I think you can say the worst is over," as the number of coronavirus hospitalisations in the state starts to plateau.

The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC : "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now."

The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it would provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries under its Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) to allow them to focus more financial resources on fighting the coronavirus pandemic

Japan's health ministry has reported 390 new coronavirus cases, for a domestic total of 7,645. The country was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo. Japan's health ministry reported 530 new cases and four deaths on Sunday.

The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then.

German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained.

The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial.

The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.15am BST

block-time published-time 5.28am BST

Podcast: How vulnerable are people with asthma?

Nicola Davis speaks to            Dr Andy Whittamore about the effects of Covid-19 on people with asthma and what they can do to protect themselves.

Related:  Covid-19: how vulnerable are people with asthma?

block-time published-time 5.17am BST

The coronavirus pandemic has led to an unprecedented global surge in digital surveillance, researchers and privacy advocates around the world have said, with billions of people facing enhanced monitoring that may prove difficult to roll back.

Governments in at least 25 countries are employing vast programmes for mobile data tracking, apps to record personal contact with others, CCTV networks equipped with facial recognition, permission schemes to go outside and drones to enforce social isolation regimes.

The methods have been adopted by authoritarian states and democracies alike and have opened lucrative new markets for companies that extract, sell, and analyse private data. One of the world's foremost experts on mobile phone surveillance said the pandemic had created a "9/11 on steroids" that could lead to grave abuses of power.

Related:  Growth in surveillance may be hard to scale back after pandemic, experts say

block-time published-time 5.11am BST

How Greece is beating coronavirus despite a decade of debt

Every day at 6pm Greeks turn on their TV sets and tune into a broadcast that at other times they might have missed. Like most rituals, there are no surprises: two men, seated several meters apart, behind a long table in a brightly lit room.

A man wearing a mask and gloves walks in front of a building covered with grafitti in Athens, Greece, 30 March 2020. Photograph: Yannis Kolesidis/EPA

The health ministry's daily coronavirus briefing then begins with Sotiris Tsiodras, a soft-spoken Harvard-trained professor of infectious diseases, delivering the latest facts and figures with the occasional emotional plea. Nikos Hardalias, the civil defence minister, invariably follows, invoking the gravity of the situation with warnings that Greeks "must stay at home".

The bookish professor and no-nonsense former mayor are the faces who have come to be associated with the government's drive to contain the spread of Covid-19. Their efforts at keeping the country virus-safe appear to be paying off: in a population of just over 11 million, there were, as of Monday, 2,145 confirmed cases of coronavirus and 99 deaths, far lower than elsewhere in Europe. Italy to date has registered 20,465 deaths.

Greece, it is generally agreed, is having a better crisis than may have been expected:

Related:  How Greece is beating coronavirus despite a decade of debt

block-time published-time 5.07am BST

Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro and his health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta are in open conflict over the countrys coronavirus response, leading many to worry that the far-right leader could soon fire the official who has played a major role in containing the outbreak, AP reports.

In this March 18, 2019 file photo, Brazil's Health Minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta, right, gives anti-bacterial gel to President Jair Bolsonaro. Photograph: Andre Borges/AP

The public battle between a president notorious for his polarising remarks and the more measured doctor has reminded many of a similar tug of war taking place in the United States, between President Donald Trump and his chief virus expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci. It has also raised concerns that efforts to prevent the spread of the virus in Latin America's largest country could veer off track. In a televised interview earlier this month, Bolsonaro said Mandetta had failed to show humility and that anyone can be fired. A few days later, Bolsonaro told a group of supporters that he would use his pen against officials in his government who are full of themselves. Those comments were widely understood as signaling an end to Mandetta's tenure, so much so that the minister said his subordinates cleaned out his desk. But asked about the possibility of resigning recently, Mandetta said he learned from his teachers that a doctor never abandons his patient.

block-time published-time 5.00am BST

According to Washington Post journalist Robert Klemko, March this year was the first month in the US since 2002 without a school shooting.

Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden has retweeted the statistic:

enltrIt shouldn't take a global pandemic shutting down schools to end school shootings. https://t.co/hlXwn6Mhkd

- Joe Biden (@JoeBiden)

April 13, 2020

block-time published-time 4.51am BST

The novel coronavirus is 10 times more deadly than swine flu, which caused a global pandemic in 2009, the World Health Organization said Monday, stressing a vaccine would be necessary to fully halt transmission.

AFP reports that WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a virtual briefing from Geneva that the organisation was constantly learning about the new virus sweeping the globe, which has now killed nearly 115,000 people and infected over 1.9 million.

A patient who recovered from coronavirus kisses the ground as medical staff rejoice, north of the Moroccan capital Rabat on 12 April, 2020. Photograph: Fadel Senna/AFP via Getty Images

"We know that Covid-19 spreads fast, and we know that it is deadly, 10 times deadlier than the 2009 flu pandemic," he said.

More than half of the planet's population is currently staying home as part of efforts to stem the spread of the virus, but Tedros warned that while COVID-19 had accelerated quickly, "it decelerates much more slowly."

"In other words, the way down is much slower than the way up," he said.

WHO said that "ultimately, the development and delivery of a safe and effective vaccine will be needed to fully interrupt transmission".

A vaccine is thought to be at least 12 to 18 months away.

block-time published-time 4.43am BST

In Mexico, health workers briefly blocked a street in Mexico City on Monday to demand more protective gear as their hospital receives more patients suffering from Covid-19, AP reports.

Health workers are seen inside at the ISSSTE October 1 Hospital during a demonstration Coronavirus outbreak, Mexico City, Mexico, 13 Apr 2020 Photograph: Carlos Tischler/REX/Shutterstock

Dozens of nurses, doctors and other personnel from the October 1 Hospital carried handwritten signs and shouted for assistance. The hospital is part of Mexico's public health system for government workers.

One nurse, who had worked at the hospital for more than 20 years, but requested anonymity to avoid repercussions, said she received only one flimsy mask per day even though she works on a floor with dozens of patients with the new coronavirus. At least one nurse has already died at the hospital and a doctor is in intensive care, she said. Calls to the hospital and the agency that runs it were not immediately answered. Mexico's Institute of Social Security acknowledged Monday there had been outbreaks among medical personnel in at least five hospitals across the country, with 535 medical workers infected and nine dead so far. Mexico has seen a growing number of such protests in recent weeks as the epidemic spreads. Mexico has reported just over 5,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 332 deaths.

block-time published-time 4.29am BST

Japan reports 390 new cases, South Korea 27

Japan's health ministry has reported 390 new cases of infection for a domestic total of 7,645. The country was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo to stock up on necessities.

A net is laid around a Tokyo 2020 merchandise store after the shop closed for the day at the Narita International Airport in Nairta, near Tokyo, 2 April 2020. Photograph: Jae C Hong/AP

South Korea meanwhile has reported 27 fresh cases of the new coronavirus, the 13th day in a row of below 100, as infections continued to wane in the worst-hit city of Daegu and nearby towns. Figures released by South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Tuesday brought national totals to 10,564 infections and 222 virus-related deaths. The KCDC says at least 940 of the cases were linked to passengers arriving from overseas, with most of the cases detected in the past three weeks.

block-time published-time 4.11am BST

A sweet story from our correspondent in New Zealand, where endangered plovers have been relocated from Christchurch to near Wellington, despite the lockdown:

Related:  Endangered New Zealand bird sent to safety offshore despite Covid-19 lockdown

block-time published-time 4.07am BST

The US Census Bureau wants to delay deadlines for the 2020 head count of all US residents because of the coronavirus outbreak, the Associated Press reports.

If approved by lawmakers, it would push back timetables for releasing data used to draw congressional and legislative districts, officials said on Monday.

Census Bureau officials said they were postponing all field operations until 1 June and the deadline for wrapping up the nation's head count was being pushed back to 31 October.

Field operations for the 2020 census have been suspended since mid-March and were set to resume this week. The deadline for finishing the head count also had been pushed back from the end of July to mid-August because of the pandemic.

block-time published-time 3.56am BST

Here's some more from China, where Russia is being blamed for new infections inside the country.

Russia has become China's largest source of imported cases, with a total of 409 infections originating in the country, and Chinese citizens should stay put and not return home, the state-owned Global Times said in an editorial.

"Russia is the latest example of a failure to control imported cases and can serve as a warning to others," said the paper, which is run by the Communist Party's People's Daily.

"The Chinese people have watched Russia become a severely affected country... This should sound the alarm: China must strictly prevent the inflow of cases and avoid a second outbreak."

China's northeastern border province of Heilongjiang saw 79 new cases of imported coronavirus cases on Monday. All the new cases were Chinese citizens travelling back into the country from Russia, state media said on Tuesday. They formed the bulk of new cases on the Chinese mainland, which stood at 89.

block-time published-time 3.45am BST

Here is US President Donald Trump at the White House press briefing earlier playing a campaign-style video attacking the media.

The video comprises clips from Trump's preferred network, Fox News, praising his record on the pandemic. CNN and MSCNB cut away from the briefing, calling the video "propaganda".

At the rest of the briefing an agitated Trump angrily lashed out at reporters for questioning his response and insisted 'everything we did was right' while the media was 'guilty'

block-time published-time 3.33am BST

IMF to provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries

The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it would provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries under its Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) to allow them to focus more financial resources on fighting the coronavirus pandemic, Reuters reports. IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said the fund's executive board approved on Monday the first batch of countries to receive grants to cover their debt service obligations to the fund for an initial six months.

enltrI am very pleased that the IMF's Executive Board just agreed to provide immediate debt service relief to 25 of the poorest countries for the next 6 months. This will provide them space to reorient funding towards critical areas to address #COVID19.            https://t.co/Qvn996Bzbc           pic.twitter.com/8eKNoRscKt

- Kristalina Georgieva (@KGeorgieva) April 13, 2020

About $215 million of the total would be used for grants to the first 25 countries over the next six months, with extensions possible up to two years, an IMF spokeswoman said.  The first countries that will receive debt service relief from the CCRT are Afghanistan, Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Tajikistan, Togo and Yemen, the IMF said.

block-time published-time 3.28am BST

Here is everything we know about the deadly Covid-19 cluster in north-west Tasmania that may have been sparked by an "illegal dinner party" of healthcare workers.

Ben Doherty and Charlotte Graham-McLay report:

Australia's chief medical officer Brendan Murphy has told a NZ parliamentary committee that the dinner party attended by healthcare workers was the origin of a cluster of new cases in the state.

But the state's premier, Peter Gutwein, said the chief medical officer "was commenting on a rumour", and no dinner party had been identified as a possible source of infection.

The cluster of more than 60 cases has caused a spike in Tasmania's previously low number of infections, and forced about 5,000 people into the country's strictest lockdown, as well as the emergency closure of two hospitals.

So far more than 60 cases of Covid-19 have been linked to the outbreak, including at least 45 medical workers and nine patients.

Related:  Tasmanian premier and chief medical officer at odds over 'illegal dinner party' source of Covid-19 cluster

block-time published-time 3.23am BST

Podcast: Why have the UK and Germany taken different approaches to Covid-19 testing?

In February, the UK and Germany were taking a similar approach to testing for coronavirus. But over the subsequent weeks, the two countries began to go in very different directions. Guardian health editor Sarah Bosley and Berlin bureau chief Philip Oltermann look at what happened next.

Related:  Why have the UK and Germany taken different approaches to Covid-19 testing?

block-time published-time 3.14am BST

Speaking of readers - thanks to the 11.6 million of you who read this blog, the Australia live blog, and other news coverage on Guardian Australia this month:

Guardian Australia's audience increased by 104% in March making it the fourth most popular news site in the nation with 11.6 million readers.

The global Covid-19 pandemic has seen a spike in traffic to news websites, with Guardian Australia experiencing the biggest surge in the Australian market.

Guardian Australia doubled its unique audience in March and moved up from seventh to fourth place, according to the Nielsen digital content ratings.

The coronavirus reporting, which includes two of the most popular pages on the site - a daily liveblog and data tracker, has boosted Guardian Australia up the rankings ahead of the Daily Mail (5th), nine.com.au (6th) and the Sydney Morning Herald (7th).

Related:  Guardian Australia doubles audience to become fourth most popular news site in the country

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.24am BST

block-time published-time 3.08am BST

Thanks to the readers who have sent news and tips today - you have been really helpful. A reminder that the easiest way to get in touch with me directly is on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

block-time published-time 3.07am BST

Trump claims 'total authority' and attacks media in chaotic coronavirus briefing

More analysis of that White House presser now.

Donald Trump declared in a White House briefing on Monday that his "authority is total" when it comes to lockdown rules during the coronavirus pandemic, and he denied that he was weighing firing            Dr Anthony Fauci, the country's foremost infectious diseases expert who sits on the coronavirus task force.

After a weekend reprieve from presidential briefings that have been likened to Trump rallies for their uninterrupted flow of Trumpian id, the president returned to the lectern on Monday to deliver one of his most bizarre performances yet.

US governors announce multi-state pacts to begin easing coronavirus ordersRead more

He played a campaign video produced by White House staff, in a possible violation of elections laws, that he said highlighted the media's downplaying of the coronavirus crisis in the early stages of the pandemic.

Related:  Trump claims 'total authority' and attacks media in chaotic coronavirus briefing

block-time published-time 3.00am BST

Wounded by media scrutiny, Trump turned a briefing into a presidential tantrum

A toddler threw a self-pitying tantrum on live television on Monday night. Unfortunately he was 73 years old, wearing a long red tie and running the world's most powerful country.

Donald Trump, starved of campaign rallies, Mar-a-Lago weekends and golf, and goaded by a bombshell newspaper report, couldn't take it any more. Years of accreted grievance and resentment towards the media came gushing out in a torrent. He ranted, he raved, he melted down and he blew up the internet with one of the most jaw-dropping performances of his presidency.

This was, as he likes to put it, "a 10".

Trump's Easter had evidently been ruined by a damning 5,500-word New York Times investigation showing that Trump            squandered precious time in January and February as numerous government figures were sounding the alarm about the coronavirus.

With more than 23,000 American lives lost in such circumstances, some presidents might now be considering resignation. Not Trump. He arrived in the west wing briefing room determined to tell the world, or at least his base, that he was not to blame. Instead it was a new and bloody phase of his war against "enemy of the people" - the media. Families grieving loved ones lost to the virus were in for cold comfort here.

Related:  Wounded by media scrutiny, Trump turned a briefing into a presidential tantrum

block-time published-time 2.55am BST

On that Johns Hopkins error earlier:

enltrFor those who may have seen the Johns Hopkins coronavirus tracker suddenly spike to over 2 million cases worldwide, it was an error in figures for Florida, with 100k cases added to Okaloosa county. This was corrected, and current cases stand at 1,918,855. https://t.co/zf7EBG7GYt           pic.twitter.com/EZ9awq81A7

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) April 14, 2020

enltrThe Okaloosa bit - the county actually has 103 cases, up 1 from earlier (ie 102), which looks like what caused the error "102,103": pic.twitter.com/UdAXbGFyMp

- Helen Sullivan (@helenrsullivan) April 14, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.24am BST

block-time published-time 2.33am BST

In Australia, an update on the confusing situation in Tasmania.

The CMO Brendan Murphy told a New Zealand health committee this morning they needed to keep a lid on the virus infections, telling them

We thought we were doing really well then in the last week we had a cluster of 49 cases in a hospital in Tasmania just over the weekend. Most of them went to an illegal dinner party of medical workers."

Then not half an hour later, the Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, said the CMO had been commenting "on a rumour".

I spoke to Brendan Murphy, a short while ago.  To be frank, Brendan was commenting on a rumour.

At this stage, there has... our contact tracing has not identified a dinner party of health workers.

However, I accept that this is a serious allegation, and it's something that needs to be followed up, and so we will retrace our steps, but, importantly, I've asked the Tasmania Police to investigate this matter, and that will be started today. We need to get on top of this.

So Tasmania will investigate whether or not there was a dinner party, as it tries to work out the origins of the north-west outbreak, which has caused two hospitals to close and put just under 5000 people into a strict lockdown.

block-time published-time 2.31am BST

First sailor dies from Covid-19 and 600 test positive after outbreak on USS Theodore Roosevelt

The death of the first US active duty military member comes 11 days after captain was fired for voicing concerns over safety of his crew on ship off Guam.

A member of the crew of the coronavirus-infected USS Theodore Roosevelt has died of complications related to the disease, 11 days after the aircraft carrier's captain was fired for pressing his concern that the US navy had done too little to safeguard his crew. The sailor was the first active-duty military member to die of Covid-19.

Related:  Sailor dies from Covid-19 and 600 test positive after outbreak on USS Theodore Roosevelt

block-time published-time 2.27am BST

Biden projected to win Wisconsin primary after Sanders drops out

The Guardian's Tom McCarthy and Sam Levine report.

As former vice-president Joe Biden scored a widely expected win in the Wisconsin Democratic presidential primary, a liberal challenger for a state supreme court seat declared victory in an upset hailed by Democrats as boding well for the presidential election in November.

The state supreme court is expected to rule in numerous voting rights cases in the lead-up to the presidential election, including a case in which 200,000 voters could be purged from voter rolls. Wisconsin is a swing state that narrowly voted for Donald Trump in 2016.

Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, had held a large lead in polls before the vote was held. His main opponent, Bernie Sanders,            dropped out of the presidential nominating race the day after the vote. Sanders endorsed Biden's candidacy            in a video chat on Monday.

The results from Wisconsin on Monday were drawn from election day the previous Tuesday, which was marred by long lines of voters forced to go to the polls in person as coronavirus ravaged the country.

Coronavirus fears led to an unprecedented number of requests for absentee ballots in the state, numbering more than 1m, but many voters reported that they had not received ballots by election day.

Related:  Biden projected to win Wisconsin primary after Sanders drops out

block-time published-time 2.23am BST

Majority of new cases in China in province bordering Russia

China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on April 13, down from 108 the previous day, the health authority said on Tuesday.

Of the total, 86 were imported, down from 98 a day earlier, the National Health Commission said.

Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases.

The number is down from Sunday's 108 new infections, the highest number in more than five weeks, surpassing Saturday's 99, which was nearly double the 46 reported on Friday.

China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang,  which shares a border with Russia.

Workers wearing face masks move bed parts into a makeshift hospital which has been converted from an office building to treat coronavirus patients in Suifenhe, a city of Heilongjiang province on the border with Russia, China 10 April 2020. Photograph: China Daily/Reuters

China's northeastern border with Russia has become its new frontline in the fight against a resurgence in the epidemic,

The number of total confirmed cases in China now stands at 82,249. Its death toll from the pandemic stands at 3,341, with no new deaths on April 13.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.32am BST

block-time published-time 2.10am BST

Just a note to those of you who may be watching the Johns Hopkins University tracker closely, as we are.

The figure listed on their website briefly showed that there were more than two million confirmed cases worldwide. This has now been revised down to 1,918,855.

We'll keep a close eye on it throughout the day - no word yet from Johns Hopkins on what the reason behind this was.

block-time published-time 2.00am BST

In Australia, mind-melting news from the Chief Medical Officer Brendan Murphy now.

According to Sky News New Zealand correspondent Jackson Williams, Professor Murphy has said Australia needed to be prepared for "further outbreaks".

Why? Because of an illegal dinner party. Who attended? Medical workers.

We thought we were doing really well then in the last week we had a cluster of 49 cases in a hospital in Tasmania just over the weekend. Most of them went to an illegal dinner party of medical workers."

enltrGeez...As reported by @jacksonw____ - Aust CMO Brendan Murphy has dropped a bit of a bombshell to a NZ Committee: "A cluster of 49 cases in a hospital in Tasmania just over the weekend...but most of them went to an illegal dinner party of medical workers!"

- Thomas O'Brien (@TJ__OBrien) April 13, 2020

The Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein  has previously dismissed questions of a dinner party as 'social media rumours'

"To be frank, I've never taken much notice of social media," he said, when this was last raised on Monday.

"The key thing here is we work through this.

"The contact tracking and tracing will determine how this has occurred and, importantly, what the epicentre of it is."

block-time published-time 1.53am BST

Help the Guardian document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus

Lost on the frontline is a project by the Guardian and            Kaiser Health News that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. This project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project            here.

If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we'd like you to share their story.

We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients.

More details on what we're looking for and how to reach us below:

Related:  Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus

block-time published-time 1.41am BST

In case you missed it, here is some of the bizarre and unsettling footage played by Trump before Monday evening's White House press briefing:

enltr.? @realDonaldTrump ? scowls at reporters in briefing room while video clips are played, that he says show what a great job he's done in tackling            #coronavirus - and not being recognized by the media            pic.twitter.com/bFc5RLhlN3

- Jon Sopel (@BBCJonSopel) April 13, 2020

enltrStraight up North Korea-style propaganda going on right now in the White House briefing room. Get a load of the dramatic music. pic.twitter.com/p3KO6Ap2Sp

- Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) April 13, 2020

enltrTrump is now playing back clips of various governors praising him pic.twitter.com/LiwAM8OgyB

- Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) April 13, 2020

block-time published-time 1.32am BST

Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said on Monday nobody would die from the coronavirus in his country and again rejected any need for the strict lockdown measures adopted by most countries to contain the spread of the pandemic.

A woman rides a bicycle in front of the fence with the graffiti reading "quarantine' in Minsk, Belarus, Monday, April 6, 2020. Photograph: Sergei Grits/AP

It was the latest show of defiance by the strongman leader, who has dismissed worries about the disease as a "psychosis" and variously suggested drinking vodka, going to saunas and driving tractors to fight the virus, Reuters reports. Belarus has kept its borders open and even allowed soccer matches in the national league to be played in front of spectators. Its churches have also remained open in the run-up to Orthodox Easter on 19 April.

"No one will die of coronavirus in our country. I publicly declare this," Lukashenko said. "We have already found combinations of drugs to save people." The health ministry has reported 2,919 confirmed coronavirus cases and 29 deaths in Belarus. But Lukashenko said the fatalities were the result of underlying health conditions in the patients, such as heart disease and diabetes. "Therefore, I say that not a single person died purely from the coronavirus."

block-time published-time 1.26am BST

Putin warns Russia to prepare for 'extraordinary' virus crisis     Two Russian police officers, wearing face masks to protect from coronavirus, patrol empty Manezhnaya Square near Red Square to ensure a self-isolation regime due to coronavirus, in Moscow, Russia, Monday, 13 April 2020. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP

Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday warned officials to brace for "extraordinary" scenarios in the coronavirus pandemic as Moscow tightened its lockdown measures and Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet, AFP reports.

Russia reported 2,558 new cases on Monday, bringing the overall nationwide tally to 18,328. Eighteen people diagnosed with the virus died overnight, pushing the death toll to 148. Though rising, the number of deaths remains much lower for now than in countries such as the United States and Italy.

In a video conference with officials on Monday, Putin said the next weeks would be "decisive" for Russia's fight against the virus as the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better."

He told officials that they need to "consider all scenarios for how the situation will develop, even the most complex and extraordinary."

In the video conference, Putin called for measures to end shortages of protective equipment for medics.

"I know there's not always enough of that and of course here we need additional measures to get rid of all these shortages," the president said.

He added that Russia would also bring in the defence ministry to help if necessary.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.27am BST

block-time published-time 1.22am BST

And before we move onto news from the rest of the world, a reminder that  about half an hour into that White House briefing, Trump had yet to provide any updates on the crisis in the US. Instead, he spent that time defending his record.

CNN's response to this included these news banners:

enltrCNN banner right now pic.twitter.com/oA6IK9zuY2

- Shimon Prokupecz (@ShimonPro) April 13, 2020

enltrAnother banner pic.twitter.com/KTeB72Rizs

- Shimon Prokupecz (@ShimonPro) April 13, 2020

undltr pic.twitter.com/jnGRw4afGf

- Shimon Prokupecz (@ShimonPro)

April 13, 2020

block-time published-time 1.20am BST

That White House press briefing has now ended.

Here are the main points:

•US president Donald Trump will decide whether to continue funding the WHO and whether to reopen the economy on 1 May in the next few days, he said.•"I have the ultimate authority" to re-open the country and scale back distancing measures, Trump claimed. This is not true.•Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week, said US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.•The US has significantly ramped up testing in recent days. "In three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests to 3m tests," said Dr. Deborah Birx.

US president Donald Trump will decide whether to continue funding the WHO and whether to reopen the economy on 1 May in the next few days, he said.

"I have the ultimate authority" to re-open the country and scale back distancing measures, Trump claimed. This is not true.

Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week, said US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.

The US has significantly ramped up testing in recent days. "In three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests to 3m tests," said Dr. Deborah Birx.

In other US news: Bernie Sanders endorsed Joe Biden's bid for president. The announcement comes five days after Sanders withdrew from the Democratic primary, and the former candidate told his supporters today, "We've got to make Trump a one-term president."

block-time published-time 1.07am BST

Dr Deborah Birx noted earlier that the US has significantly ramped up testing in recent days. "In three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests to 3m tests," she said. "We know that we have to further increase that." A team is mapping the testing capacity is across the country, she added.

block-time published-time 1.06am BST

The White House Press Briefing is ongoing, with Dr Anthony Fauci - the country's leading infectious diseases expert and a key member of the US coronavirus task force - speaking now.

"I can tell you one thing he's going to listen. But I think what's going to happen is he's going to get input from a number of experts. One of them is health."

Dr. Fauci is speaking following a retweet by US president Trump that included the hashtag #FireFauci, and is being asked bout Trump's plans to possibly reopen the country by 1 May - Trump said earlier in the presser that he will know later this week whether that will happen.

Trump also said earlier in the press briefing that he did not plan to fire the doctor.

"When you have conversations with the president, sometimes they really have to be confidential," Dr Fauci said when asked if he's willing to publicly contradict Trump if he advocates for unsafe policies.

"I'll have to think about that," Fauci said, adding that he's confident the president will defer to public health experts' guidance.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.07am BST

block-time published-time 1.00am BST

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

As confirmed cases worldwide approach two million and deaths at more than 119,400, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo is seeing "glimmers of hope" and has told the state that the "worst is over".

Later, in a freewheeling and aggressive press conference, even by his standards, US president Donald Trump repeatedly confronted journalists, calling one disgraceful, and saying another would be "the last to know" the answer to her question.

Meanwhile Russian President Vladimir Putin has warned the country to prepare for an "extraordinary" virus crisis, saying the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better."

I'll be bringing you the latest for the next few hours. You can get in touch with me directly with news, tips, questions or comments on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

•The confirmed global death toll passed 119,483, and at least 1.9 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates.•US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week.•New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said that with the number of coronavirus hospitalisations starting to plateau, that there were glimmers of hope. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," he said.•The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC : "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now."•The US governors of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Delaware and Connecticut announced they had formed a regional advisory council. Each state will name a public health official and an economic development official to serve on a working group alongside each governor's chief of staff to design a "reopening plan" for their states.•The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase. B, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then.•The number of deaths from coronavirus in Italy passed 20,000 after they rose by 566 on Monday, 135 more than on Sunday. Almost half of the deaths (280) were registered in Lombardy, the northern region worst affected by the virus.•A total of 11,329 patients have died in UK hospitals after testing positive for coronavirus, the UK's Department of Health said, up by 717 in 24 hours.•German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained.•The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial.•The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to.•Spain saw another fall in its overnight death toll, down by 102 to 517 in 24 hours, bringing the total to 17,489, the country's health ministry said, adding that it was the smallest proportional daily increase since tracking began.

The confirmed global death toll passed 119,483, and at least 1.9 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates.

US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week.

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said that with the number of coronavirus hospitalisations starting to plateau, that there were glimmers of hope. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," he said.

The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC : "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now."

The US governors of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Delaware and Connecticut announced they had formed a regional advisory council. Each state will name a public health official and an economic development official to serve on a working group alongside each governor's chief of staff to design a "reopening plan" for their states.

The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase. B, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then.

The number of deaths from coronavirus in Italy passed 20,000 after they rose by 566 on Monday, 135 more than on Sunday. Almost half of the deaths (280) were registered in Lombardy, the northern region worst affected by the virus.

A total of 11,329 patients have died in UK hospitals after testing positive for coronavirus, the UK's Department of Health said, up by 717 in 24 hours.

German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained.

The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial.

The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to.

Spain saw another fall in its overnight death toll, down by 102 to 517 in 24 hours, bringing the total to 17,489, the country's health ministry said, adding that it was the smallest proportional daily increase since tracking began.

10511 2020-04-14T00:00:28Z false false 2020-04-14T10:58:02Z true AUS theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/dk37g false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/e82ab7100dfcc2e306f4154dc4e07dbc649eb754/0_0_4342_2606/500.jpg false en true French Ministers have added some details to fill out the broad brush strokes of Emmanuel Macron's televised address yesterday evening, which was watched by an estimated 36.7 million people - more than half the French population. In the 30-minute broadcast, the president announced France would remain in strict lockdown until Monday 11 May when he said crêches, schools, colleges and lycées would "progressively" reopen. He called on people to be "civic, responsible and to respect the lockdown rules". On Tuesday, interior minister, Christophe Castaner, stressed that the 11 May was not "a certainty but an objective", while in a separate interview the education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, said not all education establishments would open their doors at 9am on 11 May as it would be "out of the question to have packed classrooms". Following up on Macron's promise to shake up the country's health system, especially the wages and conditions for staff, the health minister, Olivier Véran, reiterated that there will be a complete overhaul of medical personnel salaries and working conditions when the coronavirus crisis is over. A fourth cabinet member, the economy minister, Bruno Le Maire, went on television to warn that the French economy will shrink by around 8% in 2020 as a result of the crisis. The French government is spending the next two weeks drawing up a "After Covid-19 Plan" to be announced in a fortnight. Belgian authorities have announced 4,157 people have now died from coronavirus, making the country among the worst affected in Europe. Deaths from coronavirus in Belgium exceeded the 4,000 mark with 262 new deaths confirmed in the last 24 hours, the National Crisis Centre reported in its daily briefing on Tuesday. Cases rose to 31,119, as testing was stepped up. The number of new patients admitted to hospital each day is continuing on a slow downward trend that has been evident since the end of March. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, the number of deaths in Belgium is behind only Italy, Spain, France and the UK, all significantly more populous countries. Belgium, which has a population of 11.5m, has recorded more deaths than its neighbour the Netherlands, which has a population of 17.1 million and 2,727 deaths at the latest ECDC count. Comparisons are difficult as all countries are at different phases of the outbreak and calculate the death rate in varying ways. Belgium includes deaths in care homes, which so far account for 46% of all fatalities. Belgian authorities also include people suspected, but not confirmed, of having died from Covid 19. The country's national security council is due to meet on Wednesday to discuss when to end the lockdown, following a report from an expert group. The francophone state broadcaster RTBF reported that the lockdown was likely to be extended until 3 May. The mayor of Brussels, Philippe Close, has called on the government to announce a date for ending the lockdown. "It is not enough to ask people to deprive themselves of their individual freedoms without telling them 'we will come back to you and explain the next step,'" he said. He also said people could forget about any mass events before the end of June. Coronavirus has pushed the death toll in England to its highest level since official weekly statistics began in 2005, with fatalities running at almost 40% above the average. The Office for National Statistics said that in the week to 3 April, 16,387 people died in England and Wales, an increase of 5,246 deaths compared with the previous week and 6,082 more than the five-year average, reports Robert Booth. The figures also showed the increasing impact of Covid-19 on mortality in England and Wales with 22% of all deaths relating to the disease in the week ending 3 April compared to 5% in the week ending 27 March. In London, nearly half of deaths registered involved Covid-19 and the West Midlands also suffered one of the high proportions of Covid-19 deaths, accounting for 22.1% of all deaths registered in the region. Coronavirus deaths in Spain rose slightly over the past 24 hours to 567, compared to 510 yesterday, according the ministry of health. This brings the total number of deaths to 18,056, and the total number of recorded cases to 172,451. Businesses in the construction and manufacturing sectors tentatively reopened yesterday - a public holiday - after the Spanish government relaxed some lockdown measures put in place two weeks ago that confined most people to their homes. There have been no reports of crowded buses and trains. The Barcelona transport authority said there had been increased passenger traffic but still fewer than on 24 March, the last normal Tuesday before the full lockdown was enforced. Meanwhile, the health ministry has taken control of all private laboratories and clinics to accelerate the process of testing and has introduced measures to avoid abusive pricing of tests. Many furloughed employees have been unable to collect their benefits as unemployment offices struggle to cope with the huge number of claimants. Carmen Calvo, the vice-president, and Fernando Simón, the chief medical officer, both returned to work today after recovering from Covid-19. Spain recorded 48,712 deaths in March, the highest March number since 1975, the last year of the dictatorship. Positive news from leading public health body in Germany, the Robert Koch Institute, whose head, Lothar Wieler has said the country's attempts to control the virus' spread are showing "positive tendencies". "We cannot yet talk of a containment, but of a slowing down," Wieler said in his first briefing since the Easter break. According to figures from health ministries across Germany, there are just over 130,000 confirmed infections in Germany, and there have been 3,246 deaths. The reproduction rate is currently 1.2 and the aim is to get this under one. Germany's coronavirus mortality rate is 2.4% and will increase as more elderly people become infected, Wieler said. But he said if the development of the virus in Germany continues in a similar way, hospitals are not in danger of being overburdened. "It is good to see that the efforts being made are showing positive results," Wieler said. He appealed to Germans to continue following the hygiene regulations as well as keeping their distance, saying these remained the two most crucial ways to dampen the virus' spread. He added that in Germany the average age of those infected was 49, and a cough, temperature, blocked nose and loss of taste and smell remained the most commonly reported symptoms. In 2% of cases people developed pneumonia he said, while 16% of cases ended up in hospital. On Monday, the Academy of Sciences, Leopoldina released a long-awaited study in which it recommended a staggered return to normal life starting with schools reopening. Angela Merkel has said the study's results would be an "influential resource" in her government's decision as to when and how the current lockdown might be relaxed. Merkel is due to meet with the leaders of Germany's 16 states tomorrow after which a decision is expected to be made as to Germany's way forward. The Philippines has introduced a more aggressive testing programme for the coronavirus to locate what it said could be as many as 15,000 unknown infections. The country has implemented some of Asia's strictest and earliest lockdown measures, reports Reuters. Covid-19 has so far infected 5,223 people locally and killed 335. Authorities are to start the new programme of ramped-up testing on Tuesday with 8,000 people working at or admitted to Manila hospitals that were treating patients with the virus. Although the Philippines has Southeast Asia's highest number of coronavirus infections and nearly 40% of its known fatalities, the government believes its swift move to close borders and put half its population under home quarantine may have averted a far greater toll and a healthcare disaster. The former military chief in charge of the national coronavirus task force said on Tuesday that modelling suggested 75% of infections - or 15,000 people - had yet to be detected. Carlito Galvez said: Our strategy is Metro Manila first because this is the epicentre. When we test Manila, we can win this battle against Covid. The Tour de France will not begin as originally planned because French President Emmanuel Macron has cancelled all public events with large crowds until mid-July in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Tour organisers say it is now impossible for the three-week race to start on 27 June in the Riviera city of Nice as scheduled. It is unclear if cycling's biggest event will be scrapped from the race calendar. Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his chief rival have met in a final effort to finalise an agreement on an emergency government that would tackle the coronavirus threat and prevent yet another costly and divisive election amid the crisis. Reuters reports that the meeting between Netanyahu and former military chief Benny Gantz followed an overnight session in which the two asked for, and received, a deadline extension from President Reuven Rivlin to try to complete the talks. Should the pair fail to reach agreement, the clock will start ticking toward the dissolution of parliament and a possible, yet still seemingly improbable, fourth election in just over a year. Last month's election, just like the previous two, ended with no clear winner. Gantz repeatedly vowed not to sit in government with Netanyahu because of the criminal corruption charges against the prime minister. But with the virus crisis worsening, and his own shaky alliance fraying, Gantz made an about-face late last month and accepted an offer from Netanyahu to pursue a joint government to deal with the pandemic. Israel has reported over 11,800 cases and at least 117 deaths from the outbreak, which has paralysed the economy, shuttered Israelis in their homes and driven unemployment to record highs. Germany's health authorities are appealing to medically qualified migrants to help them tackle the coronavirus, reports Kate Connolly in Berlin. As increasing numbers of doctors and nurses fall ill or are quarantined, the shortage of medical staff is putting pressure on a usually well-resourced health service. Government initiatives have already increased the number of intensive care beds from around 24,000 to 40,000, most of them with ventilators. Staff are being retrained and non-essential operations across the country have been cancelled. But the health system still needs more medical personnel to care for patients, increase the levels of testing, and track down people who have been in contact with those who are sick. MatchlHealthcare, a website backed by medical authorities which was created by a volunteer team of students and hackers, seeks to match healthcare workers and volunteers - both citizens and foreigners living in Germany - to clinics and care homes needing support. The eastern state of Saxony is at the forefront of a campaign calling on foreign doctors, including the thousands of refugees who arrived in 2015, to help. According to the Facebook group Syrian Doctors in Germany there are 14,000 Syrian doctors waiting for their qualifications to be approved. In the UK, the Office for National Statistics has published its figures for deaths from coronavirus up until 3 April. They include all deaths where the virus is mentioned on the death certificate and not just deaths that occur in hospital, as the daily figures from the Department of Health do. Reuters is reporting that Amazon.com Inc has fired two employees for "repeatedly violating internal policies" after they criticised the working conditions at the e-commerce giant's warehouses in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. The termination of Emily Cunningham and Maren Costa, who worked as user-experience designers in Seattle, came a couple of weeks after the company fired another employee, Christian Smalls, for raising health and safety concerns for people labouring through the outbreak. The Seattle-based firm has been facing public scrutiny over safety and working conditions of warehouse, delivery and retail gig workers in the United States after cases of Covid-19 were reported in some of its facilities. Amazon workers have also protested in other countries. Amazon said it supported "every employee's right to criticize their employer's working conditions, but that does not come with blanket immunity against any and all internal policies". More than 100 academics, parliamentarians and public figures from across Europe and Australia have signed an open letter criticising the role of China's government in the global pandemic, saying the current crisis affecting the world "has been caused by the regime so many of you have been tolerating and supporting for decades". China has faced continued hostility and skepticism over its virus response, in particular because of its suppression of information at the beginning of the outbreak, and the punishment of health workers who sought to warn colleagues of the new virus in December. The already tense relationship between the US and China has worsened, as each government sought to blame the other for the outbreak - including unfounded allegations about deliberate production of the virus. The pandemic has also fuelled hostilities with Taiwan, which has been left out of the World Health Organisation's response, and with African nations whose citizens have been subject to discrimination in Guangzhou. "We should never forget that China's Chernobyl moment was a self-inflicted wound," reads the letter, published on Tuesday in the Hong Kong Free Press. The global pandemic forces us all to confront an inconvenient truth: by politicising all aspects of life including people's health, continued autocratic one-party rule in the People's Republic of China has endangered everyone. Rather than trusting the CCP's intentions and accepting establishment academics' uncritical approval of the party-state's policies, we should pay greater attention to the voices of what can be termed 'unofficial' China. These independent-minded academics, doctors, entrepreneurs, citizen journalists, public interest lawyers and young students no longer accept the CCP's rule by fear. Neither should you. Afghan's health minister has said the country is prepared for the worst case scenario, as the number of confirmed cases reached 714 amid a surge of infection in Kabul and Kandahar. 49 new Coronavirus cases were recorded in last 24 hours in the war-torn country, 18 of which were confirmed in the capital Kabul, taking the total number of infections to 178. Two Covid-19 patients died in the same period, bringing the total number of deaths to 23. There have been 40 recoveries. Kabul was put into full lockdown last week and all roads to the city of six million people were blocked. 1,600 police officers were appointed to monitor adherence to the new rules. The western province of Herat is the country's worst affected area with 291 positive cases, including 41 health workers. 13 new cases have been confirmed in the southern province of Kandahar, pushing the total number of infections to 86. Thousands of Afghan migrants have poured back into Kandahar from Pakistan in recent days. Speaking at the opening of a mask and isolation kits factory in Kabul on Tuesday morning, the health minister said the country was prepared for the worst case scenario and asked people to respect the advice of health workers to avoid a "storm". Ferozuddin Feroz, said it would not be possible to test everyone, but that if people heeded hygiene advice "Coronavirus will be ended [in the] next two months". He said the historic Darlaman palace would become a field hospital in coming days. Feroz asked all health workers to join the government's fight against the virus and promised to increase salaries of current employees as well as reduce their working hours. The French government's budget deficit is set to hit a post-war record of 9% of economic output this year, the budget minister has said in the second revision in less than a week. Budget minister Gerald Darmanin said that financial shortfall would exceed the 7.6% prediction announced last week after President Emmanuel Macron extended a nationwide lockdown until 11 May. Darmanin told France Info: We are going from a deficit -7.6% (of GDP) to a deficit of -9%. Our country has never seen such a deficit since World War Two. German Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative Christian Democrats (CDU) will likely delay the election of a new leader until December due to the coronavirus, current leader Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer has said. The new leader will be in pole position to run as chancellor in the next federal election as Merkel has said she will not seek a fifth term at the head of Europe's biggest economy. The party had already cancelled a special congress in April to pick a leader and Kramp-Karrenbauer was quoted by dpa news agency as saying it looked increasingly likely that the decision would not take place until a regular conference in December. Heathrow Airport, traditionally the busiest in Europe, has forecast that passenger demand will be down 90% in April, as coronavirus restrictions stop most people from travelling. Heathrow said on Tuesday that its passenger numbers were down 52% in March compared with the same period last year, with many of those journeys being made by Britons returning home from abroad, reports Reuters. The airport, which is owned by a group of investors including Spain's Ferrovial, the Qatar Investment Authority and China Investment Corp, said it was now only using one of its two runways, as flights continue for cargo. Southeast Asian leaders have held a meeting via video link to plot a strategy to overcome a crisis that has threatened their economies and kept millions of people in their homes under lockdowns, the Associated Press reports. The heads of state of the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations were to hold further talks later Tuesday, also through video conferencing, with their counterparts from China, Japan and South Korea who are expected to express their support in helping ASEAN fight the coronavirus. Vietnam, ASEAN's leader this year, has postponed an in-person gathering tentatively to June. In an opening speech, the country's prime minister, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, said it is in these grim hours that the solidarity of the ASEAN community "shines like a beacon in the dark". He said containment efforts have placed the pandemic under control, but warned against complacency, with a number of member countries, including Indonesia and the Philippines, fearing spikes in infections after large-scale testing is conducted. Founded in 1967 in the Cold War era, ASEAN - a diverse bloc representing more than 640m - people has held annual summits of its leaders and top diplomats with ceremonies steeped in tradition, protocol and photo-ops. Derided as a talk shop by critics, the bloc is known largely for photographs of its leaders locking arms at annual meetings in a show of unity despite often-thorny differences. All of ASEAN's member states have been hit by the coronavirus outbreak, with the total number of confirmed cases reaching more than 20,400, including over 840 deaths, despite massive lockdowns, travel restrictions and home quarantines. Hello and welcome to the Guardian's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Frances Perraudin, in London. I'll be bringing you the latest updates on the crisis for the next few hours. You can contact me directly on Twitter (@fperraudin) with tips, questions and comments, and I'll do my best to respond. That's it from me, Helen Sullivan. With you for the next few hours is my colleague Frances Perraudin. If you're just waking up or checking in, it's worth (at the very least in case you were under the impression it things couldn't get weirder) watching this video of US president Donald Trump's White House press briefing meltdown on Monday evening in Washington: The global death toll neared 120,000 as cases passed 1.92 million. According to Johns Hopkins University figures, 1,920,985 people worldwide are known to have been infected with coronavirus, though the total number of infections is likely higher. So far, 119,687 people have died in the pandemic. France restrictions to ease in May. In a televised address, the French president said France would start returning to normal life on 11 May, if citizens were "civic, responsible and respected the rules" - and if the number of cases of coronavirus continued to drop. He said that only by respecting the confinement rules would the battle against Covid-19 be won. Brace for 'extraordinary' crisis, says Putin. As Moscow tightened its lockdown measures, Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet. In a video conference with officials on Monday, Putin said the next weeks would be "decisive" for Russia's fight against the virus as the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better." China cases emerge on Russia border. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on 13 April, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases. Trump threatens to withdraw funding from WHO again. In a bizarre and antagonistic press briefing that included the airing of a campaign-style video attacking the press and Trump announcing his authority over lockdown rules is "total", the US president said he will also decide this week whether he plans to reopen the US by 1 May. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday, US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said. Hospitalisations in New York start to plateau. A glimmer of hope. Deaths and hospitalisations are falling in New York. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," governor Andrew Cuomo said, announcing an alliance with six other governors in the region to explore how to lift restrictions. "If you do it wrong, it can backfire, and we've seen that with other places in the globe," Cuomo said. Japan reports 390 new cases. Monday's new cases were lower than the 530 new cases reported by the health ministry on Sunday. The country's total is 7,645. Japan was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo. IMF to provide immediate debt relief to 25 countries. The debt relief will be made available under the IMF's Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT). About $215 million of the total will be used for grants to the first 25 countries over the next six months, with extensions possible up to two years. Never thought I'd say this but: A spokesperson for the Polish government says decisions on easing restrictions will be taken on Wednesday or Thursday, with limits around shopping being the first to be lifted, Reuters reports. Poland has 6,934 confirmed cases and 245 deaths according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. In a televised address on Tuesday morning, prime minister Narendra Modi announced that India's nationwide lockdown is to be extended till 3 May. The lockdown in India, imposed on its population of 1.3bn people, is the largest of its kind anywhere in the world and has been the cause of enormous amounts of human suffering since it was first introduced at midnight on 24 March. India's millions of migrant workers, and the 300 million people who fall below the poverty line and live a hand-to-mouth existence, have struggled without being able to work and travel and it has led to many finding themselves without food. In his speech, Modi thanked people for being "disciplined soldiers" and said that it was "now clear that the road we have taken is the right one". Over the past 24 hours, the number of coronavirus cases in India reached 10,000, with the death toll currently at 339. Modi's speech also emphasised his belief that India had tackled the spread of coronavirus more proactively and successfully than many countries in the west. "Compared to developed countries across the world, India is in a much better position," he said. Modi also announced that from 20 April the lockdown would be eased in a few select areas which had no risk of becoming hotspots for the virus, but that they would be determined on a case by case basis. Human Rights Watch is today launching a campaign demanding that the Greek government free unaccompanied migrant children "from police cells and detention centres" because of the heightened risk of exposure to coronavirus. The campaign, running under the hashtag #FreetheKids, urges people to call on Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis to release the minors and transfer them to safe, child-friendly facilities. "Keeping children locked up in filthy police cells was always wrong, but now it also exposes them to the risk of COVID-19 infection," said Eva Cosse, Greece researcher at the US-based group. "The Greek government has a duty to end this abusive practice and make sure these vulnerable kids get the care and protection they need." The organisation launched the initiative after what it described as "years of research and advocacy" on the country's practice of detaining and locking up children, with no immediate access to a parent or relative, in police cells and detention centres. Citing figures released from the state-run National Centre for Social solidarity, it says that as of March 31, some 331 minors were in police custody awaiting transfer to a shelter, almost twice the number who were in detention in January. According to the group, Greek authorities argue they place unaccompanied children - many who have made perilous journeys to get to Greece - in detention under a form of "protective custody regime" that is in the child's best interest. HRW claims the facilities are not only inappropriate but overcrowded and highly unhygienic and, as such, provide fertile ground for a Covid-19 outbreak. Here are the UK's newspaper front pages for Tuesday, 14 April 2020: Thailand on Tuesday reported 34 new coronavirus cases and a death of a 52-year old Thai female bus driver in Bangkok. Of the new cases, 27 patients are linked to previous cases, four with no links to old cases, while two people who tested positive are awaiting investigation into how they were infected, said Taweesin Wisanuyothin, a spokesman for the government's Center for COVID-19 Situation Administration. A Thai national who tested positive on Tuesday was already under quarantine after traveling to South Sulawesi province, Indonesia for a religious gathering last month. Since the outbreak escalated in January, Thailand has reported a total of 2,613 cases and 41 fatalities, while 1,405 patients have recovered and gone home. Vietnam's civil aviation authority (CAAV) said on Wednesday that domestic flights would remain suspended, after airlines announced they were set to resume after the expiry of a government order for 15 days of social distancing, Reuters reports. "In order to strictly implement social distancing and curb the spread of the coronavirus, airlines are not allowed to sell tickets for flights from April 16," the CAAV said in a statement. How coronavirus almost brought down the global financial system In the third week of March, while most of our minds were fixed on surging coronavirus death rates and the apocalyptic scenes in hospital wards, global financial markets came as close to a collapse as they have since September 2008. The price of shares in the world's major corporations plunged. The value of the dollar surged against every currency in the world, squeezing debtors everywhere from Indonesia to Mexico. Trillion-dollar markets for government debt, the basic foundation of the financial system, lurched up and down in terror-stricken cycles. On the terminal screens, interest rates danced. Traders hunched over improvised home workstations - known in the new slang of March 2020 as "Rona rigs" - screaming with frustration as sluggish home wifi systems dragged behind the movement of the markets. At the low point on 23 March, $26tn had been wiped off the value of global equity markets, inflicting huge losses both on the fortunate few who own shares, and on the collective pools of savings held by pension and insurance funds. What the markets were reacting to was an unthinkable turn of events. After a fatal period of hesitation, governments around the world were ordering comprehensive lockdowns to contain a lethal pandemic. Built for growth, the global economic machine was being brought to a screeching halt. In 2020, for the first time since the second world war, production around the world will contract. It is now clear that we can, if circumstances demand, turn the economy off. But the consequences are catastrophic. Global Covid-19 cases near 2 million as Putin warns Russia faces 'extraordinary' crisis The number of Covid-19 cases recorded worldwide is nearing 2 million, as Vladimir Putin warned warned officials to brace for "complex and extraordinary" scenarios in Russia as a result of the outbreak. The country reported 2,558 new cases on Monday, its highest daily figure yet, as officials tightened lockdown restrictions in Moscow. The overall nationwide tally is 18,328 and the death toll is 148. Putin told officials in a video conference the situation was "changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better" and Russia's next few weeks would be "decisive". China has also voiced concern about spread of the virus in Russia. While China's daily reported infection rate remains far below its peak during the pandemic, the majority of new cases have been in regions bordering its northern neighbour. The area has become the new focus of containment measures, with some lockdown measures brought in for the cities of Hubin and Suifenhe. "Russia is the latest example of a failure to control imported cases and can serve as a warning to others," said the state-owned English-language Global Times in an editorial. "The Chinese people have watched Russia become a severely affected country ... This should sound the alarm: China must strictly prevent the inflow of cases and avoid a second outbreak." In New Zealand, new modelling from the Treasury has painted a dire picture of the country's economic prospects for the next year, with a surge in unemployment to as much as 13% even if Covid-19 infections are contained and lockdown rules eased after the initial four weeks. A jobless rate of up to 26% - and a fall in GDP of 23% - is predicted if the country is forced to remain in its strictest level of shutdown for a total of six months before moving to marginally lighter measures. However, with a larger fiscal stimulus package than the NZ$20bn (£9.7bn) already pledged by the government, the 13% jobless rate modelled could hit a much lower peak of 8.5% before falling to 5.5% in the year to June 2021. On Tuesday, Robertson pledged to release further support. All seven of the scenarios modelled - the first released since the pandemic reached New Zealand - predicted that unemployment would be higher in the June quarter of this year than the 6.7% reached during the 2008 global financial crisis. The current jobless rate is just over 4%. The confirmed global death toll passed 119,687, and at least 1.92 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates. The majority of new cases in China are in a province bordering Russia. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on April 13, down from 108 the previous day. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases. Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday warned officials to brace for an "extraordinary" virus crisis as Moscow tightened its lockdown measures and Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet, AFP reports. US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said "I think you can say the worst is over," as the number of coronavirus hospitalisations in the state starts to plateau. The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC: "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now." The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it would provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries under its Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) to allow them to focus more financial resources on fighting the coronavirus pandemic Japan's health ministry has reported 390 new coronavirus cases, for a domestic total of 7,645. The country was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo. Japan's health ministry reported 530 new cases and four deaths on Sunday. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then. German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained. The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial. The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to. Podcast: How vulnerable are people with asthma? Nicola Davis speaks to Dr Andy Whittamore about the effects of Covid-19 on people with asthma and what they can do to protect themselves. The coronavirus pandemic has led to an unprecedented global surge in digital surveillance, researchers and privacy advocates around the world have said, with billions of people facing enhanced monitoring that may prove difficult to roll back. Governments in at least 25 countries are employing vast programmes for mobile data tracking, apps to record personal contact with others, CCTV networks equipped with facial recognition, permission schemes to go outside and drones to enforce social isolation regimes. The methods have been adopted by authoritarian states and democracies alike and have opened lucrative new markets for companies that extract, sell, and analyse private data. One of the world's foremost experts on mobile phone surveillance said the pandemic had created a "9/11 on steroids" that could lead to grave abuses of power. How Greece is beating coronavirus despite a decade of debt Every day at 6pm Greeks turn on their TV sets and tune into a broadcast that at other times they might have missed. Like most rituals, there are no surprises: two men, seated several meters apart, behind a long table in a brightly lit room. The health ministry's daily coronavirus briefing then begins with Sotiris Tsiodras, a soft-spoken Harvard-trained professor of infectious diseases, delivering the latest facts and figures with the occasional emotional plea. Nikos Hardalias, the civil defence minister, invariably follows, invoking the gravity of the situation with warnings that Greeks "must stay at home". The bookish professor and no-nonsense former mayor are the faces who have come to be associated with the government's drive to contain the spread of Covid-19. Their efforts at keeping the country virus-safe appear to be paying off: in a population of just over 11 million, there were, as of Monday, 2,145 confirmed cases of coronavirus and 99 deaths, far lower than elsewhere in Europe. Italy to date has registered 20,465 deaths. Greece, it is generally agreed, is having a better crisis than may have been expected: Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro and his health minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta are in open conflict over the countrys coronavirus response, leading many to worry that the far-right leader could soon fire the official who has played a major role in containing the outbreak, AP reports. The public battle between a president notorious for his polarising remarks and the more measured doctor has reminded many of a similar tug of war taking place in the United States, between President Donald Trump and his chief virus expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci. It has also raised concerns that efforts to prevent the spread of the virus in Latin America's largest country could veer off track. In a televised interview earlier this month, Bolsonaro said Mandetta had failed to show humility and that anyone can be fired. A few days later, Bolsonaro told a group of supporters that he would use his pen against officials in his government who are full of themselves. Those comments were widely understood as signaling an end to Mandetta's tenure, so much so that the minister said his subordinates cleaned out his desk. But asked about the possibility of resigning recently, Mandetta said he learned from his teachers that a doctor never abandons his patient. According to Washington Post journalist Robert Klemko, March this year was the first month in the US since 2002 without a school shooting. Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden has retweeted the statistic: The novel coronavirus is 10 times more deadly than swine flu, which caused a global pandemic in 2009, the World Health Organization said Monday, stressing a vaccine would be necessary to fully halt transmission. AFP reports that WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a virtual briefing from Geneva that the organisation was constantly learning about the new virus sweeping the globe, which has now killed nearly 115,000 people and infected over 1.9 million. "We know that Covid-19 spreads fast, and we know that it is deadly, 10 times deadlier than the 2009 flu pandemic," he said. More than half of the planet's population is currently staying home as part of efforts to stem the spread of the virus, but Tedros warned that while COVID-19 had accelerated quickly, "it decelerates much more slowly." "In other words, the way down is much slower than the way up," he said. WHO said that "ultimately, the development and delivery of a safe and effective vaccine will be needed to fully interrupt transmission". A vaccine is thought to be at least 12 to 18 months away. In Mexico, health workers briefly blocked a street in Mexico City on Monday to demand more protective gear as their hospital receives more patients suffering from Covid-19, AP reports. Dozens of nurses, doctors and other personnel from the October 1 Hospital carried handwritten signs and shouted for assistance. The hospital is part of Mexico's public health system for government workers. One nurse, who had worked at the hospital for more than 20 years, but requested anonymity to avoid repercussions, said she received only one flimsy mask per day even though she works on a floor with dozens of patients with the new coronavirus. At least one nurse has already died at the hospital and a doctor is in intensive care, she said. Calls to the hospital and the agency that runs it were not immediately answered. Mexico's Institute of Social Security acknowledged Monday there had been outbreaks among medical personnel in at least five hospitals across the country, with 535 medical workers infected and nine dead so far. Mexico has seen a growing number of such protests in recent weeks as the epidemic spreads. Mexico has reported just over 5,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 332 deaths. Japan's health ministry has reported 390 new cases of infection for a domestic total of 7,645. The country was put under a state of emergency last week, but many people were still seen queuing up at grocery stores and crowding shopping arcades in parts of downtown Tokyo to stock up on necessities. South Korea meanwhile has reported 27 fresh cases of the new coronavirus, the 13th day in a row of below 100, as infections continued to wane in the worst-hit city of Daegu and nearby towns. Figures released by South Korea's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Tuesday brought national totals to 10,564 infections and 222 virus-related deaths. The KCDC says at least 940 of the cases were linked to passengers arriving from overseas, with most of the cases detected in the past three weeks. A sweet story from our correspondent in New Zealand, where endangered plovers have been relocated from Christchurch to near Wellington, despite the lockdown: The US Census Bureau wants to delay deadlines for the 2020 head count of all US residents because of the coronavirus outbreak, the Associated Press reports. If approved by lawmakers, it would push back timetables for releasing data used to draw congressional and legislative districts, officials said on Monday. Census Bureau officials said they were postponing all field operations until 1 June and the deadline for wrapping up the nation's head count was being pushed back to 31 October. Field operations for the 2020 census have been suspended since mid-March and were set to resume this week. The deadline for finishing the head count also had been pushed back from the end of July to mid-August because of the pandemic. Here's some more from China, where Russia is being blamed for new infections inside the country. Russia has become China's largest source of imported cases, with a total of 409 infections originating in the country, and Chinese citizens should stay put and not return home, the state-owned Global Times said in an editorial. "Russia is the latest example of a failure to control imported cases and can serve as a warning to others," said the paper, which is run by the Communist Party's People's Daily. "The Chinese people have watched Russia become a severely affected country... This should sound the alarm: China must strictly prevent the inflow of cases and avoid a second outbreak." China's northeastern border province of Heilongjiang saw 79 new cases of imported coronavirus cases on Monday. All the new cases were Chinese citizens travelling back into the country from Russia, state media said on Tuesday. They formed the bulk of new cases on the Chinese mainland, which stood at 89. Here is US President Donald Trump at the White House press briefing earlier playing a campaign-style video attacking the media. The video comprises clips from Trump's preferred network, Fox News, praising his record on the pandemic. CNN and MSCNB cut away from the briefing, calling the video "propaganda". At the rest of the briefing an agitated Trump angrily lashed out at reporters for questioning his response and insisted 'everything we did was right' while the media was 'guilty' The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it would provide immediate debt relief to 25 member countries under its Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) to allow them to focus more financial resources on fighting the coronavirus pandemic, Reuters reports. IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said the fund's executive board approved on Monday the first batch of countries to receive grants to cover their debt service obligations to the fund for an initial six months. About $215 million of the total would be used for grants to the first 25 countries over the next six months, with extensions possible up to two years, an IMF spokeswoman said. The first countries that will receive debt service relief from the CCRT are Afghanistan, Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Tajikistan, Togo and Yemen, the IMF said. Here is everything we know about the deadly Covid-19 cluster in north-west Tasmania that may have been sparked by an "illegal dinner party" of healthcare workers. Ben Doherty and Charlotte Graham-McLay report: Australia's chief medical officer Brendan Murphy has told a NZ parliamentary committee that the dinner party attended by healthcare workers was the origin of a cluster of new cases in the state. But the state's premier, Peter Gutwein, said the chief medical officer "was commenting on a rumour", and no dinner party had been identified as a possible source of infection. The cluster of more than 60 cases has caused a spike in Tasmania's previously low number of infections, and forced about 5,000 people into the country's strictest lockdown, as well as the emergency closure of two hospitals. So far more than 60 cases of Covid-19 have been linked to the outbreak, including at least 45 medical workers and nine patients. Podcast: Why have the UK and Germany taken different approaches to Covid-19 testing? In February, the UK and Germany were taking a similar approach to testing for coronavirus. But over the subsequent weeks, the two countries began to go in very different directions. Guardian health editor Sarah Bosley and Berlin bureau chief Philip Oltermann look at what happened next. Speaking of readers - thanks to the 11.6 million of you who read this blog, the Australia live blog, and other news coverage on Guardian Australia this month: Guardian Australia's audience increased by 104% in March making it the fourth most popular news site in the nation with 11.6 million readers. The global Covid-19 pandemic has seen a spike in traffic to news websites, with Guardian Australia experiencing the biggest surge in the Australian market. Guardian Australia doubled its unique audience in March and moved up from seventh to fourth place, according to the Nielsen digital content ratings. The coronavirus reporting, which includes two of the most popular pages on the site - a daily liveblog and data tracker, has boosted Guardian Australia up the rankings ahead of the Daily Mail (5th), nine.com.au (6th) and the Sydney Morning Herald (7th). Thanks to the readers who have sent news and tips today - you have been really helpful. A reminder that the easiest way to get in touch with me directly is on Twitter @helenrsullivan. Trump claims 'total authority' and attacks media in chaotic coronavirus briefing More analysis of that White House presser now. Donald Trump declared in a White House briefing on Monday that his "authority is total" when it comes to lockdown rules during the coronavirus pandemic, and he denied that he was weighing firing Dr Anthony Fauci, the country's foremost infectious diseases expert who sits on the coronavirus task force. After a weekend reprieve from presidential briefings that have been likened to Trump rallies for their uninterrupted flow of Trumpian id, the president returned to the lectern on Monday to deliver one of his most bizarre performances yet. US governors announce multi-state pacts to begin easing coronavirus ordersRead more He played a campaign video produced by White House staff, in a possible violation of elections laws, that he said highlighted the media's downplaying of the coronavirus crisis in the early stages of the pandemic. Wounded by media scrutiny, Trump turned a briefing into a presidential tantrum A toddler threw a self-pitying tantrum on live television on Monday night. Unfortunately he was 73 years old, wearing a long red tie and running the world's most powerful country. Donald Trump, starved of campaign rallies, Mar-a-Lago weekends and golf, and goaded by a bombshell newspaper report, couldn't take it any more. Years of accreted grievance and resentment towards the media came gushing out in a torrent. He ranted, he raved, he melted down and he blew up the internet with one of the most jaw-dropping performances of his presidency. This was, as he likes to put it, "a 10". Trump's Easter had evidently been ruined by a damning 5,500-word New York Times investigation showing that Trump squandered precious time in January and February as numerous government figures were sounding the alarm about the coronavirus. With more than 23,000 American lives lost in such circumstances, some presidents might now be considering resignation. Not Trump. He arrived in the west wing briefing room determined to tell the world, or at least his base, that he was not to blame. Instead it was a new and bloody phase of his war against "enemy of the people" - the media. Families grieving loved ones lost to the virus were in for cold comfort here. On that Johns Hopkins error earlier: In Australia, an update on the confusing situation in Tasmania. The CMO Brendan Murphy told a New Zealand health committee this morning they needed to keep a lid on the virus infections, telling them We thought we were doing really well then in the last week we had a cluster of 49 cases in a hospital in Tasmania just over the weekend. Most of them went to an illegal dinner party of medical workers." Then not half an hour later, the Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, said the CMO had been commenting "on a rumour". I spoke to Brendan Murphy, a short while ago. To be frank, Brendan was commenting on a rumour. At this stage, there has... our contact tracing has not identified a dinner party of health workers. However, I accept that this is a serious allegation, and it's something that needs to be followed up, and so we will retrace our steps, but, importantly, I've asked the Tasmania Police to investigate this matter, and that will be started today. We need to get on top of this. So Tasmania will investigate whether or not there was a dinner party, as it tries to work out the origins of the north-west outbreak, which has caused two hospitals to close and put just under 5000 people into a strict lockdown. First sailor dies from Covid-19 and 600 test positive after outbreak on USS Theodore Roosevelt The death of the first US active duty military member comes 11 days after captain was fired for voicing concerns over safety of his crew on ship off Guam. A member of the crew of the coronavirus-infected USS Theodore Roosevelt has died of complications related to the disease, 11 days after the aircraft carrier's captain was fired for pressing his concern that the US navy had done too little to safeguard his crew. The sailor was the first active-duty military member to die of Covid-19. Biden projected to win Wisconsin primary after Sanders drops out The Guardian's Tom McCarthy and Sam Levine report. As former vice-president Joe Biden scored a widely expected win in the Wisconsin Democratic presidential primary, a liberal challenger for a state supreme court seat declared victory in an upset hailed by Democrats as boding well for the presidential election in November. The state supreme court is expected to rule in numerous voting rights cases in the lead-up to the presidential election, including a case in which 200,000 voters could be purged from voter rolls. Wisconsin is a swing state that narrowly voted for Donald Trump in 2016. Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, had held a large lead in polls before the vote was held. His main opponent, Bernie Sanders, dropped out of the presidential nominating race the day after the vote. Sanders endorsed Biden's candidacy in a video chat on Monday. The results from Wisconsin on Monday were drawn from election day the previous Tuesday, which was marred by long lines of voters forced to go to the polls in person as coronavirus ravaged the country. Coronavirus fears led to an unprecedented number of requests for absentee ballots in the state, numbering more than 1m, but many voters reported that they had not received ballots by election day. China reported 89 new coronavirus cases on April 13, down from 108 the previous day, the health authority said on Tuesday. Of the total, 86 were imported, down from 98 a day earlier, the National Health Commission said. Hubei province reported 0 new deaths and cases. The number is down from Sunday's 108 new infections, the highest number in more than five weeks, surpassing Saturday's 99, which was nearly double the 46 reported on Friday. China's state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day's imported cases were in the northeast province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. China's northeastern border with Russia has become its new frontline in the fight against a resurgence in the epidemic, The number of total confirmed cases in China now stands at 82,249. Its death toll from the pandemic stands at 3,341, with no new deaths on April 13. Just a note to those of you who may be watching the Johns Hopkins University tracker closely, as we are. The figure listed on their website briefly showed that there were more than two million confirmed cases worldwide. This has now been revised down to 1,918,855. We'll keep a close eye on it throughout the day - no word yet from Johns Hopkins on what the reason behind this was. In Australia, mind-melting news from the Chief Medical Officer Brendan Murphy now. According to Sky News New Zealand correspondent Jackson Williams, Professor Murphy has said Australia needed to be prepared for "further outbreaks". Why? Because of an illegal dinner party. Who attended? Medical workers. We thought we were doing really well then in the last week we had a cluster of 49 cases in a hospital in Tasmania just over the weekend. Most of them went to an illegal dinner party of medical workers." The Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein has previously dismissed questions of a dinner party as 'social media rumours' "To be frank, I've never taken much notice of social media," he said, when this was last raised on Monday. "The key thing here is we work through this. "The contact tracking and tracing will determine how this has occurred and, importantly, what the epicentre of it is." Help the Guardian document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus Lost on the frontline is a project by the Guardian and Kaiser Health Newsthat aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. This project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project here. If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we'd like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. More details on what we're looking for and how to reach us below: In case you missed it, here is some of the bizarre and unsettling footage played by Trump before Monday evening's White House press briefing: Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said on Monday nobody would die from the coronavirus in his country and again rejected any need for the strict lockdown measures adopted by most countries to contain the spread of the pandemic. It was the latest show of defiance by the strongman leader, who has dismissed worries about the disease as a "psychosis" and variously suggested drinking vodka, going to saunas and driving tractors to fight the virus, Reuters reports. Belarus has kept its borders open and even allowed soccer matches in the national league to be played in front of spectators. Its churches have also remained open in the run-up to Orthodox Easter on 19 April. "No one will die of coronavirus in our country. I publicly declare this," Lukashenko said. "We have already found combinations of drugs to save people." The health ministry has reported 2,919 confirmed coronavirus cases and 29 deaths in Belarus. But Lukashenko said the fatalities were the result of underlying health conditions in the patients, such as heart disease and diabetes. "Therefore, I say that not a single person died purely from the coronavirus." Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday warned officials to brace for "extraordinary" scenarios in the coronavirus pandemic as Moscow tightened its lockdown measures and Russia reported its highest daily infection figures yet, AFP reports. Russia reported 2,558 new cases on Monday, bringing the overall nationwide tally to 18,328. Eighteen people diagnosed with the virus died overnight, pushing the death toll to 148. Though rising, the number of deaths remains much lower for now than in countries such as the United States and Italy. In a video conference with officials on Monday, Putin said the next weeks would be "decisive" for Russia's fight against the virus as the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better." He told officials that they need to "consider all scenarios for how the situation will develop, even the most complex and extraordinary." In the video conference, Putin called for measures to end shortages of protective equipment for medics. "I know there's not always enough of that and of course here we need additional measures to get rid of all these shortages," the president said. He added that Russia would also bring in the defence ministry to help if necessary. And before we move onto news from the rest of the world, a reminder that about half an hour into that White House briefing, Trump had yet to provide any updates on the crisis in the US. Instead, he spent that time defending his record. CNN's response to this included these news banners: That White House press briefing has now ended. Here are the main points: US president Donald Trump will decide whether to continue funding the WHO and whether to reopen the economy on 1 May in the next few days, he said. "I have the ultimate authority" to re-open the country and scale back distancing measures, Trump claimed. This is not true. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week, said US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The US has significantly ramped up testing in recent days. "In three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests to 3m tests," said Dr. Deborah Birx. In other US news: Bernie Sanders endorsed Joe Biden's bid for president. The announcement comes five days after Sanders withdrew from the Democratic primary, and the former candidate told his supporters today, "We've got to make Trump a one-term president." Dr Deborah Birx noted earlier that the US has significantly ramped up testing in recent days. "In three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests to 3m tests," she said. "We know that we have to further increase that." A team is mapping the testing capacity is across the country, she added. The White House Press Briefing is ongoing, with Dr Anthony Fauci - the country's leading infectious diseases expert and a key member of the US coronavirus task force - speaking now. "I can tell you one thing he's going to listen. But I think what's going to happen is he's going to get input from a number of experts. One of them is health." Dr. Fauci is speaking following a retweet by US president Trump that included the hashtag #FireFauci, and is being asked bout Trump's plans to possibly reopen the country by 1 May - Trump said earlier in the presser that he will know later this week whether that will happen. Trump also said earlier in the press briefing that he did not plan to fire the doctor. "When you have conversations with the president, sometimes they really have to be confidential," Dr Fauci said when asked if he's willing to publicly contradict Trump if he advocates for unsafe policies. "I'll have to think about that," Fauci said, adding that he's confident the president will defer to public health experts' guidance. Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan. As confirmed cases worldwide approach two million and deaths at more than 119,400, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo is seeing "glimmers of hope" and has told the state that the "worst is over". Later, in a freewheeling and aggressive press conference, even by his standards, US president Donald Trump repeatedly confronted journalists, calling one disgraceful, and saying another would be "the last to know" the answer to her question. Meanwhile Russian President Vladimir Putin has warned the country to prepare for an "extraordinary" virus crisis, saying the situation "is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better." I'll be bringing you the latest for the next few hours. You can get in touch with me directly with news, tips, questions or comments on Twitter @helenrsullivan. The confirmed global death toll passed 119,483, and at least 1.9 million people have been infected, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. The tallies are likely to be underestimates. US president Donald Trump said we'll know in the next few days whether he wants to reopen by 1 May, and also whether he plans to continue funding the World Health Organization. Payments to individuals as part of the US economic stimulus package will be made by Wednesday this week. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said that with the number of coronavirus hospitalisations starting to plateau, that there were glimmers of hope. "Yes, I think you can say the worst is over," he said. The US is nearing the peak of its outbreak, according to the director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Robert Redfield, who told NBC: "You'll know when you're at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now." The US governors of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Delaware and Connecticut announced they had formed a regional advisory council. Each state will name a public health official and an economic development official to serve on a working group alongside each governor's chief of staff to design a "reopening plan" for their states. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, says crèches and schools will begin to reopen on 11 May. That date will mark the start of a new phase. B, he said, but the lockdown will continue until then. The number of deaths from coronavirus in Italy passed 20,000 after they rose by 566 on Monday, 135 more than on Sunday. Almost half of the deaths (280) were registered in Lombardy, the northern region worst affected by the virus. A total of 11,329 patients have died in UK hospitals after testing positive for coronavirus, the UK's Department of Health said, up by 717 in 24 hours. German experts recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and hygiene measures to control the spread of the virus are maintained. The head of the World Health Organization urged caution over moves to lift lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the virus and that finding, testing and isolating cases was still crucial. The UK will not ease lockdown this week, said to the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who added that it was "still far too early", and that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to. Spain saw another fall in its overnight death toll, down by 102 to 517 in 24 hours, bringing the total to 17,489, the country's health ministry said, adding that it was the smallest proportional daily increase since tracking began. 64212 false false

Frances Perraudin (now) and Helen Sullivan (earlier)      Cleaning staff disinfect a train at El Retiro station in response to the coronavirus pandemic in Buenos Aires, Argentina, 13 April 2020.         People watch as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, speaks during a televised address to the nation on Monday evening.        Employees pose for a photo wearing face masks at a care home in Brussels.        A woman takes a face mask from a police officer in Madrid, Spain.        Benny Gantz, leader of Blue and White party, and Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu.        Afghanistan's health minister Ferozuddin Feroz.        French Minister of Public Action and Accounts Gerald Darmanin.        Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.        The concourse at Terminal 5 at Heathrow last Thursday.        Thai prime minister attends a video conference of Special ASEAN Summit on COVID-19.        A spray machine is used to sanitize a locality in New Delhi, India, 13 April 2020.        Empty seats are seen at Mo Chit bus terminal during the Songkran holiday which marks the Thai New Year, in Bangkok, Thailand, 14 April 2020.        People wearing personal protective equipments walk at Noi Bai international airport in Hanoi, Vietnam 12 April 2020.        A man wearing a mask and gloves walks in front of a building covered with grafitti in Athens, Greece, 30 March 2020.        In this March 18, 2019 file photo, Brazil's Health Minister Luiz Henrique Mandetta, right, gives anti-bacterial gel to President Jair Bolsonaro.        A patient who recovered from coronavirus kisses the ground as medical staff rejoice, north of the Moroccan capital Rabat on 12 April, 2020.        Health workers are seen inside at the ISSSTE October 1 Hospital during a demonstration Coronavirus outbreak, Mexico City, Mexico, 13 Apr 2020        A net is laid around a Tokyo 2020 merchandise store after the shop closed for the day at the Narita International Airport in Nairta, near Tokyo, 2 April 2020.        Workers wearing face masks move bed parts into a makeshift hospital which has been converted from an office building to treat coronavirus patients in Suifenhe, a city of Heilongjiang province on the border with Russia, China 10 April 2020.        A woman rides a bicycle in front of the fence with the graffiti reading "quarantine' in Minsk, Belarus, Monday, April 6, 2020.        Two Russian police officers, wearing face masks to protect from coronavirus, patrol empty Manezhnaya Square near Red Square to ensure a self-isolation regime due to coronavirus, in Moscow, Russia, Monday, 13 April 2020.