In a year of lockdown and isolation, books about islands seem a good place to turn for comfort and to reflect on our predicament. There are many to choose from. From Utopia and RobinsonCrusoe  to Aldous Huxley’s Island  and William Golding’s Lord of the Flies,  imaginary islands have long featured in the philosophical and literary imagination. Nonfiction in which real islands play a central role is almost a genre in itself. The work of the late Tim Robinson in relation to the Aran islands has helped shape a generation of nature writers, while in Sea RoomAdam Nicolson has gifted the Shiants  to those who are unlikely ever to get there. Judith Schalansky’s Atlas of Remote Islands   was an international bestseller and Amy Liptrot’s The Outrun  is unforgettable.

In Island Dreams, Gavin Francis combines memoir from a lifetime of travel and the practice of medicine, observations on the geography and history of islands across the globe, and reflections on how islands illuminate his own life and the human condition. Tamsin Calidas’s I Am an Island is the story of how she came, through more than 15 years of struggle, to make a kind of home on one small Scottish island. Hers is a vivid and at times almost unbearably distressing story from which it is very hard to turn away.

On first view, the most striking feature of Island Dreams is the maps it contains. There are about 90 of them, many reproduced in full colour, that one may leaf through in childlike wonder and reverie. On an 18th-century chart of the Canaries, each island is outlined in a different colour, caught in a cobweb-like network of windroses, and dubbed the Hesperides, or Isles of the Blessed. Muckle Flugga and Out Stack off the north coast of Unst squat in a corner of empty sea. Robben, Alcatraz, Château d’If and other prison islands seem implacable.

But the book is more than an atlas. Francis, an Edinburgh GP, is the author of two celebrated books about the human body:  Adventures in Human Being  and Shapeshifters: On Medicine and Human Change.  He has also been an amateur geographer since childhood, and a traveller since his 20s, taking a motorcycle across Asia and working as physician on the Halley Research Station in Antartica. Island Dreams reflects the range and depth of his memories, skills, understanding and humanity. Francis describes the book as “a simple but sincere cartography of my own obsession with the twinned but opposing allures of island and city, of isolation and connection”. And, like the paediatrician Donald Winnicott, whom he cites several times, he explores paths towards psychological and emotional health.

For Calidas, the adventure starts with escape when she and her husband Rab flee London for a Hebridean island. Here they buy an abandoned and half-ruined croft and set up as smallholders. Things soon start to go horribly wrong, as island men corner Calidas when she is on her own. The sexual harassment, resentment, misogyny and racism  – Calidas is of partly Asian origin – continue, with Rab remaining remarkably insensitive to what is happening. Matters go from bad to worse, as Calidas suffers failed IVF treatment, sexual betrayal by her husband, a series of horrific injuries, multiple bereavements, and the suspicious death of her prize ram. Nevertheless, she persists. (Her account has raised hackles in the Hebrides.)

Calidas is a supple, sensuous writer – deeply empathic, and ready to forgive. Her account is shot through with moments of intense brightness. In the third part of the book she finds peace in night walking along the tracks of deer, and swims in the freezing winter sea. “I know that if I can stand bare-skinned in the freezing cold, hurl myself into the waves and keep swimming then I am winning.”

More than four fifths of people in the UK live in cities while only a tiny fraction live on the smaller islands of the archipelago, and yet the great majority of us have recently found ourselves isolated. Reflecting on his own experience of lockdown, the Turkish Nobel prize-winning novelist Orhan Pamuk wrote that “fear elicits two distinct responses in me, and perhaps in all of us. Sometimes it causes me to withdraw into myself, toward solitude and silence. But other times it teaches me to be humble and to practice solidarity.” The more that we are able to access the latter quality, the greater are the odds that we will successfully, and with generosity, confront Covid-19 and the other, greater, challenges that lie on the other side of it.

• Island Dreams: Mapping an Obsession  is published by Canongate (£20); I Am an Island  is published by Doubleday (£16.99). To order go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.