NSW Police's Marine Area Command has provided an escort for NSW Health and an independent medical team to board the stricken cruise ship, Ruby Princess, off the coast of Sydney earlier Thursday to assess the health of more than 1,100 crew and whether they are infected with Covid 19.

The joint operation between Australian Border Force and NSW Police is part of the Australian government's efforts to deal with at eight cruise ships that are in Australian waters off the east coast and which have ignored an order to leave to their home ports.

No police officers boarded the vessel, the police said in a statement.

"During today's joint operation, a 66-year-old crew member was transported from the vessel requiring medical care," it said.

"The NSW Police Force is also assisting with a number of medical evacuations and transfers of Australian crew members from several cruise ships anchored off Sydney," the police said.

NSW Police commissioner Mick Fuller, who is in charge of the cruise ship situation in NSW will provide an update on the evolving operation regarding the management of cruise ships on Friday morning.

Earlier in the day the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said Australia had an obligation to provide healthcare to people who are sick and within our territorial waters, and that the government would take doctors from a private company to review health of about 8,500 crew, mostly foreigners, are onboard the ships owned by Carnival Cruises and Royal Caribbean.

The prime minister said in his midday press conference that the ships off the New South Wales coast had been "visited for the purposes of health checks very, very recently".

The Australian government ordered the vessels to leave Australia waters during the Covid-19 pandemic but they have so far refused to do so and some sick crew members have had to be medically evacuated to Australian hospitals.

Fuller has the final say on who can disembark cruise ships.

On Thursday morning Fuller said he feared that "bringing 9,000 people off the cruise ships" could "overload" the state's health system. "We know around the world that when the hospital systems become overwhelmed, then lots and lots of people die.

NSW police also forced another cruise ship, the Pacific Explorer , to leave Sydney harbour and anchor off the coast.

Sture Myrmell, the president of Carnival Australia, which operates the Pacific Explorer, said in a statement posted to YouTube that the decision was "particularly sad and disappointing".

"Being able to send home those crew members who are not required for the safe operation of the ship is the right thing to do both from a humanitarian point of view and Australia's international standing as a maritime nation that looks after foreign nationals in its care," Myrmell said.

"We remain concerned that it is not safe for the ship to sail away from Australian while there are crew members on board who are ill.

"Australia has maritime obligations to protect the welfare of seafarers and as such we need to care for foreign nationals as we would expect other nations to care for Australians in similar circumstances abroad."

But Morrison made it clear Australia would honour its international obligations to assist the sick in its waters.

"If there are people who are sick and need healthcare, then whether it is a foreign national off our shores or an Australian somewhere else, then countries have been respecting that and that is the position of the Australian government," he said.

"That has been respected, that has been honoured, as recently as we have seen in Western Australia with the cases that are there. We are provisioning those ships, so they will be able to move on their way."

Support to reach the ships and process any people evacuated is being provided by the defence forces.

A defence department spokesman said: "At the request of the New South Wales government, Defence is planning to provide land-based logistics and additional quarantine compliance at some NSW ports in support of NSW police."

The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, said on Thursday that non-Australian residents who were trapped on the ships could be "extracted" and "flown back to their country of origin".

Six crew members from the Ruby Princess cruise ship, which has now had more than 500 confirmed cases of coronavirus, had already been taken to Australian hospitals after falling ill. It remains off the coast of Sydney with 1,100 crew onboard.

Doctors from the private company Aspen Medical will be taken to the seven ships off shore - an eighth is in port in Sydney - to determine how many crew are ill with Covid-19. It is then hoped the ships will depart for their port of origin - usually a flag- of-convenience port such as the Bahamas or Malta.

Dutton said on Thursday that if ships were free of Covid-19, then it might be possible to send them out to sea or repatriate crew without risk.

But he also accused some of the cruise ship companies of misleading authorities about the health of people onboard. "It's clear that some of the companies have been lying about the situation of the health of passengers and crew onboard, so what we've agreed to do with NSW is to look at each of the vessels," he told 2GB radio.

He said the approach might vary from ship to ship. "Some of these ships will move off and go back to their port of origin, some of them we may be able to extract the crew and fly them back to their country of origin, some of them - because they've been out there for more than 14 days - there's no presence of Covid-19 onboard. Others we do have concern about."

Aspen Medical - a private company that has done work for Princess Cruises, owned by Carnival, in the past - will provide the medical staff.

A company spokesman said: "Aspen Medical is operating at a high operational tempo, with a significant amount of work relating to the Covid-19 response, both at home and overseas, including establishing respiratory clinics, emergency departments, infection control training for health professionals and aged care staff and providing screening at Swissotel [Sydney].

"Our involvement in the Covid-19 cruise ship response began in Tokyo, where we managed the land-based quarantine facility for the crew of the Diamond Princess. Following the success of that operation, we were contracted to undertake similar work onboard the Grand Princess off San Francisco," he said.

The details of the contract with Australian Border Force in relation to cruise ships off the coast was being finalised now, he said.

The Maritime Union of Australia has urged the federal government to urgently repatriate all crew members, other than those directly responsible for marine operations, to address the growing humanitarian crisis.

That would mean bringing crews onshore and organising charter flights to countries such as Philippines, India and China, where many of the crew originate.

But the presence of the novel coronavirus will potentially open up a legal quagmire, particularly if the captains of the ship declare their ships in distress or refuse to leave Australian waters. There may also be difficulties getting countries to accept repatriated crew.

Dutton said the Australian Border Force commissioner had already issued directions for a number of vessels to depart Australian waters "and we're working through that with each of the companies now".

But Dutton added: "We've also got to be cautious about the fact that if you force these boats to set sail, and they end up having people die or people who are seriously sick by the time they get a couple of hundred nautical miles off the coast, they'd turn around and come back. So we've got to deal sensibly with each of them."

Meanwhile, Labor has accused the federal government of pushing responsibility for dealing with the cruise ship crisis onto the states and called for Dutton, who has been recovering from Covid-19, to be replaced.

Labor's home affairs spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, called on the federal government to take responsibility for solving the "complex" issues, saying they were beyond the capacity of any single jurisdiction to solve.

"We have a border security crisis on our hands," she said. "We welcome the border measures that have come in in recent days but they've come too late. More astoundingly, the commonwealth government, responsible for our borders, at the ports and airports, has handed the responsibility for quarantine measures to state governments.

"After trying to blame NSW for the Ruby Princess, the federal government has given NSW and Victoria, as well as all other states, the responsibility for implementing quarantine measures at our ports, airports and seaports."

According to NSW Health, 464 cases of Covid-19 had been linked to various cruise ships in the state.

The Ovation of the Seas has 74 positive cases, the Voyager of the Seas has 34 cases among passengers and five among crew, the Ruby Princess 337 among passengers and three among crew, and the Celebrity Solstice 11 cases. On the 15 March, Morrison said the federal government would not allow crew ships to arrive, but several cruise ships which had left Australia with predominantly Australian passengers onboard were permitted to land and disembark passengers.