block-time published-time 5.26am BST

Trump dismisses Dr Fauci's warnings on reopening the economy as 'not acceptable'

In case you missed it, US President Donald Trump on Wednesday evening dismissed comments by Dr Anthony Fauci, Director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a key member of the coronavirus task force, in testimony at the US senate regarding the dangers of reopening the economy too soon.

Trump told reporters at the White House, "to me it's not an acceptable answer, especially when it comes to schools."

Yesterday, the top public health official contradicted Trump, who urged schools and businesses to reopen and said the White House has set a target of having 100m vaccine doses by the autumn.

Fauci disputed that timeline, indicating that neither a vaccine nor treatment could be developed and distributed in time to facilitate the reopening of schools in the fall.

In this file photo Director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Anthony Fauci, flanked by US President Donald Trump, speaks during the daily briefing on coronavirus. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP via Getty Images

"I think they should open the schools, absolutely," the president said on Wednesday.

"I think they should. It's had very little impact on young people. And I think that if you're an instructor, if you're a teacher, a professor over a certain age like let's say 65 or maybe even if you want to be conservative, 60, perhaps you want to stay out for a little while longer. But I think you should absolutely open the schools. Our country has got to get back and it's got to get back as soon as possible, and I don't consider our country coming back if the schools are closed."

block-time published-time 5.04am BST

'Why should you cry?' Ghana's dancing pallbearers find new fame during Covid-19    Ghana's dancing pallbearers who have shot to fame during the coronavirus pandemic. The founder and lead pallbearer, Benjamin Aidoo, stands center. Photograph: Wilfred Bonsu Ababio/Nana Otafrija pallbearers

The Nana Otafrija pallbearers might look slick, but they are not afraid to get dirty. Their signature moves, carried out with a coffin in tow, include dropping to all-fours and crawling in unison; or lying on their backs, the coffin balanced on top of them, legs moving in time to the music - as though they have been crushed by the casket.

The dancing pallbearers first became famous in 2017 when their so-called "coffin dance" featured in a BBC documentary. Then, someone added an EDM track and a meme was born: footage of the dancers was spliced with botched feats of strength and other accidents and posted all over the internet.

Now, the coronavirus pandemic has transformed their performance into a way to warn people of the dangers of ignoring social distancing.

Benjamin Aidoo, the lead pallbearer, and his dancers have also taken it upon themselves to warn the public about the dangers of ignoring social distancing measures, with the help of a new slogan: "Stay at home or dance with us".

Speaking from his home in Accra, Aidoo said that once the pandemic is over, he hopes to teach people around the world to hold uplifting funerals. "Most people love the display", said Aidoo, "because they want to be happy." When people's parents die, for example, "You know what your mom and dad did for you," said Aidoo. "Why should you cry?"

Related:  'Why should you cry?' Ghana's dancing pallbearers find new fame during Covid-19

block-time published-time 4.54am BST

China begins testing every resident in Wuhan

Yesterday we reported on plans by Chinese authorities to test every resident in Wuhan, after a small outbreak was reported this week. State media, People's Daily, has said the program began yesterday, prioritising high risk populations. It appears the intention is still to test everyone, although a health official told CGTN testing should be selective. Dr Wu Zunyou, an epidemiologist at the Chinese center for disease control and prevention, said he didn't believe there would be a "second peak" of the virus epidemic in China. "We have gathered experience in curbing the spread of the coronavirus vin the past three months," he said. "We won't let some sporadic cases become another outbreak."

A medical worker wait for patients to be tested for the Covid-19 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, Chinas on 14 May 2020. Photograph: Héctor Retamal/AFP via Getty Images

There is serious concern over the outbreak in Wuhan, despite the small size. He Qinghua from the bureau of disease prevention and control, told a press conference disease control was generally stable across the nation, but there were still challenges. He said Chinese authorities were still investigating the origins of the Shulan outbreak inthe northeasternJilin province, and he vowed to "make [results] public immediately".Outbreaks in northeastern provinces near the borders with Russia and North Korea, drew a visit from Chinese vice premier Sun Chunlan this week. According to Xinhua News, Sun, who is also a member of the CCP central committee's Political Bureau, toured Heilongjiang province and demanded increased efforts in testing, tracing and treatment.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.00am BST

block-time published-time 4.44am BST

Suicide in Japan falls by 20% in April compared to 2019, biggest drop in five years

Gavin Blair reports for the Guardian:

Suicide in Japan fell by 20% in April compared to 2019, the biggest drop in five years, despite fears of the coronavirus pandemic causing increased stress and many prevention helplines either not operating or being short-staffed. People spending more time at home with their families, fewer people commuting to work and the start of the school year being delayed are seen as factors in the fall. 1,455 people took their own life in Japan last month, 359 fewer than in April 2019. Suicide has been on a downward trend in Japan since peaking at more than 34,000 cases in 2003. Last year saw just over 20,000 suicides, but the large drop last month comes at a time when there were fears of a fresh spike. New coronavirus infections reached their peak in mid-April in Japan at more than 500 a day, leading the government to declare a state of emergency on 16 April, though the restrictions are less strict than those of other countries. The stay-at-home measures impacted suicide prevention organisations, with around 40% of them either shut down or working reduced hours, leading to worries about vulnerable populations. As for adults, at times of national crisis and disasters, "traditionally, people don't think about suicide," noted Saito, pointing to a drop in cases in 2011, the year of the giant earthquake, tsunami and nuclear meltdowns at Fukushima. However, economic and work pressures are factors in suicide, and many train stations have installed barriers on platforms in recent years to make it more difficult to jump in front of trains, a common way for people to take their own life in Japan. A large drop in the number of people commuting to offices, where they often work long hours, is also being seen as another contributing factor in the lower suicide rate. A prolonged economic downturn caused by the pandemic could though lead to a rebound in suicides, suggested Saito, who also served as chair of the Japanese Association for Suicide Prevention. The year after the 1997 Asian financial crisis saw a record rise of nearly 35%.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am BST

block-time published-time 4.30am BST

Deaths worldwide near 300,000

The number of lives lost worldwide in the coronavirus pandemic is nearing 300,000, according to Johns Hopkins University figures, with 297,197 confirmed deaths.

There are 4,347,015 confirmed infections.

The true fatalities figure is likely to be significantly higher as a result of underreporting or differing definitions.

A man wearing a mask as a precaution against coronavirus walks past a picture on the side of a building in London, 13 May 2020. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP

China is no longer among the ten worst-affected countries in terms of the official number of confirmed infections.

•US cases : 1,390,406 ( deaths : 84,119)•Russia cases : 242,271 ( deaths : 2,212)•United Kingdom cases : 230,986 ( deaths : 33,264)•Spain cases : 228,691 ( deaths : 27,104)•Italy cases : 222,104 ( deaths : 31,106)•Brazil cases : 190,137 ( deaths : 13,240)•France cases : 178,184 ( deaths : 27,077)•Germany cases : 174,098 ( deaths : 7,861)•Turkey cases : 143,114 ( deaths : 3,952)•Iran cases : 112,725 ( deaths : 6,783)

US cases : 1,390,406 ( deaths : 84,119)

Russia cases : 242,271 ( deaths : 2,212)

United Kingdom cases : 230,986 ( deaths : 33,264)

Spain cases : 228,691 ( deaths : 27,104)

Italy cases : 222,104 ( deaths : 31,106)

Brazil cases : 190,137 ( deaths : 13,240)

France cases : 178,184 ( deaths : 27,077)

Germany cases : 174,098 ( deaths : 7,861)

Turkey cases : 143,114 ( deaths : 3,952)

Iran cases : 112,725 ( deaths : 6,783)

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.11am BST

block-time published-time 4.14am BST

The full story on the China hacking warnings now:

Organisations conducting research into Covid-19 may be targeted by computer hackers linked to the Chinese government, according to the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security.

Neither agency cited any specific examples, but warned on Wednesday that institutions and companies involved in vaccines, treatments and testing for the coronavirus should take additional security measures to protect data and be aware of the potential threat.

"China's efforts to target these sectors pose a significant threat to our nation's response to Covid-19," the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said in a statement. "This announcement is intended to raise awareness for research institutions and the American public and provide resources and guidance for those who may be targeted."

China has defended its response to the virus, and foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian denied the government was involved in any attempt to steal virus-related data on Monday, after some media reported on the warning in advance.

"We are leading the world in Covid-19 treatment and vaccine research," Zhao told reporters. "It is immoral to target China with rumours and slanders in the absence of any evidence."

Related:  China hacking poses 'significant threat' to US Covid-19 response, says FBI

block-time published-time 3.58am BST

Cats can spread the new coronavirus to other cats without any of them ever having symptoms, a lab experiment suggests. Scientists who led the work, reported on Wednesday, say it shows the need for more research into whether the virus can spread from people to cats to people again, Reuters reports. Health experts have downplayed that possibility. The American Veterinary Medical Association said in a new statement that just because an animal can be deliberately infected in a lab does not mean that it will easily be infected with that same virus under natural conditions.

The owner of a cat cafe checks the temperature of one of her cats in Bangkok, Thailand. Photograph: Sakchai Lalit/AP

Researchers took coronavirus from a human patient and infected three cats with it. Each cat then was housed with another cat that was free of infection. Within five days, coronavirus was found in all three of the newly exposed animals. None of the six cats ever showed any symptoms. Last month, two domestic cats in different parts of New York state tested positive for the coronavirus after mild respiratory illnesses. They were thought to have picked it up from people in their homes or neighbourhoods. Some tigers and lions at the Bronx Zoo also have tested positive for the virus, as have a small number of other animals around the world. Guidelines from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that based on the limited information available so far, the risk of pets spreading coronavirus to people is considered to be low.

block-time published-time 3.51am BST

Get in touch on Twitter @helenrsullivan.

block-time published-time 3.44am BST

Here is the full story on New Zealand's budget:

Related:  New Zealand budget: Robertson lays out $50bn plan to return jobs to pre-Covid-19 levels

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.44am BST

block-time published-time 3.37am BST

Hong Kong to test hundreds of families

Hong Kong authorities are going to screen hundreds of families, local media is reporting, after its 23-day run of no local infections was broken with the diagnosis of Covid-19 in a 66-year-old woman with no recent travel history, and her five-year-old granddaughter. Several other members of the family are reportedly also showing symptoms.

Health authorities told media on Wednesday afternoon the woman developed a fever on 8 May, and had been visiting her son and his family in a nearby building every day.

Authorities are now testing hundreds of people in the area of Tsuen Wan, including all residents of about 860 households in the two buildings, worker at a market the woman visited, and the employees and fellow pupils of a tutorial centre where the child visited.

A woman wearing a protective face mask walks past stacks of toilet paper for sale in the Tsuen Wan district of Hong Kong on 8 February 2020. Photograph: Philip Fong/AFP via Getty Images

"This test result will indicate the epidemic situation in the local community. It does not mean that the patient acquired the disease from these two blocks, because she also participated in a bit of community activities," said communicable Disease Branch Head Dr Chuang Shuk-kwan.

"She travelled daily, from Lei Muk Shue Estate to Tsuen Wan by minibus, and also visited some markets. Her household contacts may also be a source.

We are also investigating the people who are in contact with her household to see whether there are other possible sources."

Hong Kong recently began easing restrictions on gatherings and venues in the city, but government authorities said there was no need to re-up them at this stage.

Under secretary for food and health, Dr Chui Tak-yi urged vigilance, saying sporadic new cases were unavoidable.

Hong Kong has reported 1,050 cases of Covid-19, four of them fatal.

block-time published-time 3.29am BST

Australia's unemployment rate of 6.2% - an increase from has come in lower than expected, but are still "terribly shocking," the Prime Minister said.

That press conference is now over.

Most experts had predicted unemployment of around 7% or as high as 10%.

The ABC's analysis notes that the participation rate has jumped from 63.5% to 66%, however, which means many more people are no longer looking for work. Most of Australia's jobs were lost in the retail, hospitality and tourism sectors.

If you'd like more Australia-specific Covid-19 and politics news,

block-time published-time 3.23am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison  says the plan is to get people back to work:

And I would urge people to not underestimate the scale of that task - it's one thing to close things down. It's entirely another to open them up again.

And to do so in a Covid-safe way. And that's why we can't get too far ahead of ourselves here.

The task we have now is to reopen these businesses to get employees back into their jobs and to do so in a Covid-safe way, so that it's sustainable.

For many years, potentially, if that is what is required. And so the task and the message I have for those young people is that's why I have been so forward leaning, whether it has been the reopening of schools which has been on Treasury's advice.

block-time published-time 3.21am BST

Returning to Australia's unemployment rate - Greg Jericho, who writes on economics for Guardian Australia:

enltrThe rise in the Underemployment Rate is the real story. pic.twitter.com/0GxCEcTAOr

- Greg Jericho (@GrogsGamut) May 14, 2020

block-time published-time 3.20am BST

Back to Australia, where Prime Minister Scott Morrison is asked what it says about Australia's relationship with China that both the trade and agriculture ministers are unable to get a phone call with their Chinese counterparts.

"The great thing about sovereignty is we always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we expect the same in return," he says. "And I think that's a pretty good deal.

Here is an earlier story for context:

Related:  Australia urged to avoid 'megaphone diplomacy' with China over trade dispute

block-time published-time 3.13am BST

New Zealand announces NZ$50bn fund for the country's recovery from Covid-19

Cutting away from Australia for second to nearby New Zealand, where the finance minister, Grant Robertson, said his government could reduce unemployment to pre-coronavirus levels within two years as he announced a NZ$50bn fund for the country's recovery from Covid-19 alongside his annual Budget on Thursday.

The figure, which is about 17% of New Zealand's GDP and 17 times more than what a New Zealand government usually allocates to new spending in its budgets, was "the most significant financial commitment" the country's leaders had made "in modern history", Robertson said.

New Zealand Finance Minister Grant Robertson holds copies of his Budget 2020 on the steps of parliament in Wellington, New Zealand, Wednesday, 13 May 2020. Photograph: Mark Mitchell/AP

The spending, which includes an extension to the government's Covid-19 wage subsidy as well as spending on training and apprenticeships, public housing and infrastructure - will be funded by steep long-term borrowing, and could save 138,000 jobs according to Treasury models provided by the government.

The announcement came as New Zealand recovered a third consecutive day of no new cases of Covid-19 and the government's lockdown restrictions on the country loosened further, with eateries and shops permitted to open and people allowed to socialise outside their homes for the first time, in groups of no more than 10.

block-time published-time 3.09am BST

Australia's treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is speaking now.

The youth unemployment rate has risen to more than 13% he says.

"The economic figures will get worse before they get better," he says.

1.6m Australians are now on JobSeeker - an unemployment benefit - and 6 million Australians, working for more than 860,000 businesses, are on JobKeeper, a wage subsidy to keep Australians in work.

Both are designed to end in September.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.16am BST

block-time published-time 3.04am BST

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is addressing the media now, as the country's unemployment reaches 6.2%.

"This is a tough day for Australia," he says.

This is a tough day for Australia. A very tough day. Almost 600,000 jobs have been lost. Every one of them devastating for those Australians, for their families, for their communities. A very tough day. Terribly shocking, although not unexpected."

block-time published-time 2.50am BST

Los Angeles beaches reopened on Wednesday after weeks of coronavirus closure, drawing Californians out for a glimpse of the sun one day after learning that sweeping stay-at-home orders could remain in place all summer. The new rules imposed by county health officials allow residents back to the shore as long as they wear masks when not in the water and stay "active" by surfing, swimming or running. Sitting on the sand is still prohibited, Reuters reports.

Los Angeles police officers patrol the Venice Beach boardwalk on horseback during the coronavirus outbreak, Wednesday, 13 May 2020, in Los Angeles. Photograph: Mark J Terrill/AP

The closure of California's beaches by Newsom or local officials has been a point of contention as US states slowly lift unprecedented clampdowns imposed on residents and businesses in March to control the spread of the virus. Los Angeles County Health Director Barbara Ferrer said on Tuesday that stay-at-home rules for some 10 million residents, including the city of Los Angeles, would likely remain in force through the summer, although some restrictions would be eased. Many state governors, concerned about the economic fallout from prolonged lockdowns, have said they would lift restrictions carefully and gradually, requiring businesses to maintain physical distance from customers and clean surfaces frequently.

block-time published-time 2.29am BST

South Korea has tested over 24,000 people since the outbreak in Seoul's Itaewon neighbourhood, Yonhap News Agency reports:

More than 24,000 people connected with the recent new coronavirus outbreak in Seoul's popular multicultural neighborhood of Itaewon have been tested for Covid-19, thanks to the adoption of free and anonymous tests, the city mayor said Thursday.

Cases linked to bars and nightclubs in Itaewon hit 120 on Wednesday as secondary infections surfaced across the country. Infections in Seoul accounted for more than half of the cases at 70.

Policemen serving near the international district of Itaewon undergo Covid-19 tests at a makeshift clinic set up at Seoul Medical Center in Seoul, South Korea, 12 May 2020. Photograph: YONHAP/EPA

block-time published-time 2.23am BST

China reported 3 new coronavirus cases for May 13, down from 7 cases a day earlier, the country's health commission said. All of the new cases were locally transmitted - two in the northeastern Liaoning province and one in Jilin province that borders Liaoning, the National Health Commission said in a statement on Thursday. The number of new asymptomatic cases rose to 12 from 8 a day earlier. The total number of cases now stands at 82,929 while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,633.

People wearing facemasks are seen along the shores of the Yangtze River in Wuhan, in Chinas central Hubei province on 13 May 2020. Photograph: Héctor Retamal/AFP via Getty Images

block-time published-time 2.07am BST

Wisconsin supreme court strikes down governor's stay-at-home order

Wisconsin's supreme court struck down the state's stay-at-home order on Thursday, ruling that Governor Tony Evers overstepped his authority by extending the order through the end of May.

The ruling reopens the state, lifting caps on the size of gatherings, allowing people to travel as they please and allowing shuttered businesses to reopen, including bars and restaurants. The Tavern League of Wisconsin swiftly posted the news on its website, telling members, "You can OPEN IMMEDIATELY!"

The 4-3 decision, written by the court's conservative justices, also chips away at Evers' authority to slow the spread of coronavirus and will force the Democratic governor to work with the Republican legislature as the state continues to grapple with the outbreak.

Related:  Wisconsin supreme court strikes down governor's stay-at-home order

block-time published-time 2.02am BST

Trump has just tweeted:

enltrOBAMAGATE!

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 14, 2020

So it seems a good time to repost Guardian Washington Correspondent David Smith's piece on why Trump might be doing this:

"Donald Trump has ratcheted up his "Obamagate" conspiracy theory to implicate Joe Biden and other former White House officials in what critics say is a desperate attempt to distract from the coronavirus pandemic":

Related:  Trump deepens 'Obamagate' conspiracy theory with Biden unmasking move

block-time published-time 1.45am BST

It is regularly cited as the most hated word in the English language and even Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has visibly struggled while using it. But now the word "moist" is being deployed for good - in a song written by a New Zealand school principal that aims to helps children observe social distancing guidelines.

Shirley ?erban of Lake Brunner school in the South Island penned the song Moist Breath Zone as a health and safety message for students returning to school after the Covid-19 lockdown.

"I'll share my news, but my food's for me alone. If I smell your breath, I will go sit on my own. Always wash your hands - make them soapy, full of foam," she sings.

"And stay out of my moist breath zone!"

A moist breath zone is the area in which you can feel or smell someone else's breath.

The song has been welcomed by New Zealand's Ministry of Education, which called ?erban's effort "fantastic".

enltrIn case you missed it - this fantastic song by Lake Brunner School principal Shirley ?erban was made to help children understand the expectations when they are back in school in Alert Level 2. Ka mau te wehi - fantastic work, Shirley! https://t.co/oVqDwX0klh

- Ministry of Education NZ (@EducationGovtNZ) May 13, 2020

Related:  'Stay out of my moist breath zone': Covid-19 anthem takes the drool out of school

block-time published-time 1.31am BST

Japan is expected to lift the state of emergency for 39 of 47 prefectures

Japan is expected to lift the state of emergency for 39 of its 47 prefectures on Thursday, local media reported, while the capital Tokyo is set to keep restrictions in place until it sees a convincing containment of the coronavirus, Reuters reports. The world's third-largest economy declared a nationwide state of emergency a month ago, urging citizens to reduce person-to-person contact by 80% in an effort to slow the pace of new infections and ease the strain on medical services. The government had said it would reassess the situation in mid-May.

Dotonbori, one of Osaka's most popular tourist areas, 13 May 2020 in Osaka, Japan. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images

The declaration gives governors added authority to tell people to stay home and close schools and businesses, but there is no penalty for non-compliance. Some non-essential businesses even in hard-hit areas have gradually started to reopen ahead of the government's review. Japan has reported 16,100 confirmed cases of the coronavirus, excluding those from a cruise ship previously quarantined in Yokohama, and 696 deaths to date from the disease it causes, Covid-19, according to public broadcaster NHK. While Japan has avoided the kind of explosive growth seen in the United States and elsewhere, its testing has also been among the lowest, at 188 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests per 100,000 people, versus 3,159 in Italy and 3,044 in Germany.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24am BST

block-time published-time 1.09am BST

Italian doctors find link between Covid-19 and inflammatory disorder

Doctors in Italy have reported the first clear evidence of a link between Covid-19 and a rare but serious inflammatory disorder that has required some children to undergo life-saving treatment in intensive care units.

The mysterious condition emerged last month when NHS bosses issued an alert to doctors after hospitals admitted a number of children with a mix of            toxic shock and symptoms seen in an inflammatory disorder known as Kawasaki disease.

On Tuesday, medics at the Evelina London Children's Hospital announced the death of a 14-year-old boy, the first known fatality from the condition in Britain. Between 75 and 100 children are now receiving treatment across the country. Typical symptoms include a fever, skin rashes, red eyes, cracked lips and abdominal pain.

Doctors suspected early on that coronavirus played a role in the new disorder by triggering an excessive immune reaction in the children, but there was no proof that the two were linked.

Related:  Italian doctors find link between Covid-19 and inflammatory disorder

block-time published-time 1.01am BST

Organizations conducting research into Covid-19 may be targeted by computer hackers linked to the Chinese government, according to the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security. Neither agency cited any specific examples Wednesday, AP reports, but they warned that institutions and companies involved in work on vaccines, treatments and testing for the novel coronavirus should take additional security measures to protect data and be aware of the potential threat.

"China's efforts to target these sectors pose a significant threat to our nations response to Covid-19," said a statement from the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. "This announcement is intended to raise awareness for research institutions and the American public and provide resources and guidance for those who may be targeted." It comes amid heightened tensions between the two countries over the source of the outbreak and Trump administration complaints that China did not adequately alert the world to the danger posed by the new coronavirus. The warning also echoes long-standing US complaints that China has engaged in the wholesale theft of technology and trade secrets to build its economy.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.09am BST

block-time published-time 12.49am BST

In the US, coronavirus could sweep through camps where firefighting crews are stationed, ready to fight wildfires, according to a federal document obtained by The Associated Press.

From the AP:

The US Forest Service's draft risk assessment predicts that even in a best-case scenario - with social distancing followed and plenty of tests and protective equipment available - nearly two dozen firefighters could be infected with COVID-19 at a camp with hundreds of people who come in to combat a fire that burns for months.

The worst-case scenario? More than 1,000 infections.

Forest Service officials have declined to answer questions about the document other than saying it's outdated and being redone. They didn't immediately respond to additional questions Wednesday.

"The report is being reviewed and updated with the most current data and is not ready to share," the agency said Monday in an email.

The Forest Service declined to release a copy of the draft or say what changes are being made. The AP obtained the document from an official who has access to it and didn't want to be named.

block-time published-time 12.40am BST

Moscow says it ascribed over 60% of coronavirus deaths in April to other causes

The city of Moscow said on Wednesday it had ascribed the deaths of more than 60% of coronavirus patients in April to other causes as it defended what it said was the superior way it and Russia counted the number of people killed by the novel virus, Reuters reports. At 242,271, Russia has the second-highest number of confirmed cases in the world after the United States, something it attributes to a massive testing programme which it says has seen almost 6 million tests conducted. But with 2,212 coronavirus deaths, Russia also has one of the world's lowest mortality rates. Moscow, the epicentre of the country's outbreak, accounts for 1,232 of those deaths.

Smolensky Metro Bridge over the Moskva River displays a message reading "We thank construction workers carrying on for us", with the House of Government in the background, Moscow, Russia. Photograph: Mikhail Tereshchenko/TASS

The disparity between the high number of cases and the relatively low number of deaths has prompted Kremlin critics and various Western and Russian media outlets to question the veracity of Russia's official death statistics. Data published at the weekend showing that the total number of deaths registered in Moscow rose sharply in April compared with the same month last year and was also significantly higher than the number officially confirmed as having been caused by the new virus raised further suspicions. Moscow's Department of Health acknowledged in a statement on Wednesday that the number of deaths in April, 11,846, had been 1,841 higher than the same month last year and almost triple the number of people registered as having died of the virus. But it flatly denied it had been dishonestly lowering the Russian capital's coronavirus death toll. Tatyana Golikova, Russia's health minister, has also denied any falsification of the statistics.

block-time published-time 12.31am BST

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's coverage of pandemic news from around the world.

I'm Helen Sullivan, with you for the next few hours. Get in touch on Twitter@helenrsullivan.

Coronavirus could become endemic like HIV, the World Health Organization has said, warning against any attempt to predict how long it would keep circulating and calling for a "massive effort" to counter it.

Meanwhile Trump has dismissed Dr Anthony Fauci's comments in testimony at the US senate regarding the dangers of reopening the economy too soon, telling reporters at the White House, "to me it's not an acceptable answer, especially when it comes to schools."

Meanwhile Russia, with the second-highest number of infections worldwide, has one of the lowest official death tolls.

The city of Moscow said on Wednesday it had ascribed the deaths of more than 60% of coronavirus patients in April to other causes as it defended what it said was the superior way it and Russia counted the number of people killed by the novel virus. More on this shortly.

Here are the key recent developments:

•At least 4.3 million people are known to have been infected with the coronavirus worldwide, while at least 295,671 people have died. The figures collected by Johns Hopkins University are likely to be a great underestimate of the true scale of the pandemic.•Trump says Fauci's warning over reopening the economy too soon as "not an acceptable answer". US President Donald Trump on Wednesday described as not acceptable a warning given by top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci this week about the dangers of reopening the economy too quickly. "To me it's not an acceptable answer especially when it comes to schools," Trump told reporters at the White House, noting he was surprised by the response Fauci gave to lawmakers in testimony to the US Senate on Tuesday.•Virus may never be eradicated - WHO. The coronavirus that causes Covid-19 could become endemic like HIV, the World Health Organization has said, warning against any attempt to predict how long it would keep circulating and calling for a "massive effort" to counter it.•Every African country is now affected by the outbreak, after Lesotho announced its first case. The virus was detected in one of 81 people tested after arriving last week from Saudi Arabia and neighbouring South Africa, Lesotho's health ministry said.•Former UK spy chief dismisses Wuhan lab conspiracy theory. In the UK, the former director general of the domestic intelligence service has poured cold water on White House speculation that Covid-19 may have emerged via a leak from a coronavirus research laboratory in the Chinese city of Wuhan.•Public Health England approves antibody test - report. Public Health England (PHE) has reportedly approved an antibody test kit, the first to receive such an endorsement. The kit is made by the Swiss drugmaker Roche Holding AG, the Daily Telegraph has reported. The newspaper added that it understands the UK's Department of Health and Social Care is in negotiations with Roche to buy millions of the kits.•Afghanistan reached 5,000 confirmed cases, as the country's health ministry warned that easing lockdowns would bring a "catastrophe". Out of 619 suspected patients tested in the last 24 hours, 259 came back positive, pushing the total number of infections to 5,226. The death toll reached 132, after five more patients died overnight. The number of recoveries is 648.•Sweden announced it would hire up to 10,000 more care workers to address shortcomings in elderly care exposed by the pandemic. About half of the Sweden's 3,460 coronavirus-related deaths have been among nursing home residents, and another quarter among those receiving care at home.•Mexico said it would reopen parts of economythe economy after 51 days of lockdown, despite the country reporting its highest number of daily deaths so far. Mexico has confirmed 1,992 new cases and 353 deaths, bringing the total death toll to 3,926 and the total number of cases to 38,324.•Hotels and restaurants across Europe have been asked to enforce physical distancing between guests to allow Europeans to take their annual summer holiday. The EU executive called for a "gradual and careful easing of lockdown restrictions across the continent".•The car manufacturer Ford announced plans to restart production, including at two factories in the UK. Work will resume on 18 May at the company's engine plants in Dagenham in Essex and Bridgend in south Wales. The move, along with the reopening of the Valencia engine plant in Spain, will open all of Ford's European manufacturing facilities.

At least 4.3 million people are known to have been infected with the coronavirus worldwide, while at least 295,671 people have died. The figures collected by Johns Hopkins University are likely to be a great underestimate of the true scale of the pandemic.

Trump says Fauci's warning over reopening the economy too soon as "not an acceptable answer". US President Donald Trump on Wednesday described as not acceptable a warning given by top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci this week about the dangers of reopening the economy too quickly. "To me it's not an acceptable answer especially when it comes to schools," Trump told reporters at the White House, noting he was surprised by the response Fauci gave to lawmakers in testimony to the US Senate on Tuesday.

Virus may never be eradicated - WHO. The coronavirus that causes Covid-19 could become endemic like HIV, the World Health Organization has said, warning against any attempt to predict how long it would keep circulating and calling for a "massive effort" to counter it.

Every African country is now affected by the outbreak, after Lesotho announced its first case. The virus was detected in one of 81 people tested after arriving last week from Saudi Arabia and neighbouring South Africa, Lesotho's health ministry said.

Former UK spy chief dismisses Wuhan lab conspiracy theory. In the UK, the former director general of the domestic intelligence service has poured cold water on White House speculation that Covid-19 may have emerged via a leak from a coronavirus research laboratory in the Chinese city of Wuhan.

Public Health England approves antibody test - report. Public Health England (PHE) has reportedly approved an antibody test kit, the first to receive such an endorsement. The kit is made by the Swiss drugmaker Roche Holding AG, the Daily Telegraph has reported. The newspaper added that it understands the UK's Department of Health and Social Care is in negotiations with Roche to buy millions of the kits.

Afghanistan reached 5,000 confirmed cases, as the country's health ministry warned that easing lockdowns would bring a "catastrophe". Out of 619 suspected patients tested in the last 24 hours, 259 came back positive, pushing the total number of infections to 5,226. The death toll reached 132, after five more patients died overnight. The number of recoveries is 648.

Sweden announced it would hire up to 10,000 more care workers to address shortcomings in elderly care exposed by the pandemic. About half of the Sweden's 3,460 coronavirus-related deaths have been among nursing home residents, and another quarter among those receiving care at home.

Mexico said it would reopen parts of economythe economy after 51 days of lockdown, despite the country reporting its highest number of daily deaths so far. Mexico has confirmed 1,992 new cases and 353 deaths, bringing the total death toll to 3,926 and the total number of cases to 38,324.

Hotels and restaurants across Europe have been asked to enforce physical distancing between guests to allow Europeans to take their annual summer holiday. The EU executive called for a "gradual and careful easing of lockdown restrictions across the continent".

The car manufacturer Ford announced plans to restart production, including at two factories in the UK. Work will resume on 18 May at the company's engine plants in Dagenham in Essex and Bridgend in south Wales. The move, along with the reopening of the Valencia engine plant in Spain, will open all of Ford's European manufacturing facilities.