Australia should not be spooked by the growing trade dispute with China but both sides should avoid "megaphone diplomacy", a leading business group has warned.

The Australian Industry Group's call for cool heads to prevail comes as the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, tries to arrange a call with his Chinese counterpart amid fears the tensions could spread to other sectors reliant on trade with China.

But while Birmingham and senior members of the Australian government try to lower the diplomatic temperature, several Coalition backbenchers have pushed for it to take a harder line, with one lashing out at "China's economic infiltration and economic blackmail".

Trade tensions have grown over the past few days as Chinese authorities flagged            potential tariffs of 80% on Australian barley imports and suspended permits for beef supplied by three abattoirs in Queensland and one in New South Wales.

Innes Willox, the chief executive of the Australian Industry Group, said megaphone diplomacy or overreactions from either side would not lead to good outcomes.

"We are not alone in being subject to China trying to throw its weight around at a time of heightened global uncertainty," he said. "We shouldn't be spooked by it, but we need to find ways to make the relationship work."

The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, warned that thousands of workers could be affected if the dispute escalated into a full-blown trade war.

"What I'm really concerned about is this potential for a trade war to erupt," she said on Wednesday. "I would like this issue resolved as quickly as possible."

Birmingham told the ABC he was trying to arrange to speak with his Chinese counterpart "to seek assurances that the process applied at the Chinese end will be evidence-based" and would give a fair hearing to the responses of Australian beef processors and barley exporters.

He stopped short of criticising backbenchers speaking out in strong terms about the relationship with China, but underlined the need for public debate to be conducted "responsibly and carefully".

The Queensland Coalition backbencher George Christensen told parliament: "Being so entangled with an authoritarian regime has left our nation open to economic blackmail and boycotts, like that mooted by China's ambassador and the actions recently against both our barley and beef exports."

James Paterson, a Liberal senator from Victoria, accused Australian higher education institutions of being too dependent on the Chinese student market, while the NSW senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells has called for Australia to "decouple" from China economically and seek compensation from Beijing for the impacts of Covid-19.

A fellow China hawk, Andrew Hastie, is collecting signatures on a petition for Australia to safeguard its sovereignty against "authoritarian regimes like the Chinese Communist party".

The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, called on the government to "take control of this and exercise a little bit of discipline in their ranks" to avoid inflaming tensions.

"It would be pretty handy if we heard more from the foreign minister and less from people like George Christensen," Albanese said.

The Labor senator Kim Carr went further in the upper house, accusing "mavericks within the Coalition" of making "ill-considered, reckless and irresponsible calls" that went against Australia's national interest.

The foreign minister, Marise Payne, played down her colleagues' interventions, saying free speech was an important value of liberal democracies, but that the government was managing the issues with China in an "appropriate, considered and determined way".

In an interview with Sky News, Payne also defended the government's handling of its call for an independent international investigation into the origin and handling of Covid-19 - a move that irked China.

Payne said that given the pandemic had claimed more than 250,000 lives globally, a review aimed at improving the response to future outbreaks was an "unremarkable proposition".

But she acknowledged that many countries were still in crisis mode dealing with Covid-19, "so the timing of that review will of course be at an appropriate point" down the track.

A spokesperson for China's foreign ministry, Zhao Lijian, said the origins and transmission of the virus needed to be assessed by medical professionals, but warned against "political manoeuvre under the context of the pandemic".

Speaking at a regular press conference on Tuesday, Zhao denied the Chinese ambassador's recent comments about how Chinese consumers may choose to stop buying certain Australian products amounted to economic coercion.

Zhao said the ambassador was simply "talking about the concerns that the Australian side's recent erroneous words and deeds have upset the Chinese people and that they may impact bilateral relations".

An editorial in China's state-backed English-language paper Global Times sounded a warning to politicians in Canberra, saying the recent import suspensions and potential tariffs were not necessarily punishment but should serve as a "wake-up call" for Australia to reflect on its economic links with China.

The editorial says Australia's support for a Covid-19 inquiry has worsened a relationship already damaged by Australia's "unfriendly actions" towards China, including the blocking of Huawei from the 5G network.

"While China is the only choice for Australia's massive commodity exports, Australia is not necessarily the only option for China," it says. "Of course, China's willingness to maintain a cooperative relationship with Australia hasn't changed, and it is now up to Australia to decide what to do next."

Shaughn Morgan, the chief executive of Australian industry advocacy group Dairy Connect, said it would be concerning if the trade dispute extended to other sectors, but he was confident the industry was meeting the required standards.