Stephanie Alexander: tomatoes

As soon as the temperature rises, I start to think of outdoor lunches, and the next thought is tomatoes and basil and Australian extra virgin olive oil. Summer is tomato time and they come in all shapes and sizes. I love big bumpy beefsteak heirlooms but I also love sweet little cherry tomatoes – they make a speedy burst tomato sauce for pasta, or a sauce for breakfast sweetcorn fritters.

• Stephanie Alexander is an author and cook

Daniel Bolotin: flour, milk and egg

With so many diversions and excursions unavailable to our kids, I ended up making pancakes for them almost every morning! With these three basic ingredients, I could start their day off with a treat in a year in which they had to go without so many simple pleasures.

• Daniel Bolotin is a co-founder of Free to Feed

Lennox Hastie: potatoes, specifically Garry Kadwell’s Andean Sunrise

Garry’s Andean Sunrise takes the biscuit. Grown in Crookwell by Garry , who was crowned “producer of the year” at this year’s Delicious produce awards, Andean Sunrise is seeded from an 8,000-year-old Peruvian variety. With a beautiful nutty flavour, golden colour and waxy texture, they elevate the humble potato to a star in its own right.

• Lennox Hastie is head chef and owner at Firedoor

Dan Hong: wagyu intercostal

The meat that is directly in between the rib bones of beef (also known as rib fingers) is a popular cut in Korean barbecue. It has that great balance of fatty richness and connective tissue chew that I love. I recently bought a portable smokeless grill so I can do my own yakiniku at home without setting the smoke alarm off.

I love to eat it Korean-style with sesame leaves, various kimchi, namul, kim, ssamjang and freshly cooked Korean white rice.

• Dan Hong is the executive chef at Merivale

Julia Busuttil Nishimura: tinned tomatoes

I found myself reaching into the pantry more often than ever this year, and meals would regularly be based around a tin of whole tomatoes. I love draining them of their juice and crushing them with my hands onto a tray with chicken thighs, olives and fresh oregano to be roasted in a hot oven. Classic pasta dishes like amatriciana, puttanesca and arrabiata were all regular staples of my kitchen this year too. Comforting, simple and delicious food for trying times.

• Julia Busuttil Nishimura is a cookbook author and food writer

‘Big’ Sam Young: mince

Mince was life changing for me in 2020. I was very depressed for the first five days of lockdown, very depressed. Then my friend Andrew from Room Ten called me and asked if I wanted to do take-home dinners. That changed – well, it changed my whole life. I was going to cook Asian food, but he wanted me to cook spaghetti bolognese. I told him, “No way, that’s not my speciality, I’m not Italian and I fucking hate spaghetti bolognese, hate it with a passion.” But I made it and it popped off. We sold 50 portions that weekend, crazy.

I ended up making 300 lasagnas with Enrico Tomelleri (of 10 William Street) for Charcoal Charlie’s, again using mince. I also used pork mince to make my mum’s signature dumplings, which I used for my business that I launched during Covid. This is a story of love, with Andrew supporting me, Charcoal Charlie’s supporting chefs. With my business supporting myself. This is how I survived 2020 and mince was so important. It’s cheap and delicious. As much as I love caviar and truffles, 2020 was a reminder for everyone we can go back to the basics – just make a good lasagna or dumplings.

• Sam Young is the former head chef at Lotus

Coskan Uysal: tarhana

Tarhana is probably the world’s first instant soup. It’s a dried ingredient based on a fermented mixture of grains and yoghurt. It’s cooked then dried and looks like crumble. You mix it with boiling water to make a thick, acidic soup. Most people add in stock, but I believe strong meat stocks overpower it and you lose the ingredient’s unique flavour. At Tulum we make our own fermented tarhana, and have since day one, we use it on grilled Freemantle octopus.

• Coskan Uysal is the owner and chef at Tulum

Peter Gilmore: white peaches

This time of year, I just absolutely love white peaches. They are in season right now (it’s a short season, six weeks at the most) and they are so versatile – you can eat them fresh for the perfect taste of summer or grill them for a delicious dessert.

As a Christmas treat in the Gilmore household, we toast some Panettone, pan fry some peaches with maple syrup and serve with yoghurt for the perfect dessert.

• Peter Gilmore is the executive chef at Quay

Bruce Pascoe: cunjim winyu

We call it cunjim winyu and it means salty sun in Yuin language. You won’t find it on google, Yuin words are not on the internet. This is deliberate, Australians need to get used to the idea that these are Aboriginal foods, they’re First Nations foods. It’s a little herb that grows on the margin of the salt swamp. The wonderful thing about this salad vegetable is it looks beautiful on the plate and it’s also such a fresh, lovely salad flavour. It’s prolific in autumn and winter and it’s then that we’re able to supply it to local restaurants and sandwich shops.

When the season was on, I was trialling it on my grandkids to see if it was poisonous. I’m just joking, I knew it was flavourful [and safe], and I wanted to make sure there were no reactions to it. It’s a lovely way to experiment with my own grandchildren, sliding it into salads while they were being home schooled during Covid. They’re very proud of their culture and we were able to talk about where this comes from, and what we can do with it as a people.

This coming year we’re going to harvest a hell of a lot more. I think it will be a sensation. It’ll make Australia great again.

• Bruce Pascoe is the author of Dark Emu

Ade Adeniyi: Ghanaian palm oil

This forms the base of a lot of Nigerian dishes. It’s very versatile, it can be used for any dish but it’s especially important for our traditional stews. It has a different flavour to other oils. Even when you fry it you can smell the difference.

I get mine from the African shop in Seven Hills, DF.HUNNY Foods.  It’s my ingredient specifically this year, because this is the year we introduced a lot of our traditional stews to Sydney. When we did pop-ups in previous years we kept it very simple.

• Ade Adeniyi is the chef and owner of A Little Lagos

Luisa Brimble: wort

I tell you what, the ingredient of the year for would be wort because of the Brewer’s Malt Pie  recipe from Tom McHugo’s. It’s such a revelation, I’d never heard of wort.

Basically, it’s created from wheat grains (pilsner and Caraaroma) crushed. I make it from scratch. I reckon there is an opportunity to sell freaking wort. I want to start a wort business calling it Wort the Effort. I’m joking.

• Luisa Brimble is a food photographer and community director at Somekind Press

Arthur Tong: hyssop and XO sauce

I’d say hyssop and XO sauce for me, though the latter is more a condiment than an ingredient. Hyssop is known by herbalists for its antiviral and respiratory aiding properties – needless to say we drank a lot of tisanes with hyssop in it during this period. My kitchen has been constantly ladened with saucepans, jugs and teapots full of spent hyssop concoctions – you know, saving remains for repeated infusions and later for the compost.

As for XO, it was a combo of rediscovering my culture during the launch of our pivot business Asian Staples, and talking to journos and anyone else who’d listen about its history. I introduced it to my kids for the first time and it’s now affectionately known as “epic sauce” in my house – they lather it on like it doesn’t cost $1 a teaspoon.

• Arthur Tong is the co-owner of Tea Craft

Max Veenhuyzen: onions

This is going to sound like a bit of a cop-out but I’d have to say onions. I’ve been doing a lot more Chinese home cooking this year and there always seems to be an onion involved. It’s a key ingredient in the fluffy omelettes I’ll often whip up to bulk up a catch-and-kill dinner, plus it’s also a key player in stir-fried zucchini and onions, a Japanese steakhouse staple that I’ve been leaning on lots this year.

On top of that, I’ve taken to making pickled onions on the regular this year and giving jars to friends: originally it was a way to recycle these jars I was left with after someone delivered a bunch of cocktails to me to sample during lockdown. Now I’ve got a system going where friends swap empty jars for fresh jars of Casa Veenhuyzen onions.

• Max Veenhuyzen is a WA-based food journalist

Lorraine Elliott: flour

My favourite ingredient for 2020 was flour. I usually buy flour in 1kg packets but during Covid-19 I started buying it in 12.5kg bags as I buried and busied myself in bread making (focaccia, pizza and daily bread loaves) as if my life depended on it, because my sanity really did.

I’d use my oversize bag of flour to barter with friends. Not serious bartering, of course – we all used it as an excuse to look after and see each other at a distance. I didn’t quite get into sourdough because I know my limits but I still have a love for focaccia, that pillowy soft bread that got us through so many tough months.

• Lorraine Elliott is the food blogger behind Not Quite Nigella

Topher Boehm: oat milk and straw

My wife, Benny, stopped dairy because our one-year-old son wasn’t handling it while she was feeding, and now we go through loads of oat milk. I see it everywhere, and in my perception it’s just this year blown up.

From the brewery side, I’d have to say straw. We’ve fermented with it a few times and it imparts the most distinctive aroma profile of spice and funk. I really dig it. I also love using something that is already part of our raw materials in the beer – using the straw from the same barley that our beer is made with. Kinda deepens the process.

• Topher Boehm is the owner of Wildflower Brewing & Blending

Shane Roberts: McDonnells Original Curry Sauce

This is a really synthetic powdered curry sauce from Ireland. It makes the sort of curry sauce you get in fish and chip shops in the north of England, which I fell in love with over many trips there to visit Amanda’s family.

I discovered it in the British section at Woolworths in early lockdown and it became a feature of “Sausage Mondays” (yes, we also rediscovered a long-lost love of sausages during lockdown), a comfort meal we’d have after a long autumn or winter’s day packing vege boxes. Hand-cut chips, good quality sausages and baked beans, with lashings of McDonnells. Perfect comfort food for uncomfortable times. Also tastes a lot like Japanese curry sauce. Which makes sense in the Yõshoku tradition of western-influenced food.

• Shane Roberts is a produce merchant at The Veg Box

Thanh Truong: fermented chilli bean curd

It’s an ingredient my mum uses. It’s basically a plant-based, umami version of fish sauce, which some western friends say tastes like a chilli cheese. I cooked a water spinach stir fry for 250 people with it at the wholesale fruit market, and most people were burly men who wanted meat but they were all surprised. Many said it was the best vegetarian dish they’ve ever had.

• Thanh Truong is a self-identified fruit nerd and Plate of Origin contestant

Raph Rashid: cime di rapa and white pepper

I worked out how versatile the cime de rapa could be this year. I ended up cooking it a lot in broths for breakfast. I used the white pepper in all my noodles, rice dishes and with veg. I went overboard, really.

• Raph Rashid  is the owner and chef at Beatbox Kitchen  and Juanita Peaches

Eun Hee An: Chinese cabbage and dried persimmon

When I first started Moon Mart this year, I was looking around in all the Korean markets in Sydney for produce I could use. Because of this, I’ve never, ever cut this much Chinese cabbage in my entire life.

I wasn’t sure if some of the things I was looking for would be available in Sydney so when I found this semi dried persimmon I was quite excited because I knew I could use it for my vegan kimchi, and it worked perfectly. Not only am I using it in that, I am so into making persimmon banchan, that you marinate in plum extract and gochujang. Plus, it keeps really well in the freezer and you can just grab it for a really nice snack; the natural sugars stop it from freezing hard and it turns into a kind of natural granita.

• Eun Hee An is the founder of Moon Mart, an all-handmade Korean grocer

Junda Khoo: kombu extract

Kombu adds umami to dishes, like MSG does. And, of course, it makes it easier for anyone who says they’re allergic to MSG. Kombu contains glutamate salts, which means it’s a natural MSG – people don’t seem to know that they’re already consuming MSG anyway. By using kombu, we’re adding umami and slowly educating others that MSG is in a lot of food naturally. I use it in a lot of sauce-based dishes, like a garlic stir fry or a chilli sauce. Make anything saucy with a couple drops of kombu extract and boom, umami. It completely elevates the dish.

• Junda Khoo is co-owner and head chef at Ho Jiak

•What has been your favourite ingredient discovery, go-to or rediscovery in 2020? Let us know in the comments. Part 3 of this series featuring readers’ favourites will be published on 31 December

What has been your favourite ingredient discovery, go-to or rediscovery in 2020? Let us know in the comments. Part 3 of this series featuring readers’ favourites will be published on 31 December