Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

Italy reports surge in deaths but figure is misleading

Reported coronavirus deaths in Italy rose by 474, after 269 new fatalities were recorded on Friday, but the figures were distorted by late registrations of 282 hospital deaths which had occurred in April, according to La Repubblica newspaper. The daily tally of new infections nationwide was broadly stable for a third day running at 1,900 against 1,965 on Friday.

UK death toll rises further

Another 621 people are confirmed to have died from the virus in the UK, bringing the total to 28,131 - just short of Italy which has so far had the world's second most deadly outbreak after the US - as criticism mounts over the government in London's handling of the crisis in the early stages.

Spain eases lockdown as people emerge to exercise

As of first thing Saturday, adults across Spain are allowed to exercise between 6am and 10am and then 8pm til 11pm, while the children's slot is midday til 7pm. The streets are reserved for older people and those who need assistance from 10am til midday and then 7pm til 8pm.

Hairdressers in Austria reopen

Austrians visited newly reopened hairdressers, beauticians and electronics shops on Saturday after the further relaxation of its seven-week lockdown. Protective measures remain in place, while bars are set to reopen within a fortnight.

Thousands protest in California against lockdown

Amid demonstrations across the state in defiance of the lockdown, California's governor Gavin Newsom promised meaningful adjustments to stay-at-home orders in the coming days which would affect how businesses, including restaurants, can operate.

Controversial Chinese virologist dismisses defection rumours

Shi Zhengli, a researcher of bat coronaviruses whose work has been at the centre of an extremely controversial claim about the origin of coronavirus, has reportedly dismissed rumours that she has defected from China.

Mick Jagger and Will Smith to perform in India Covid-19 concert

Dozens of international and Indian celebrities including cricket captain Virat Kohli and actor Priyanka Chopra will appear and perform from their homes on Sunday as part of a four-hour concert to raise funds for the battle against coronavirus in India, where the number of cases is surging.