block-time published-time 9.28pm GMT

Summary: Dow lurches into bear market

Time for a quick recap.

America's Dow Jones industrial average has plunged into a Bear Market, after another day of wild drama and heavy losses . The Dow slumped by 5.8% today, taking it more than 20% below its record high of a month ago.

The losses were driven by rising concerns about a global recession, as the number of Covid-19 cases continues to rise worldwide.

American politicians have, so far, failed to come up with a stimulus plan to calm and reassure investors, even though the virus has been declared a pandemic.

Donald Trump is expected to speak about the situation later tonight, having met with bank bosses today- and promised to use "the full power of the Federal Government to deal with our current challenge of the CoronaVirus!"

In the UK, fresh losses took the FTSE 100 index down to a four-year low. It has now lost a fifth of its value in the last month.

The Bank of England became the latest central bank to ease monetary policy, by dramatically slashing interest rates at 7am . Bank rate was cut to 0.25%, a joint-record low, from 0.75%.

The BoE also tried to protect businesses and households from the coronavirus shock, with new schemes to encourage lenders to offer cheap loans to firms.

Related:  Coronavirus: Bank of England makes emergency interest rate cut

The move was part of a co-ordinated UK response, with chancellor Rishi Sunak announcing billions of pounds of fresh stimulus measures in today's budget:

Related:  Budget 2020: Rishi Sunak turns on taps with £30bn splurge

New GDP figures showed the UK had flatlined in the last three months  -- fuelling concerns over the strength of its economy.

The president of the European Central Bank, Christine Lagarde: warned that the coronavirus outbreak will spark an economic downturn in Europe similar to the 2008 financial crash unless EU governments provide financial support for their economies.

The ECB is due to set monetary policy tomorrow -- will it take steps to support struggling Italy?

Related:  Coronavirus could cause crash on scale of 2008, Lagarde warns

Goodnight. GW

block-time published-time 9.27pm GMT

There are pensive faces on Wall Street tonight, as the market turmoil shows no sign of ending:

block-time published-time 9.19pm GMT

The S&P 500 index narrowly avoided falling into a Bear Market tonight.

It still had a rough day, sliding by 4.9% to a one-year low of 2,741 points -- that's 19% off its peak.

Some analysts believe the index will suffer further losses, as CNBC reports:

Goldman Sachs chief equity analyst David Kostin said Wednesday he expects the S&P 500 to hit a low of 2,450, more than 10% below its current closing level of 2,741. Kostin based his new view on a reduced expectation for S&P 500 earnings.

"I'm thinking maybe something like 2,400," said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA. "If we end up with no earnings growth in 2020, we end up with a 15 multiple...that brings us to 2,460."

block-time published-time 9.01pm GMT

Meanwhile in Europe......

enltrWhoa. Italy says all stores except pharmacies and food markets will be closed in response to the country's new virus outbreak - @AP

- Jon Passantino (@passantino) March 11, 2020

enltrItaly's lockdown just got even more serious - all shops across the country will be closed, except food shops and chemists. Bars, hairdressers, all company departments that are not essential to production, will be closed.

- Jamie McGeever (@ReutersJamie) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 9.00pm GMT

Investors must feel like they've been chewed by a bear, given the scale of the sell-off in the last few weeks.

Here's some reaction to the Dow Jones's lurch into a bear market tonight :

enltrDow Jones officially falling into bear market territory, down 20 per cent from its high - and today closing 1400 points down. Safe to say President Trump's attempts to calm investors are not working @Channel4News

- siobhan kennedy (@siobhankennedy4) March 11, 2020

enltrHi here is where I break out my bear market trivia: no one knows the precise origins but something it's related to how bulls and bears fight (upward horns, downward claws).

- Kim Gittleson (@kgittleson) March 11, 2020

enltrBEAR MARKET EMERGES FROM HIBERNATION

- Ariel Edwards-Levy (@aedwardslevy) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 8.58pm GMT

Michael Corbat, the boss of Citi, has claimed that we're not facing a financial crisis.

Speaking at a meeting of bank bosses with Donald Trump at the White House, he insisted:

"This is not a financial crisis. The banks and the financial system are in strong shape and we are here to help."

enltr"Our number one priority is the health of the people of our country." President Trump says he will make a statement later tonight about what he has decided to do about the coronavirus pandemic. pic.twitter.com/homQveC0Hc

- CNBC (@CNBC) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 8.36pm GMT

Experts: We need a US fiscal package

Today's rout underlines how concerned Wall Street is about Covid-19, especially now            it has been declared a pandemic.

US investors want to see strong, clear steps from their leaders -- as we saw in the UK today, with the government announcing a stimulus programme and the Bank of England cutting interest rates.

The worry, though, is that Republicans and Democrats won't agree what needs to happen.

Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial, told MarketWatch.

Are we now going into a back-and-forth between the White House and the Senate and the House of Representatives over potential measures? The market doesn't want to hear this tug of war, they want to know if Congress will be able to cushion the economy,"

She adds:

"The hope is that we see a fiscal spending package targeted at the vulnerable areas in the economy"

block-time published-time 8.30pm GMT

Boeing had a shocking day, and was a key reason the Dow slumped into a bear market tonight.

The aircraft maker's shares fell 18%, the worst performance on the index by some distance, after it announced it would fully tap a $13.8bn credit line, after suffering a jump in cancelled orders.

Chemicals maker Dow Inc  slumped 10%, as fears of a global downturn refuse to abate.

Tech firms United Utilities (-9.9%) and Cisco (-7.5%) were also top fallers, along with A merican Express (-7.6%) and P rocter & Gamble (-7.5%) - who will suffer if more Americans self-quarantine or simply shun the shops.

block-time published-time 8.15pm GMT

The Dow has fallen to its lowest point since January 2019.

That means more than a year of gains has been wiped out in under a month.

The Dow Jones industrial average Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 8.08pm GMT

Dow plunges into bear market

NEWSFLASH: The Dow Jones industrial average has officially fallen into a bear market, ending an 11-year rally.

The Dow has ended the day down 5.9%, after another day of heavy, anxious selling.

More than 1,464 points were ripped off the benchmark index, as it subsided to 23,553.22 points. That means it's over 20% below February's high, ending a run that began in 2009.

The news that Donald Trump is giving a statement tonight could not drag shares higher, given the news that Covid-19 is now a pandemic.

The Dow Jones industrial average is in a bear market Photograph: Bloomberg TV

block-time published-time 8.01pm GMT

enltr* TRUMP SAYS IF WE GET RID OF THE CORONAVIRUS PROBLEM QUICKLY, WE WON'T NEED STIMULUS (via @reuters )

- Carl Quintanilla (@carlquintanilla) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.51pm GMT

Newsflash: There are reports that president Trump will give a statement tonight on the coronavirus crisis, addressing the measures Americans should take:

enltrTrump tells bankers he will be making a statement later tonight about Coronavirus. He says he will talk about what the country should do to deal with the outbreak.

- Jim Acosta (@Acosta) March 11, 2020

enltr #BREAKINGTrump to make "statement" Wednesday on coronavirus measures            pic.twitter.com/IHYBnWQo1l

- AFP news agency (@AFP) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.38pm GMT

Trump: I'll use full power of the Federal Government

Breaking: US president Donald Trump has vowed to use all the powers at his disposal to tackle the coronavirus, in a flurry of tweets:

enltrI am fully prepared to use the full power of the Federal Government to deal with our current challenge of the CoronaVirus!

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

enltrAmerica is the Greatest Country in the world. We have the best scientists, doctors, nurses and health care professionals. They are amazing people who do phenomenal things every day....

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

enltr....We have the greatest healthcare system, experts, scientists and doctors anywhere in the world. Together, we will PREVAIL!

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

enltrI want to thank all of our Great Government officials on the CoronaVirus Task Force who are working around the clock, in response to the CoronaVirus. Continue to check https://t.co/boZM2NePJW for updates, and follow all recommendations that are available....

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

enltr....Together we are putting into policy a plan to prevent, detect, treat and create a vaccine against CoronaVirus to save lives in America and the world. America will get it done!

- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.35pm GMT

America's tech-focused Nasdaq index is also on the verge of a bear market tonight:

enltrNasdaq hits bear-market territory in intraday trade Wednesday afternoon, joining S&P 500 and Dow

- MarketsTicker (@MarketsTicker) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.32pm GMT

Earlier today, Swiss bank UBS warned that global stock markets could fall another 20%, if Covid-19 becomes a full-blown pandemic.

They estimate that shares only have another 5% to fall in an 'intermediate' scenario, while they could rally if the virus is contained.

Analyst Arend Kapteyn says:

In our new baseline, we expect global growth in 2020 to fall to 2.3% (was 2.9%) and eight countries to enter recession. However, we also consider two further escalation steps: an intermediate scenario where infections increase by a factor 1000 and a full pandemic scenario.

In the former, global growth falls to 1.6%YoY (16 out of 28countries in recession) and in the pandemic scenario to 0.8% (18/28 in recession).

So for equities, that means -5% and -20% losses in intermediate and pandemic scenarios, respectively.

If the virus can be contained, global equities should make new stimulus-powered highs by end-2020. North Asia and the US will likely lead gains, while Europe and the rest of EM lag.

In the intermediate scenario, we still see a recovery in hl, but not enough to keep returns positive for the year. The pandemic scenario sees a major step lower in returns as growth slips with little additional stimulus at policymakers' disposal.

UBS Covid-19 forecasts Photograph: UBS

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.39pm GMT

block-time published-time 7.12pm GMT

More bad news for investors: the S&P 500 index is also heading into a bear market tonight.

enltrBREAKING: S&P 500 joins Dow in bear market territory, down 20% from its intraday high https://t.co/PKLXXeqOOp           pic.twitter.com/97YI44IPeR

- CNBC Now (@CNBCnow) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.11pm GMT

Over in São Paulo, Brazil's Bovespa Index has slumped by more than 10% today.

This triggered a circuit breaker, forcing trading to suspended for 30 minutes.

The energy, consumer cyclical and mining sectors are leading the sell-off:

enltrBrazil stocks sink 12%, bringing losses so far this year to 30%. pic.twitter.com/Sw8WjlFHpd

- Jamie McGeever (@ReutersJamie) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 7.06pm GMT

With an hour's trading to go, the Dow is sliding even further... down 6%, or 1504 points, at 23,513.

That would certainly put the index into a bear market, if it closes there at 4pm New York time, or 8pm UK time.

block-time published-time 6.57pm GMT

Democratic politicians are working on their own stimulus package, according to US political news site The Hill.

The House will vote Thursday on sweeping legislation to address the economic fallout of the coronavirus, House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D-Md.) said Wednesday.

Democrats are still ironing out the details of the stimulus package, including its size, but Hoyer put the price tag "in the billions." Party leaders are expected to brief members of the caucus on the specifics on Wednesday at 4 p.m.

"It's being written now, so we'll see how expansive it is," he said. "We're looking at a range of issues that are the economic consequences, as opposed to the direct health consequences" of the epidemic.

Anything passed by the House (America's lower chamber) would then go up to the Senate, which is controlled by the Republicans.

However, there's a problem.... both chambers are scheduled to hold a recess next week. So any economic relief legislation might not even reached Donald Trump's desk until later in March.

block-time published-time 6.49pm GMT

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin dampened hopes of a rapid, major stimulus package earlier today -- another reason shares are under pressure.

Mnuchin told lawmakers on Capitol Hill that a major economic stimulus package wouldn't get through Congress quickly. So, it makes sense to start with a smaller measure designed to help small businesses and workers grappling with the coronavirus outbreak.

Mnuchin told House Appropriations subcommittee hearing.

"The president very much wants to consider a stimulus bill, whether it is through a payroll tax or otherwise.

We realize that may not get done this week, so we want to get done what we can do this week and we will come back."

block-time published-time 6.44pm GMT

Today's slump has more than wiped out Tuesday's gains, which followed Monday's crash (the worst since 2008)

Stock market updates are seen on a news broadcast on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters

block-time published-time 6.36pm GMT

Today's rout on Wall Street is being driven by a handful of coronavirus fears.

1) WHO's decision to declare Covid-19 a pandemic is fuelling fears of a global recession

2) Doubts are building about whether the White House will deliver a stimulus package. Donald Trump's pledge of a major package, including payroll tax cuts, seems illusive.

AFP explains:

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley -- a Republican like Trump -- said there is no bipartisan support for cutting the taxes automatically taken out of Americans' paychecks.

"We're in the process of analyzing the economic impact of the virus so right now I wouldn't say it's necessary," he told Bloomberg.

Grassley's spokesman later said on Twitter that the comment was "widely misinterpreted" and that a payroll tax cut remains an option.

block-time published-time 6.25pm GMT

Dow on track to enter bear market

Newsflash: The US stock market is on track to close in bear market territory.

The Dow is now 20% below its pre-crisis peak back in February; currently its down 5.5%, or 1,386 points, at 23,630.

Goldman Sach's prediction that the bull market could end soon may be coming true before our eyes....

enltrDOW JONES IN BEAR MARKET TERRITORY ON INTRADAY BASIS, DOWN 20% FROM FEB 19 HIGH pic.twitter.com/3lUmo6u7mD

- Gianclaudio Torlizzi (@TCommodity) March 11, 2020

enltrLATEST: The Dow falls 20% from a February closing high and into bear market territory https://t.co/7JYYNipMTd           pic.twitter.com/SzS9am7fBV

- Bloomberg (@business) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 6.15pm GMT

LV pauses travel insurance sales

Meanwhile (writes Rebecca Smithers) the insurance giant LV has announced that it is to stop selling travel insurance policies to new customers with immediate effect as a result of the coronavirus outbreak.

LV insisting that the move is a temporary one, saying:

"In light of the impact that Coronavirus (COVID-19) is having globally, we've made the difficult decision to pause the sale of travel insurance to new customers.

We considered a number of different options, such as excluding cover or significantly increasing prices for new customers. We strongly believe this temporary measure of pausing the sale of new policies and focusing on our existing customers is the right decision."

We are awaiting a statement from the consumer group Which?

block-time published-time 5.56pm GMT

enltrThe main moves in global markets now https://t.co/WDGlhKQVfW           pic.twitter.com/vdmKgXUqwj

- Bloomberg (@business) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 5.22pm GMT

The S&P 500 index is also being kicked around again, down over 4%.

Investors are clearly anxious about the White House's resolve to tackle the coronavirus.....

enltrThe $SPX has dropped back towards the week's lows. The technical 'bear market' level is within easy reach. If the White House wants to steady the market, now is a good time for a reassuring press conference            pic.twitter.com/xkdPEuPBj4

- John Kicklighter (@JohnKicklighter) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 5.11pm GMT

Wall Street tumbles further as WHO declares pandemic

Stocks are continuing to lurch lower in New York, as the World Health Organization declares that Covid-19 is now a pandemic.

WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a news conference that he was deeply concerned by the spread and severity of coronavirus, and by the "alarming levels of inaction" in some countries.

Tedros warned that the number of cases reported and number of countries affected 'doesn't tell the full story'.

Related:  Coronavirus live updates: WHO says Covid-19 is pandemic

This has triggered fresh selling on Wall Street (not that investors needed much of an excuse to ditch stocks).

The Dow is now down 5%, or 1,259 points, at 23,758 points. Boeing is down 13%, after reporting earlier that it received more commercial aircraft cancellations than new orders in February.

enltrDOW MOVES IN THE PAST 3 WEEKS: 2/24: -1032 2/25: -879 2/26: -123 2/27: -1191 2/28: -357 3/2: +1294 3/3: -786 3/4: +1174 3/5: -970 3/6: -257 (SLOW DAY) 3/9: -2014 3/10: +1167 3/11: CURRENTLY -1200

- Capitulation Capital (@RampCapitalLLC) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 5.02pm GMT

Most UK stocks fell today, some heavily, despite the Bank of England's emergency rate cut, and the government's coronavirus stimulus programme.

Just 18 members of the FTSE 100 rose, while 80 fell. Some of the usual suspects drove the rout, including airlines IAG and easyJet, and cruise operator Carnival.

The top movers on the FTSE 100, March 10 2020 Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 4.50pm GMT

FTSE 100 hits four-year low

Newsflash: Britain's stock market has hit a new four-year low, as the coronavirus crisis rages.

The FTSE 100 has closed down 83 points, or 1.4%, at 5876, after another torrid day.

That, I calculate, means it has lost 20% of its value since the current slump began two and a half weeks ago.

It's a really jaw-dropping slump, confirming the old adage that markets go up the stairs, but down the elevator (with a bump!)

The FTSE 100 over the last five years Photograph: Refinitiv

European markets also ended the day lower, with Germany's DAX losing 0.6%, and France's CAC losing 0.7%.

Big losers included Adidas (-9%) and Puma (-5%), after both sportswear firms reported that coronavirus was hurting sales.

block-time published-time 4.29pm GMT

Stockbroking firm AJ Bell has warned that it doesn't know how much damage the coronavirus outbreak will have on its business.

It has also pointed out that today's UK interest rate cut will dent its revenues and profits (it will make less money from customer cash reserves).

AJ Bell told shareholders:

At present, given the extent of current market uncertainty, it is difficult to predict the exact impact of these events on trading performance.

This will largely depend upon the length of time for which COVID-19 continues, stock markets remain at or below current levels, base rate remains at 0.25% and the other related measures remain in place.

block-time published-time 3.51pm GMT

European stock markets are sinking into the red in late trading, as investors watch stocks slide on Wall Street.

The FTSE 100 is now down another 75 points, or 1.25%, to 5885 points -- just below Monday's four-year low. Once again, the Footsie couldn't hold onto its early morning rally.

Big fallers include budget airline easyJet (-7.8%) and conference group Informa (-5%), as fears of a global recession ripple through trading floors again.

block-time published-time 3.28pm GMT

A Barclays banker in London has tested positive for coronavirus.

A Barclays sign is seen outside a branch of the bank in London, Britain, February 23, 2017. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters

The employee was based at the 5 North Colonnade offices in Canary Wharf, which houses Barclays' investment bank and is about a 5 minute walk from its headquarters.

The worker has been in self-quarantine since 9 March after learning they had been exposed to the virus.

Barclays is doing a deep-clean of their desk and surrounding areas, while colleagues and clients who were in close contact with the employee were told to self-isolate.

However, the Guardian understands that the office has not been evacuated.

Barclays issued a statement, saying:

We can confirm that a member of our staff based in our London office, 5 North Colonnade, has tested as positive for COVID-19 today. The health and safety of our staff, customers and clients is our top priority and we are providing every support to the member of staff and their family.

We are working closely with Public Health England (PHE) and other local authorities, and are following their advice. The colleague has been in self-quarantine since 9 March, following notification of their potential exposure to the virus.

We are undertaking the recommended deep clean and disinfection of their workspace and the surrounding area where the colleague is based, in accordance with PHE guidelines, and are undertaking additional, ongoing deep-cleaning as a precautionary measure.

We have also identified colleagues and clients who had close contact with our affected colleague, and are advising those colleagues to self-quarantine in line with PHE guidance.

At this stage, we are operating business as usual; we continue to monitor the situation closely and will take further action as appropriate.

It comes just days after a trader at Barclays' New York offices tested positive for the coronavirus in Manhattan. They have been in self-quarantine since 3 March.

block-time published-time 2.50pm GMT

The Dow Jones industrial average is now down by 1,000 points. The Nasdaq has lost 3% and the S&P 500 has lost 3.3%.

A quick look at the S&P 500's biggest fallers suggests that it's the US energy sector that is taking much of the pummelling, alongside consumer-facing companies.

The US oil sector was one of the main targets of Russia, which thinks a price fall could knock out American shale companies (giving Russia more market share). And consumer spending for many companies will clearly take a hit if consumers are locked at home.

Another notable mover: the mighty aircraft manufacturer Boeing is down by 9%, after saying it will draw down the full amount on a $13.8bn loan. It has already been under pressure because of the 737 Max crisis, so extra financial troubles could spell trouble.

enltrMarket talk that @Boeing may fully draw down its large funding line. Yes, it was hit by            #737MAX issues well before the            #CoronaVirus devastated            #travel. Yet it highlights the feedback loops that I worry about -- economics contaminating            #finance that then contaminates the            #economy.

- Mohamed A. El-Erian (@elerianm) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.33pm GMT

A bit more detail on Steve Mnuchin's comments today, in a briefing with reporters.

The main thing he has mentioned so far is that hundreds of billions of dollars can be put into the US economy through deferred tax payments.

The impact of the virus was initially underestimated across the the world, he said. The US Treasury is coordinating internationally.

Does that mean that the US will match the response of countries like the UK with a fiscal expansion?

enltr???? *MNUCHIN: MAY PROVIDE OVER $200B OF LIQUIDITY BY TAX PMTS DELAYS - BBG

- Christophe Barraud?? (@C_Barraud) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 2.25pm GMT

Just in: US regulators are relaxing regulations that have forced some airlines to run almost empty flights.

The Federal Aviation Administration, part of the US Department of Transport, has announced it will waive use-it-or-lose-it rules that mean airlines must run flights to avoid losing slots at busy airports. It said:

Under normal circumstances, airlines can lose their slots at congested airports if they don't use them at least 80 % of the time.

The FAA is waiving the 80%-use requirement through 31 May 2020 for US and foreign airlines that have affected flights. In doing so, the FAA expects that US carriers will be accommodated with reciprocal relief by foreign authorities at airports in their countries, and may determine not to grant a waiver to a foreign carrier whose home jurisdiction does not reciprocate.

The main airports affected are New York's John F. Kennedy (JFK) and LaGuardia airports, as well as Washington's Ronald Reagan airport Chicago O'Hare, Newark Liberty, Los Angeles International (LAX), and San Francisco International will also have rules relaxed.

block-time published-time 2.17pm GMT

Here's some reaction to the economic aspects of the Rishi Sunak's budget.

Sarah Carlson, a senior vice president at Moody's, the influential ratings agency, said:

The fiscal stimulus announced by chancellor Rishi Sunak in today's budget should help to support economic growth given the economic headwinds created by Covid-19, but the resulting deterioration in the UK's fiscal position highlights the sovereign's ongoing difficulty in meaningfully reducing the UK's gross general government debt burden from its current high levels.

John Hawksworth, chief economist at PwC, said:

The inevitable implication of higher public spending without net tax increases is higher public borrowing: the average annual budget deficit over the four years to 2023/24 is now projected by the OBR to be around 2.5% of GDP, as compared to around 1.5% of GDP previously. The implied increase in annual borrowing of around 1% of GDP, or over £20bn a year, is significant.

Public borrowing looks set to jump to about 3% of GDP this year, according to Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. He said:

Chancellor Sunak's "temporary, timely and targeted" fiscal response to the Covid-19 outbreak won't prevent GDP from falling sharply over the next couple of months, but together with the BoE's response earlier today, it greatly improves the chances that the UK economy rebounds in the second half of this year.

block-time published-time 2.10pm GMT

The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK has risen to 456, up from 373 a day ago, according to the Department of Health.

You can follow the spread of the infection here on our main coronavirus live blog:

Related:  Coronavirus live updates: eighth Briton dies, second UK MP self-isolates and Iran cases hit new record

block-time published-time 2.06pm GMT

US stock markets jumped last night with investors hoping for President Donald Trump to unleash a major fiscal response to the coronavirus outbreak. They now appear to be expressing their disappointment at the lack of action.

Even with central banks the world over bringing out their monetary bazookas, the hit to the economy means that it's fiscal spending that is in focus.

There are some snaps coming through on the wires from US treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin : he says that Trump is focused on a broad strategy for a stimulus package.

enltrDOW JONES U.S. AIRLINES INDEX DOWN 5.8%, SPIRIT AIRLINES, JETBLUE AIRWAYS, AND AMERICAN AIRLINES AMONG TOP PCT LOSERS ON THE INDEX

- *Walter Bloomberg (@DeItaOne) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 1.43pm GMT

Sunak has just finished his budget - after one hour and three minutes.

Sterling has ended up after the budget... almost exactly where it was before. It's a gain of 0.25% for the day to $1.2940.

UK government bond yields have actually fallen - not the response that you would usually expect after a relatively big fiscal expansion. The 10-year gilt is at 0.26%, having hovered around 0.3% as Sunak started speaking. (Bond yields fall as prices rise when investors buy more debt.)

There is still a lot more to come on the political response which you can follow here:

Related:  Budget 2020: Rishi Sunak extends sick pay and abolishes some business rates in coronavirus response - live news

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.31pm GMT

Wall Street slumps as investors look for bigger coronavirus response

The S&P 500 is down by 2.6% at the opening bell to hit 2,808 points, while the Dow Jones industrial average has fallen by 2.7% to 24,337 points - a 671 point fall. The Nasdaq lost 2.4%.

block-time published-time 1.22pm GMT

Passenger airplanes of German airliner Lufthansa stand parked at Berlin's new but not yet operational Willy Brandt Berlin Brandenburg International Airport. Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images

Lufthansa has just announced thousands of flight cancellations in response to the coronavirus, covering the period from 29 March to 24 April.

For all passenger airlines in the Group, a total of 23,000 flights must be cancelled. Further cancellations are expected in the coming weeks. Flight schedule adjustments for the period after 25 April will be made at a later date.

The German flag-carrier had already said it would cancel as many as half its flights.

block-time published-time 1.13pm GMT

Sterling is now flat for the day against the dollar - possibly a reaction to a budget that looks pretty expansionary on the fiscal front.

A pound now buys $1.292 against the US dollar, a gain of 0.07%.

block-time published-time 1.11pm GMT

Sunak says he will limit entrepreneurs' relief, the heavily criticised tax break given to people who sell their businesses.

The relief was "expensive [...] ineffective and [...] unfair", Sunak says.

The lifetime limit on how much relief sellers can claim will fall from £10m to £1m.

The £6bn raised over the next five years from the change will be spent on tax reliefs on research and development, buying buildings, and increasing employment allowance.

block-time published-time 1.03pm GMT

While Sunak has been speaking the market selloff has accelerated.

The FTSE 100 is now down by 0.3%. S&P 500 futures indicate Wall Street could fall by 3.3% in 25 mins when markets open. Dow Jones industrial average futures are down by 3.1%.

block-time published-time 12.59pm GMT

CBI lead economist Alpesh Paleja notes that the Office for Budget Responsibility's forecasts need to be taken with a large dose of salt.

enltrOBR forecasting growth of 1.1% this year, but this doesn't fully account for coronavirus disruption. Too early to say, but this would almost certainly push 2020 growth below 1%

- Alpesh Paleja (@AlpeshPaleja) March 11, 2020

enltrNew OBR UK GDP growth forecasts #Budget2020 (though not including full impact of            #coronavirus )            pic.twitter.com/Fo5KOaTL56

- Ben Chu (@BenChu_) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 12.56pm GMT

The government will boost spending by £175bn over the next five years, increasing productivity, Sunak says.

Growth will be 0.5 percentage points higher than it would have been without the spending, he says, citing the Office for Budget Responsibility's forecasts.

Pre-coronavirus the OBR had forecast GDP growth of 1.1% in 2020, 1.8% in 2021, 1.5% in 2022, 1.3% in 2023, and 1.4% in 2024.

block-time published-time 12.51pm GMT

UK promises £30bn fiscal stimulus in coronavirus response

The total fiscal response to the coronavirus outbreak is £30bn, Sunak says.

Sterling has pared some of its gains - it's now up by 0.1% for the day against the US dollar (having a few minutes earlier been up by 0.3%).

Sunak announces a temporary business interruption loan scheme, which he says will unlock up to £1bn of working capital loans.

Retailers, leisure and hospitality businesses with a rateable value less than £51,000 will have business rates abolished for the coming year.

The policy will cost £1bn, an average of £25,000 per business.

There will also be a £3,000 cash grant to every small business.

block-time published-time 12.45pm GMT

Sunak says that the coronavirus response has been "clearly and closely coordinated with the Bank of England".

He pledges to use fiscal action with a three-point plan:

•Whatever extra resources the NHS needs, it will get.•If people fall ill statutory sick pay will be available for anyone asked to self-isolate - even if they haven't tested positive. He will also create a £500m hardship fund for local authorities.•Businesses with fewer than 250 employees will be refunded the costs of providing statutory sick pay.

Whatever extra resources the NHS needs, it will get.

If people fall ill statutory sick pay will be available for anyone asked to self-isolate - even if they haven't tested positive. He will also create a £500m hardship fund for local authorities.

Businesses with fewer than 250 employees will be refunded the costs of providing statutory sick pay.

block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT

Sterling is up by 0.2% for the day as Sunak says there will be supply-side and demand-side effects from coronavirus.

But he adds that it will be temporary.

enltrPound broadly back to pre-Bank of England emergency rate cut levels as Chancellor begins Budget speech $GBPUSD           pic.twitter.com/2LtDrLufxe

- Viraj Patel (@VPatelFX) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 12.35pm GMT

FTSE 100 swings to a loss

Shares on the FTSE 100 have fallen back into the red, now down by 0.2% today.

Shares around the world appear to be back on the retreat, with US futures suggesting that there could be another steep selloff when the market opens.

Rishi Sunak is up now delivering his first budget.

block-time published-time 12.31pm GMT

It's a porcupine maket for brave buyers, said investor Mark Mobius. Photograph: Clemens Bilan/EPA

Renowned emerging markets investor Mark Mobius has noted that not all of the global selloff has been warranted.

Speaking on Bloomberg television, he said that there are "incredible opportunities and bargains" in emerging markets and gold, the traditional safe-haven asset. The chaos on oil markets will hurt oil companies and exporters, but it could also cushion the blow for consumers. He said:

This oil price decline is good for India, it's good for China, it's good for all these oil-importing countries.

There are "terrific bargains in Turkey", while Indonesia will also benefit from lower oil prices, he added. But there are still big risks out there (not least given potential disruption to financial markets). It is "time to buy like the way porcupines make love", Mobius said. His interviewer helpfully chimed in with the answer: "Carefully".

block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT

Hello, Jasper Jolly here. I'll be focusing on global markets as the coronavirus turmoil continues, so head to the budget live blog for a UK focus (although I'm sure a bit of budget reaction will sneak in here as well).

That Goldman Sachs note from a few minutes ago does not appear to have helped global markets: US stock market futures have extended their declines - in spite of the Bank of England's intervention today.

Futures for the S&P 500 are down by 2.8%, and Dow Jones industrial average futures are down by 2.6%.

block-time published-time 12.09pm GMT

Right, I'm off to give Andy Sparrow a hand covering the UK budget.

It should include a raft of measures to protect the UK economy from the coronavirus threat, plus a big increase in infrastructure spending - and new growth and borrowing forecasts.

Here's the Budget liveblog:

Related:  PMQs: Boris Johnson faces Jeremy Corbyn ahead of 2020 budget - live news

Jasper Jolly has the controls....

block-time published-time 11.56am GMT

The early rally in Europe's stock markets is fizzling out, again, as traders brace for another bumpy session on Wall Street.

The FTSE 100 is now up just 12 points, or 0.2%, at 5970 -- close to a four-year low. Italy's FTME MIB has dipped into the red, while the Stoxx 6o0 is only up 0.5%.

Stocks are expected to fall on New York - having rallied last night on hopes of a stimulus package.

Investors are disappointed that president Trump hasn't delivered any details of the measures he mentioned yesterday to protect the economy, such as a payroll tax cut.

Goldman Sach's warning that the bull market is on borrowed time isn't helping the mood either.

The Dow is being called 800 points down, a loss of almost 3%, having jumped by 1,167 points (nearly 5%) yesterday.

enltrSpoos 2550 anyone..? couple of bear flags pic.twitter.com/d6cxUzXisR

- Neil Wilson (@marketsneil) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 11.32am GMT

Goldman Sachs: Wall Street to fall another 15%

Goldman Sachs has predicted that Wall Street's 11-year old bull market will soon end.

In a research note, the investment bank has predicted that S&P 500 index will have fallen by 15% by the summer.

Its new mid-year target for the S&P 500 is 2450 points - compared to 2,882 points last night (and 3,386 back in February!).

enltrGOLDMAN SETS NEW MID-YEAR S&P 500 TARGET OF 2450 -- 15% BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL AND 28% BELOW THE MARKET PEAK

- Jeremy Taieb (@JeremyTaieb) March 11, 2020

enltrGOLDMAN: "After 11 years,.. we believe the S&P 500 bull market will end soon." pic.twitter.com/7QflZKjhE3

- Carl Quintanilla (@carlquintanilla) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 11.24am GMT

Italy's prime minister has tweeted that his cabinet have approved plans for a (EURO)25bn package of "extraordinary" measures.

Giuseppe Conte also pledged that "We are doing everything that is necessary, with every tool available. Together we're going to make it".

itltrIl Consiglio dei Ministri ha approvato lo stanziamento straordinario di 25 miliardi di euro per far fronte alle difficoltà che il Paese sta vivendo a causa del #coronavirus. Stiamo facendo tutto ciò che è necessario, con ogni strumento a disposizione. Insieme ce la faremo

- Giuseppe Conte (@GiuseppeConteIT) March 11, 2020

But is (EURO)25bn enough? Italy's death toll is rising alarmingly each day (from 461 to 631 yesterday), and its streets are deserted as citizens are locked down. A deep recession and a tragic social cost seems inevitable.

Related:  Italy coronavirus lockdown leaves streets deserted - in pictures

block-time published-time 11.14am GMT

Here's a video clip of the key points from Mark Carney's press conference:

block-time published-time 11.01am GMT

Sunak: Budget will include economic action plan

Over in Westminster, chancellor Rishi Sunak has told the cabinet that Britain has "one of the best placed economies" to survive the Covid-19 crisis.

Sunak also confirmed that the Budget, due at 12.30pm, will include an economic action plan to combat the damage caused by the outbreak.

A spokesman for Number 10 Downing Street said:

The chancellor set out the measures being taken to manage the impact of coronavirus, laying out details of his economic action plan that will be announced at budget.

He outlined how this plan - combined with the measures announced by the governor of the Bank of England this morning- will make the UK one of the best placed economies in the world to manage the potential impact of the virus. The chancellor added the budget will ensure businesses, the public and those in public services working on the front line against the virus get the support they need.

He said despite the impacts of the outbreak being uncertain, we have the economic tools to overcome the disruption caused by the virus and move the country forwards.

Our Politics Live blog (where we'll cover the Budget later) has the details:

Related:  Budget 2020: UK one of best placed economies in world to manage coronavirus, cabinet told - live news

block-time published-time 10.54am GMT

UK bank HSBC has announced a package of support for customers as they tackle the financial impact of Covid-19.

For personal bank customers, it could let them defer mortgage payments, and/or switch to an interest-only mortgage. It is also waiving charges on its fixed-rate saving account, to let customers access cash if needed. HSBC is also offering to temporarily increase credit card and overdraft limits.

For business customers, the Bank has "allocated £5bn to help businesses that need support" (from its existing SME lending scheme), and could also give repayments holidays or review loans. That could free up cash, to help companies whose sales take a big hit this year.

block-time published-time 10.47am GMT

Italy to spend (EURO)25bn to fight coronavirus shock     Empty restaurant tables in Milan, on the second day of an unprecedented lockdown across all of Italy Photograph: Flavio Lo Scalzo/Reuters

The Italian government has hiked its coronavirus stimulus package to (EURO)25bn, as it tries to protect its economy from the most restrictive measures since World War Two.

The AFP newswire has the story:

Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said Wednesday that Rome was allocating (EURO)25bn to fight the novel coronavirus outbreak that has killed 631 people in Italy.

"We have allocated an emergency sum of 25 billion euros," Conte told reporters during a break in a meeting on the government's response to the rapidly escalating health crisis.

The entire sum "will not all be used immediately," Conte added.

Economy Minister Roberto Gualtieri said Italy will immediately use "half of these resources" and keep the other half in reserve.

Italy unveiled a (EURO)7.5bn emergency response package last Thursday that officials later said would likely have to be increase to match the rapid rise in new infections and deaths.

A top economy minister had said on Tuesday that the package could reach (EURO)10bn.

Italy, whose faltering economy is the third largest in the eurozone, needs special EU permission to spend more than allowed under the bloc's strict budget rules for its 27 member states.

EU leaders had said they would accept Italy's request when it still stood at (EURO)7.5bn.

enltrThat would be 1.4% of GDP. *ITALY TO SPEND EU25B IN MEASURES FOR CORONAVIRUS: GUALTIERI

- Frederik Ducrozet (@fwred) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 10.32am GMT

Here's a video clip of BoE governor Mark Carney pledging that the UK financial system is strong enough to help Britain cope with the coronavirus:

enltrBOE Governor Mark Carney says that during the 2008 banking crisis "the financial system was the core of the problem," but "it can be part of the solution" as the global economy deals with coronavirus https://t.co/ucQBbL7Hpe           pic.twitter.com/fG1WJZY5aQ

- Bloomberg Brexit (@Brexit) March 11, 2020

And here's more reaction, first from Allianz's chief economic advisor Mohamed El-Erian:

enltr. @BankOfEngland just followed            #Canada and US in cutting rates by 50 bps. In this, his final            #MPC meeting as governor, Mark Carney signals a "whatever it takes" response to the            #coronavirus damage...confirming the good (no lack of policy willingness) and bad (limited effectiveness

- Mohamed A. El-Erian (@elerianm) March 11, 2020

Here's Sky's Ed Conway:

enltrBoth Mark Carney and Andrew Bailey very keen to emphasise at the BoE presser that the Bank could do even more to stimulate the economy if necessary - cutting rates (down to just above zero), more QE if necessary, and potentially other instruments

- Ed Conway (@EdConwaySky) March 11, 2020

Plus Julianna Tatelbaum of CNBC:

enltrOn QE: Why not now? This is a big package. Shifting a countercyclical buffer releases a huge amount of lending capacity - supporting exactly the type of drawdowns that would be required in this situation. - #BoE 's Carney tells            @CNBCJou

- Julianna Tatelbaum (@CNBCJulianna) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 10.24am GMT

City economists are very concerned that the UK economy stagnated in the last quarter.

Howard Archer of EY Item Club says this morning's data are "very disappointing" -- showing Britain's economy was weak before the Covid-19 outbreak began.

enltrVery disappointing news on #UK           #economy even before            #coronavirus started to have dampening impact as            #GDP was unexpectedly only flat month-on-month in January. Had been hopes that activity would get a significant lift from improved            #business &            #consumer confidence after election

- Howard Archer (@HowardArcherUK) March 11, 2020

Sam Tombs of Pantheon Economics says the UK economy is weak enough to justify an interest rate cut anyway!

enltrUK GDP flatlined in January, showing no signs of the rebound in activity signalled by all the business surveys. MPC probably would have cut Bank Rate this month anyway, had the virus never spread to Britain. pic.twitter.com/9lz85X8CAV

- Samuel Tombs (@samueltombs) March 11, 2020

enltrShould have cut sooner ?? UK MONTHLY GDP (3M/3M) ACTUAL (JAN): 0.0% VS 0.1% PREVIOUS; EST 0.1% UK MONTHLY GDP (JAN ) (MOM) ACTUAL: 0.0% VS 0.3% PREVIOUS; EST 0.2%

- Neil Wilson (@marketsneil) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 10.11am GMT

Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, has described the Bank of England's move as "extraordinary, unprecedented economic shock therapy".

Such as dramatic rate cut shows there are "seismic coronavirus tremors running through the nation's finances", so the Bank is trying to encourage spending and keep money flowing through the system.

Lewis adds:

"The financial winners are those on variable and tracker rate mortgages. They will see cost cuts of - very roughly - £25 per month per £100,000 of mortgage. And while it'll take a week or two to factor through, it's likely we'll see the rate of new mortgage fixes drop too - meaning it will then be a very cheap time to remortgage.

"Most loans, credit cards and other debts will likely be unaffected or only minimally affected because the Bank's interest rate only plays a small part in their rates.

"The losers are savers. Many who've worked hard to build up a nest egg will be holding their head in their hands at this news. Savings rates have already been plummeting this year, and this will massively increase the height of the roller coaster fall.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.11am GMT

block-time published-time 9.59am GMT

Back at the Bank of England, Mark Carney is insisting that the coronavirus crisis needn't create a new financial crisis.

Q: Do we need co-ordinated action by the world's governments, asks my colleague Richard Partington?

Carney replies that he was involved in the joint interest rate cuts of 2008 (when he was Bank of Canada governor).

Those measures were needed to "get to the weekend", so G7 leaders could decide what steps to take, Carney says.

Q: Won't savers suffer from today's rate cut, asks the Daily Mail...

Carney replies that Daily Mail readers will understand that people's lives, jobs, businesses need to be protected during the coronavirus crisis.

Q: But what if the economic shock of coronavirus isn't temporary, as you believe?

Carney insists there is no reason for the economic damage to be as bad as 2008.

His successor, Andrew Bailey, also warns commercial banks that the BoE expects this morning's measures to be passed on. Customers deserve to be treated fairly, he says, and we're watching....n

enltrGovernor to be Andrew Bailey says banks have "no excuse" not to treat customers fairly given BoE's major support for lending. Overall package could be worth "north of 1%" in terms of GDP growth, says Carney

- Russ Lynch (@russ_lynch) March 11, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.01am GMT

block-time published-time 9.50am GMT

Today's GDP report shows clearly that Britain's manufacturers have been struggling for months:

UK GDP to January Photograph: ONS

block-time published-time 9.45am GMT

Britain's economy was dragged back by a decline in its car sector in the last quarter.

The ONS says:

The services sector showed no growth in the three months to January 2020. The main drivers behind the weakening seen in services were the wholesale, retail and motor trade sector and the information and communication sector, which fell by 0.7% and 1.0%, respectively.

This fall was largely offset by increases in administrative and support services activities, and education, growing by 1.1% and 0.8%, respectively.

enltr0.0% growth in services in the three months to January. Administrative and support services and Education were the largest positive contributors, while Wholesale retail and motor trade was the largest negative contributor https://t.co/usdQoUgepY           pic.twitter.com/GDPk0zk8DD

- Office for National Statistics (ONS) (@ONS) March 11, 2020

enltrUK GDP unchanged in the 3 months to January (0%q/q). Also 0% change on the month (Dec. 0.3%m/m), which sits at odds with the bouncy January surveys. Biggest boosts from construction, Education & Admin services. Biggest drags from Manufacturing, wholesale & retail and info & comms pic.twitter.com/o3D7P9ckSn

- Rupert Seggins (@Rupert_Seggins) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 9.37am GMT

UK economy is stagnating

NEWSFLASH: Britain's economy failed to grow in the last few months, showing it was weak even before the coronavirus struck.

GDP was flat in January, according to new data from the Office for National Statistics.

It was also flat in the November-January quarter - weaker than expected, and dashing hopes that the economy enjoyed a bounce after December's general election.

The ONS says that Britain's dominant services sector was flat in the three months to January 2020, while production contracted by 1.0%. Construction (a small part of the economy) grew by 1.4%.

enltr0.0% growth in GDP in the three months to January, with services also showing no growth. Production (including manufacturing) was down 1.0%, but construction grew 1.4% https://t.co/0v4m2jmo04           pic.twitter.com/y9pYnsHOLD

- Office for National Statistics (ONS) (@ONS) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 9.30am GMT

Carney: This needn't be a repeat of 2008     Today's emergency press conference held by Bank of England Governor Mark Carney, and his successor Andrew Bailey Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA

Q: Do you agree with Christine Lagarde's warning that Europe faces a repeat of the 2008 crisis ?

Mark Carney replies that this is a different crisis -- reiterating that the banking sector is much stronger than a decade ago.

There is no reason for this shock to turn into the experience of 2008, which created a "virtual lost decade" in some countries -- if policymakers handle it well, he says.

Carney also points out that coronavirus is fundamentally a health crisis, pointing to the "extraordinary efforts" of NHS health professionals, carers, and volunteers across the country.

The next governor, Andrew Bailey, wades in too -- saying the Bank has spent a decade bolstering the financial sector to cope with such an economic shock (although they weren't expecting this particular one).

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.10am GMT

block-time published-time 9.25am GMT

Q: If interest rates can be lower -- why didn't you cut them there today, rather than only cutting to 0.25%?

Mark Carney repeats that today's measures are a "big package" -- again citing the cut to the Countercyclical Capital Buffer which releases £190 billion of bank lending to businesses.

And he again hints at the Budget will include significant measures -- you'll have to wait until the end of the day, or at least midday, for the full package.

block-time published-time 9.21am GMT

Carney: Too early to talk about UK recession

Q: Could the UK fall into a recession this year, and what happens if the coronavirus is not temporary?

Mark Carney insists that the shock of Covid-19 will pass with time, as medical treatments are devised.

It's too early to talk about a recession, he insists -- although the direction of the impact on the UK economy is clear.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.21am GMT

block-time published-time 9.19am GMT

Q: Might the Bank act again at its scheduled meeting later this month, and could you expand your QE (bond-buying) programme?

Mark Carney replies that quantitative easing is very much part of the Bank's toolkit. Asset purchases could provide useful firepower if needed.

But today's moves are a 'big package', he insists.

Reducing Britain's 'counter-cyclical buffer' (meaning banks are allowed to hold less capital) will release a "huge amount" of extra lending.

block-time published-time 9.17am GMT

Onto questions

Q: Are UK interest rates now as low as they can go?

No, Mark Carney replies. There is room for interest rates to be cut further, to just above zero.

Q: What evidence is there that Covid-19 is creating an economic shock in the UK?

Carney says there are some early signs -- China's growth swinging from 5.5% growth to a likely contraction.

He also cites very early signs in the global PMI reports (surveys of purchasing managers).

block-time published-time 9.13am GMT

In the financial crisis more than a decade ago, the financial sector was the "core of the problem", says Mark Carney.

Now it can be now it can be part of the solution

Carney says the banks have been transformed in the last decade -- to make them strong enough to survive an economic shock. This was prudence with a purpose, resilience with a reason.

block-time published-time 9.11am GMT

Bailey: Firms and households will get credit they need

Andrew Bailey, who will succeed Mark Carney as governor next week, is also attending today's press conference.

Bailey says the Bank is taking steps to ensure that businesses and households can access the credit they need to get through the economic disruption of Covid-19.

The new Term Lending Scheme  should create more than £100bn of new credit, Bailey says. And reducing the UK countercyclical capital buffer rate to 0%  will support up to £190bn of bank lending to businesses, he adds.

block-time published-time 9.07am GMT

Carney: Our measures will protect firms and jobs

Outgoing Bank of England governor Mark Carney says  today's actions are designed to keep firms in business, and people in jobs.

Activity is likely to weaken materially in the coming months, with an economic shock hurting demand and supply within the UK economy, Carney tells reporters.

The interest rate cut, and the new support for bank lending, will prevent the temporary disruption caused by Covid 19 from causing longer-lasting economic harm, Carney pledges.

He also says the Bank is acting in a co-ordinated fashion with the Treasury -- and that today's budget will contain a series of government initiatives to support the economy too.

Reminder: there are more details in the Bank's statement this morning ( online here).

block-time published-time 8.57am GMT

The Bank of England is about to hold a press conference to discuss today's shock rate cut. You can watch it live here:

block-time published-time 8.52am GMT

Lagarde: Europe faces 2008-like crisis

Newsflash: the head of the European Central Bank, Christine Lagarde, has warned that Europe risks a major economic shock similar to the financial crisis unless leaders act urgently on the coronavirus.

That's via Bloomberg.

The ECB holds its next policy meeting tomorrow, and many investors and traders believe it will announce new policy measures to help the eurozone economy.

With interest rates already at zero, the ECB's options are limited. But it will be desperate to shore up confidence in eurozone banks - especially with Italy facing a deep recession and a possible surge in bad loans.

Here's some instant reaction, from Peter Garnry of Saxo Bank....

enltrLagarde says that Europe risks 2008-style crisis because of COVID-19. Do people get it now? More European banks will likely be trouble. Helicopter money will be the rescue tool applied this time... #equities

- Peter Garnry (@petergarnry) March 11, 2020

...and Carsten Brzeski of ING:

enltrWhat will "whatever it takes" be in French? #ECB

- Carsten Brzeski (@carstenbrzeski) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 8.47am GMT

Here's our economics editor Larry Elliott's rapid analysis on today's rate cut:

Related:  Bank of England rate cut just before budget is perfectly timed | Larry Elliott

block-time published-time 8.44am GMT

Heathrow reports sharp fall in passengers numbers:

Heathrow airport has reported a significant fall in passenger traffic in February and March -- confirming that  the coronavirus is wrecking havoc on the aviation industry.

Britain's largest airport said that total passenger numbers fell 4.8% last month, due to lower demand on Asian and European routes, regions where airlines have significantly cut back or halted flights due to the spread of the coronavirus.

The traffic figures show that Asia Pacific passenger numbers fell by 19.6% in February, with European Union traffic down 1.6%.

The amount of cargo passing through Heathrow in February fell by 9.5%, to 115,800 tonnes, as the effect of the virus hits global trade.

John Holland-Kaye, Heathrow's chief executive, says:

"The threat of coronavirus is an increasing challenge for the UK and we are working day and night to ensure Britain's front door is open and safe for our people and passengers.

We will continue to work with the Government to limit the impacts this will have on UK plc."

enltrAs the BoE announce 0.5 percentage point rate cut to 0.25%, Heathrow Airport gives us a taster of what's beginning to happen in the real economy: passenger numbers down 5.4 million (drop of 4.8%) due to #COVID19

- Beth Rigby (@BethRigby) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 8.35am GMT

UK budget expected to include surge of borrowing     Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak making his final preparations to his first Budget speech Photograph: HM Treasury/PA

City economists are expecting the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to announce a major increase in borrowing today.

The Bank and the Treasury appear to be working in tandem to deliver a coordinated monetary and fiscal stimulus, in the face of a possible global recession triggered by the coronavirus outbreak.

Sunak is expected to pledge to increase infrastructure spending in the five years of this Parliament by around £100bn. This increased spending on roads, rail, broadband etc will push public sector net investment up to 3% of GDP, from 2.2% per cent.

Kallum Pickering, senior economist at Berenberg Bank, explains:

That the BoE chose to announce its stimulus on the same day as the budget is telling. Policymakers are clearly concerned about the risks ahead. The joint action reflects the intention to send a big message that policymakers are prepared to take aggressive and pre-emptive steps to support the economy.

At 12:30 today Chancellor Rishi Sunak will announce his budget plans for the next five years. We expect a significant debt-financed near-term stimulus along with an extra £100bn in public investment over the next five years.

block-time published-time 8.24am GMT

Today's shock rate cut is the first unscheduled Bank of England move since the financial crisis, and the biggest as well:

enltrBiggest Bank of England interest rate cut since the global financial crisis this morning -0.5 pp #coronavirus           pic.twitter.com/NvNXTUl8gR

- Ben Chu (@BenChu_) March 11, 2020

block-time published-time 8.21am GMT

FTSE 100 jumps 2%

Stocks are rallying in London at the start of trading, following the Bank's emergency rate cut.

The FTSE 100 has rallied by almost 2%, gaining 116 points to 6074.

UK housebuilders are leading the rally, along with holiday firm TUI, and banks including Barclays.

FTSE 100 top risers Photograph: Refinitiv

But a word of caution: the FTSE 100 surged by over 200 points early on Tuesday, before subsiding amid coronavirus fears. On Monday it plunged over 500 points.

block-time published-time 8.13am GMT

The British Chambers of Commerce has cheered the BoE's move -- but cautioned that commercial banks need to pass these measures onto small firms.

BCC Director General Dr Adam Marshall says:

"Businesses will welcome the decisive action taken by the Bank of England to support the economy at this delicate moment.

"The Bank and UK financial institutions must now work together to ensure that these policy measures translate into real-world support for firms on the ground.

"We will want to see banks using new flexibilities to do everything they can to help businesses whose cash flow and prospects have been disrupted due to the impacts of Coronavirus."

block-time published-time 8.06am GMT

The pound initially plunged when the Bank's rate cut was announced -- but has now clawed its way back to $1.29

The pound vs the US dollar Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 7.59am GMT

Reaction to this morning's emergency cut to UK interest rates to just 0.25% is pouring in.

Karen Ward, chief market strategist at J.P. Morgan Asset Management, says the Bank's moves should help the economy -- but government spending would help more:

We believe targeted fiscal measures would prove more effective. Rent and wage subsidies and tax credits would give companies confidence in their ability to manage down their costs in line with their falling revenues. This will prevent a vicious cycle of demand weakness leading to job cuts and further demand weakness. In short, interest rate cuts will help, so long as they are playing the supporting act to pro-active government stimulus.

"For that reason all eyes are now on the Chancellor to see if he announces a big increase in spending in his Budget today. If he does this would be the first instance of a truly coordinated monetary and fiscal push. Investors may be comforted by the fact that policy makers are willing to deploy their full ammunition - moving a step closer to helicopter money."

block-time published-time 7.48am GMT

This chart shows how UK interest rates have been cut back to record lows this morning:

UK interest rates

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.54am GMT

block-time published-time 7.44am GMT

Here's our news story on the Bank of England's emergency move today:

Related:  Coronavirus: Bank of England makes emergency interest rate cut

block-time published-time 7.37am GMT

Larry Elliott: Rate cut shows policymakers are worried

This is the full treatment from the Bank of England and significant for three reasons: the timing, the scale and the details, says our economics editor Larry Elliott:

He explains:

The Bank and the Treasury are working in tandem in an attempt to show they are in charge of events but the 50 basis points cut takes rates back to their post Brexit referendum low and demonstrates just how worried the authorities are.

The incentives to banks to pass on the benefits of cheaper borrowing to struggling businesses demonstrate the limitations of monetary easing when interest rates are already at historically low levels.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.42am GMT

block-time published-time 7.37am GMT

UK interest rates are now at their lowest ever level again. They've only been 0.25% once before -- after the Brexit vote in 2016.

block-time published-time 7.33am GMT

In an attempt to protect small UK companies, the Bank of England is creating a new "Term Funding Scheme".

This will provide a "cost-effective source of funding" for small firms, says the BoE.

It effectively helps commercial banks to lower the interest rates on their loans, by borrowing cheaply from the Bank ('at or very close to base rate'). It could pump up to £100bn of extra potential borrowing into the system.

The Bank says:

Experience from the Term Funding Scheme launched in 2016 suggests that the TFSME could provide in excess of £100 billion in term funding.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.23am GMT

block-time published-time 7.29am GMT

Bank: Economy likely to 'weaken materially'

Today's measures are meant to help UK businesses and households through the "sharp, large and temporary" impact of the coronavirus crisis, says the Bank of England :

The Bank's three policy committees are today announcing a comprehensive and timely package of measures to help UK businesses and households bridge across the economic disruption that is likely to be associated with Covid-19. These measures will help to keep firms in business and people in jobs and help prevent a temporary disruption from causing longer-lasting economic harm.

Following the spread of Covid-19, risky asset and commodity prices have fallen sharply, and government bond yields reached all-time lows, consistent with a marked deterioration in risk appetite and in the outlooks for global and UK growth. Indicators of financial market uncertainty have reached extreme levels.

Although the magnitude of the economic shock from Covid-19 is highly uncertain, activity is likely to weaken materially in the United Kingdom over the coming months. Temporary, but significant, disruptions to supply chains and weaker activity could challenge cash flows and increase demand for short-term credit from households and for working capital from companies. Such issues are likely to be most acute for smaller businesses. This economic shock will affect both demand and supply in the economy.

enltrHere is the Bank of England statement accompanying the 50bps rare cut https://t.co/uPiuWFZUT6

- Julia Kollewe (@JuliaKollewe) March 11, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.51am GMT

block-time published-time 7.15am GMT

UK INTEREST RATES SLASHED

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business.

Big breaking news this morning! The Bank of England has slashed UK interest rates in an attempt to protect the British economy from the impact of the coronavirus.

In an unscheduled move, the BoE is cutting interest rates to just 0.25%, from 0.75%. That's a significant move, intended to protect firms and households from financial distress.

The Bank says:

The reduction in Bank Rate will help to support business and consumer confidence at a difficult time, to bolster the cash flows of businesses and households, and to reduce the cost, and to improve the availability, of finance.

enltrAlso a new Term Funding SME scheme which will basically oblige banks to pass on the 0.5% cut to its clients And full release of the Counter cyclical Capital buffer -0% rather than 2% - that releases 190bn in bank lending Part of concerted action with Treasury on day of Budget

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) March 11, 2020

The Bank is also launching a new funding scheme to provide funding for businesses struggling with the economic shock of Covid-19.

Thirdly, the Bank is also reducing the amount of capital that UK banks need to hold -- a move that will create £190bn of extra bank lending to businesses.

It's a major intervention on governor Mark Carney's final week at the Bank, as global policymakers try to get to grips with a crisis that threatens to push the world economy into recession.

The agenda •9.30am: UK GDP figures for November-January•12.30pm: UK budget

9.30am: UK GDP figures for November-January

12.30pm: UK budget

More to follow

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.24am GMT