The involvement of Trevor Phillips' consultancy in the inquiry into Covid-19's impact on ethnic minorities has run into fresh controversy after it emerged its software has been used to identify whether different ethnic groups "specialise" in particular types of crime.

Prof Richard Webber, Phillips' partner in the firm Webber Phillips, says its Origins programme - which identifies people's ethnicity/religion on the basis of their names - helps to ensure police investigations are "not based on stereotyping but on hard evidence". Critics argue it promotes stereotypes and stigmatisation.

Writing about Origins in the industry journal Police Professional in 2017, Webber said it was wrong to lump different ethnic groups together.

"Just as each community develops legitimate means of acquiring wealth, it would be surprising if there were not a parallel specialisation in forms of criminality," he wrote.

"Sometimes these go together; as, for instance, where the minority population most likely to run petrol stations is also the one that is most proficient in ATM fraud; or when those who run taxi services have the best opportunities to engage in abuse of young girls."

In this article for @PoliceP, Webber goes further explaining that 'the minority population most likely to run petrol stations is also the one that is most proficient in ATM fraud' and that 'those who run taxi services have the best opportunities to engage in abuse of young girls'            pic.twitter.com/eivZc6bDXS - Institute of Race Relations (@IRR_News)            April 30, 2020

In another article, on neighbourhoodalert.co.uk, he wrote that, while arguments that differences in behaviour are due to differences in opportunity and treatment "no doubt have some validity, it is not unreasonable to recognise that different cultures do foster differences in behaviour among their members".

He added: "Although not all members of any minority behave in exactly the same way, it is legitimate to argue that deep seated attitudes do exist which characterise some communities and religions more than others, especially if these differences can be evidenced from operational data."

Webber, who wrote that he had no desire "to link particular criminal activities with particular communities publicly", said that a dozen or so police forces have used Origins.

Last month, Phillips, the former chairman of the Equalities and Human Rights Commission, and Webber, a visiting fellow at Newcastle University, were asked by Public Health England to investigate why coronavirus is leading to more deaths among black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities.

The selection of Phillips           had already provoked controversy because of his suspension from the Labour party in March over allegations of Islamophobia, including a reference to UK Muslims as being "a nation within a nation".

Critics said the way Origins has been used and promoted in policing further discredited Webber Phillips' role in the coronavirus inquiry.

A spokesperson for the Institute of Race Relations thinktank said Origins was "built and marketed to police forces and others with a specific purpose in mind".

The spokesperson added: "In turn, these data-driven identification technologies and databases can replicate racialised stereotypes and reinforce institutionalised prejudices.

"We believe that the appointment of Phillips sends all the wrong signals, precisely because of the way he has interpreted ethnic data in the past, to suggest that 'aspects of minority disadvantage may be self-inflicted'. To put it simply, he appears reluctant to trace, as most researchers do, the basis of racial inequality in societal, structural issues in favour of interpretations that focus on a cultural deficit within the groups that are 'failing'."

In the Police Professional article, Webber referred to "melting pot" London boroughs such as Haringey, Waltham Forest and Newham as a "Tower of Babel", a description Phillips was criticised for using with respect to Grenfell Tower.

Webber wrote that in such areas "it was not obvious who the leaders of any minority community are - or who might be controlling criminal networks".

Dal Babu, who was one of the UK's most senior Asian officers when he retired as chief superintendent for Harrow in north-west London in 2013, said: "They suggest that different cultures foster differences in behaviour and so different communities act differently. This is almost a textbook definition of stereotyping - inferring a particular behaviour from the ethnicity of an individual without knowing anything about that individual other than their ethnicity.

"Data is useful and can give helpful pointers about what is going on and who, in general, might be doing it. But no data system can do so on it's own, particularly one which the communities will view with suspicion."

Phillips told HuffPost UK last month that the Origins system, which has been used by the Premier League and Yale University according to the programme's website, would be used in the Covid-19 inquiry. He said it had an accuracy rate of over 95% for identifying ethnic or cultural origin.

Harun Khan, secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, said: "It [the inquiry] should not seek advice from those who propagate racist stereotypes or cast aspersions on minorities - issues of direct relevance in the inquiry.

"The grave concerns already voiced widely across BAME communities cannot be ignored, and we - alongside all those who have raised concerns - urge Public Health England to rethink these appointments, and focus on the evidence."

Webber Phillips declined to comment. Public Health England said it was engaging a wide range of external experts and independent advisers.