Good evening and here is our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia for Sunday, 26 April.

New Covidsafe tracing app launches

Australians can now download the government's controversial coronavirus contact tracing app, Covidsafe, amid ongoing concerns about privacy of those using the app.

The app, based on source code from Singapore's Tracetogether software, maintains a log of bluetooth connections a person's phone makes with the phones of those they have come into contact with, making it easier for health authorities to trace potential Covid-19 carriers in the case of a positive diagnosis.

For the app to be successful, just under half the population would need to carry it on their phones. From 6pm Sunday, users are able to go to the Apple app store or Google Play store and install the app, and register their name, phone number, postcode and age range.

WA and Qld to relax some restrictions

Two states announced some easing of physical distancing measures on Sunday as the rate of infection continued to slow.

Western Australia's premier, Mark McGowan, said from Monday, up to 10 people will be allowed to gather outdoors and indoors, and non-contact recreational activities such as private picnics, fishing, boating, hiking and camping would also be allowed to resume. Open homes and display villages would also be permitted.

Queenslanders will be allowed to go for a drive within 50kms, visit a national park and shop for non-essential items, while families or singles, with one other person, will be permitted to have picnics, under new rules which take effect next Saturday.

Report finds children unlikely to transmit virus

A new report, cited by the chief medical officer as the federal government advocates the reopening of schools, says children are unlikely to transmit Covid-19 between each other or to adults.

The study by NSW Health's Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance (NCIRS), released on Sunday, examined transmission of the virus in NSW schools and childcare centres between March and mid-April.

Examining the spread of 18 coronavirus cases (nine students and nine staff) from 15 schools, the report's preliminary findings were that only one primary school student and one high school student "may have contracted Covid-19 from the initial cases at their schools".

"No teacher or staff member contracted Covid-19 from any of the initial school cases," the report added. The low transmission rate was despite 735 students and 128 staff being "close contacts" of the initial 18 cases.

Tasmania records 11th death

Another elderly man died from coronavirus at the Mersey Community hospital in northern Tasmania, taking the state's toll to 11. Ten of these deaths have occurred in the state's north-west. Only NSW and Victoria have recorded more deaths from Covid-19 in Australia.

The health minister, Sarah Courtney, announced the death of the man in his 90s on Sunday, following the death of another man at the hospital on Saturday.

She also confirmed a health worker at the Mersey hospital in the Covid-19 positive ward as the latest confirmed case. A total of 208 cases have now been confirmed, while 123 have recovered.

NSW and Victoria record new Covid-19 deaths

Victoria's health minister,  Jenny Mikakos, said a man in his 90s died in hospital overnight, bringing the state's total deaths to 17.

A sixth resident of a western Sydney aged care home also died on Saturday. An 82-year-old man who resided at Newmarch House in Caddens - where almost 50 people have been infected - died on Saturday, operator Anglicare Sydney said.

This follows the death of a 96-year-old woman on Friday, a woman in her late 70s on Thursday and earlier fatalities of a woman and two men aged in their 90s. The facility is NSW's largest ongoing cluster, with some 31 of the almost 100 residents having been infected as well as 17 staff members.

Dutton repeats call for virus inquiry

The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, has reiterated calls for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus in China, despite China accusing Australia of playing "political games".

Foreign minister Marise Payne raised the idea of an international inquiry a week ago, calling for greater transparency on how Covid-19 originated and how it was subsequently handled.

"We want more transparency within the communist party of China in the way they have dealt with this virus issue," Dutton told Sky News on Sunday.

He said there needs to be reassurance globally this is not going to happen again in 12 months or two years time.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers                   •Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions•Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics•Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines•Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?•Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register•Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home•Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?•Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted•What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?•Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?•How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?•Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?•How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus•Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions

Coronavirus Australia maps and cases: live numbers and statistics

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines

Free childcare: what do the Australian government's coronavirus changes mean for my family?

Am I eligible for the jobkeeper payment? Here's everything you need to know to register

Groceries, telehealth and pharmaceuticals: how older Australians can get help at home

Have I already had coronavirus? How would I know and what should I do?

Dangerous cures and viral hoaxes: common coronavirus myths busted

What happens to people's lungs when they get coronavirus?

Coronavirus vaccine: when will it be ready?

How long does coronavirus live on different surfaces?

Who is most at risk of contracting coronavirus?

How ventilators work and why they are so important in saving people with coronavirus

Coronavirus key questions: everything you need to know

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.

- with Australian Associated Press