block-time published-time 4.41pm BST

And finally, European stock markets have ended the day with modest losses.

In London, the FTSE 100 has ended 0.67% lower, losing 41 points to 6250, after a subdued day ( as summarised here )

Stocks particularly vulnerable to the Covid-19 crisis were among the fallers, with manufacturing group Melrose  down 4%, hotels and eateries chain Whitbread  losing 3.1% and catering supplier Compass  losing 2.5%.

enltrEuropean stocks end the day in negative territory, pausing for breath after yesterday's vaccine-fuelled rally Stoxx 600 closes down 0.46%, London's FTSE 100 down 0.62%

- Michael Brown (@MrMBrown) July 16, 2020

Although China's sliding stock market caught the City's eye, as did the UK and US unemployment numbers, it was a somewhat dull day.

The European Central Bank supplying few fireworks, with its governing council pledging to maintain stimulus measures - and quietly hoping Europe's politicians deliver the much-needed Recovery Fund.

European stock markets tonight Photograph: Refinitiv

David Madden of CMC Markets sums up the day:

Stocks handed back some of yesterday's gains amid a sluggish trading session. The mixed data from China overnight ensured that equities got off to a negative start. On a quarterly basis, the Chinese economy grew by 11.5%, and that was a massive rebound from -9.8% registered in the first quarter. The June retail sales figures showed there was negative growth of 1.8%, and that undershot the 0.3% forecast. Some people questioned the headline growth reading in light of the poor retail sales numbers - which have been in territory in the quarter in question - hence why stocks didn't drive higher on the back of the growth number.

The uninteresting update from the ECB didn't inspire traders. Rates were kept on hold, and so was the PEPP - meeting forecasts. Christine Lagarde, ECB chief, said the rate of the bond buying has eased a little, but she added that unless there is a big surprise in terms of an economic rebound, the full stimulus package will be used. European governments are divided over the (EURO)750 billion rescue fund, as some are in favour the 2:1 grant to loan ratio, while others are opposed. Getting approval would be crucial to the region's recovery. Ms Lagarde said the ECB is working on the assumption that it will be approved.

We'll find out over the weekend. Goodnight! GW

block-time published-time 3.49pm BST

More bad news for the UK economy -- 1,000 jobs could be at risk at Pizza Express, as the restaurant chain prepares to close up to 75 outlets.

My colleague Sarah Butler has the details:

The restaurant chain is lining up a company voluntary arrangement (CVA) - an insolvency process which allows it to exit stores and cut rents - linked to talks with bondholders over its heavy debt burden.

Founded in 1965 in Soho, London, Pizza Express is now ubiquitous on British high streets, with 470 UK restaurants and a further 150 outlets internationally. It employs 8,000 people in the UK.

Hony Capital, a Chinese company, bought Pizza Express in 2014 in a £900m deal, made shortly after the restaurant chain opened its first branch in Beijing. The investment firm hoped to drive the growth of Pizza Express in China.

But Hony could lose control of Pizza Express to bondholders under a debt-for-equity swap....

Related:  Pizza Express to close up to 75 restaurants, risking 1,000 jobs

The pandemic has also shown the dangers of loading a company up with debt. It can boost profits and payouts for private equity owners - but if your sales dry up, you can't service the borrowing any more...

enltrBecause the PE firm that owns it loaded it up with debt: flatters their performance (and very, very tax efficient for Pizza Express)

- Richard Fletcher (@fletcherr) July 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.55pm BST

block-time published-time 3.16pm BST

Afternoon summary

Time for a quick recap.

China's economy has returned to growth, with official figures showing GDP grew by 3.2% year-on-year in April to June . Industrial production strengthened, encouraging Beijing officials to predict they were "confident on the economic recovery in the second half of this year".

Some economists said China appears to have turned the corner, and could even be enjoying the fabled V-shaped recovery.

But in a worrying sign, retail sales fell steadily during the quarter, down by 1.6% year-on-year in March.

This appeared to spook traders, sending the Chinese stock market reeling by 4.8% today - its worst slump in five months.

The latest US jobless figure also cast a shadow, with 1.3m Americans filing new unemployment benefit claims last week. Analysts fear that the recovery in the labor market is fading.

The European Central Bank said it was worried about a second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic in America, as it left interest rates on hold at record lows.

ECB president Christine Lagarde also predicted the pandemic would cause significant changes to global trade, with companies shifting supply chains closer to home.

Dutch brewer Heikenen became the latest company to suffer from the lockdown, reporting a slump in sales this year as pubs and bars were closed.

Britain's unemployment crisis also worsened, with more people leaving payrolls in June and real wages shrinking

Related:  UK paid employment falls by almost 650,000 as Covid-19 crisis bites

block-time published-time 2.44pm BST

The New York Stock Exchange on Wall Street. Photograph: Angela Weiss/AFP/Getty Images

The US stock market has opened in  the red, with the Dow Jones industrial average losing 162 points or 0.6% to  26,707.

Wall Street had rallied yesterday, on optimism that Covid-19 vaccine work was going well.

Today, though, investors are digesting the latest high weekly jobless figures, the slump in China's stock marke t, and the accelerating pandemic in the US.

block-time published-time 2.39pm BST

Lagarde: pandemic will shake up global trade

ECB president Christine Lagarde has also predicted that Covid-19 will have a major impact on global trade, for two reasons.

First, there is the mechanical impact. As the pandemic rolls around the world, with some nations worse hit than others, export-led are suffering as potential customers are locked down.

Some of those countries who were relying on trade are having to reconsider, and to rely more on their domestic market rather than exports.

Secondly, Lagarde predicts a "cultural, sociological, and maybe philosophical change" from the pandemic -- with individuals and companies both giving more value to goods made locally.

Consumers will be more attentive to the origin of goods, the place of manufacturing.

And corporates themselves, who had been largely dependent on far away supply chains, or very complicated and fragmented supply chains, suddenly rediscover the benefit of proximity.

block-time published-time 2.19pm BST

ECB braces for second wave of US Covid-19 cases

The rise in Covid-19 cases in the US is worrying the European Central Bank.

ECB chief Christine Lagarde was just asked about the surge of infections in America in recent weeks, at her press conference in Frankfurt.

She replies that "of course it is a concern" - a concern for the livelihoods of people, the lives of people.

It's something which the ECB's governing council discussed during its meeting this week, as it assessed the macroeconomic outlook.

We have taken account of the environment in which the euro are zone operates

We have taken into account the potential risk of a second wave and a measures that could be taken as a result of that.

enltrECB President Lagarde says the 'second wave' in the US is a concern Aaaand cue debate on whether this is still the first wave or not

- RANsquawk (@RANsquawk) July 16, 2020

The latest data shows that Covid-19 cases are now increasing in 41 of America's 50 states, with nearly 3.5m people now having been infected.

enltrNo sign of relief in US Covid-19 data for July 15. New cases pulled back slightly on Wed, but remain close to a record high. Meanwhile, the daily change in US fatalities rose to a 6-day high, suggesting that the downtrend has ended and a new rebound may be in progress: pic.twitter.com/gI4vzJu4Yi

- James Picerno (@jpicerno) July 16, 2020

Our US liveblog has full details:

Related:  Coronavirus US: Covid-19 cases rise in 41 states as total number nears 3.5m - live updates

block-time published-time 1.48pm BST

Worryingly, the recovery in US unemployment seems to have fizzled out.

As Bloomberg's Joe Weisenthal shows, the number of people losing their jobs and filing fresh welfare claims has only been falling slowly for weeks. There was virtually no improvement at all last week.

That suggests alarming churn in the US economy, with swathes of workers losing their jobs each week. Before the crisis, the initial jobless claims figure was hovering in the low 200,000s. It's now hovering around 1.3m....

enltrHere's the chart of weekly jobless claims. You can see improvement has almost totally stalled out. Smallest sequential decline since the crisis began. https://t.co/7Zi1SFXy0G pic.twitter.com/kgzaA5o5Xj

- Joe Weisenthal (@TheStalwart) July 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.13pm BST

block-time published-time 1.38pm BST

Economists are disappointed that so many Americans are being forced to file new claims for unemployment welfare, four months after the lockdown began.

Here's some snap reaction to the initial claims report :

enltrSeven straight weeks of all-in initial claims plateauing. And still at insanely high levels pic.twitter.com/FvcRdZgeDe

- Nick Bunker (@nick_bunker) July 16, 2020

enltrAt 1.300M, Initial Jobless Claims came in just above the 1.250M estimate, but just below last week's 1.310M level; this was the 15th weekly decline. Claims peaked on 3/28 but remain VERY high. https://t.co/gJpV1ldX37 pic.twitter.com/u8q0dUTYcf

- Randy Frederick (@RandyAFrederick) July 16, 2020

enltrInitial unemployment claims for last week came in at 1.3 million (1.5 million without the dodgy seasonal adjustment), which is still more than twice as high of a rate of *new* job losses than ever experienced before.

- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) July 16, 2020

enltrOngoing job losses on this scale will eventually cause the unemployment rate to rise, even from its current elevated rate. The prospects for a rapid economic recovery are rapidly receding.

- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) July 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.38pm BST

block-time published-time 1.36pm BST

US initial jobless claims hit 1.3m again.

Newsflash: 1.3 million Americans filed new claims for unemployment support last week, as the Covid-19 pandemic  forced some states to lock down again.

The weekly initial jobless claims total barely fell week-on-week - dipping to 1.3m from 1.31m a week ago.

This suggests little progress in healing the US labor market - with many companies continuing to lay staff off. That could be due to weak demand, or because they were forced to shut following coronavirus spikes across the country.

The number of Americans filing  'continued claims' for jobless suppport also barely shifted, coming in at 17.338m from 17.76m a week ago.

The initial jobless claims total has now exceeded one million for every week since March - something that had never happened before this year.

enltrMixed results from the claims data, with initial jobless claims barely declining and remaining above the consensus estimate at 1.3mn, while continuing claims fell to a lower-than-expected 17.3mn pic.twitter.com/7gaxHDzCMk

- MacroMarketsDaily (@macro_daily) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 1.12pm BST

Economists reckon the European Central Bank is slipping into 'wait and see' mode, while it assesses the state of the eurozone economy.

The ECB also wants to see the results of tomorrow's EU summit on the Recovery Fund. Can politicians square their differences and agree a (EURO)750bn package, or will arguments about shared debts and whether to hand out grants or loans scupper it?

Anna Stupnytska  of Fidelity International says:

"As the ECB switches to the 'wait-and-see' mode for the rest of the summer, the focus shift towards the Recovery Fund and the long-term budget. This week's Summit might not bring a final agreement just yet, but any progress on the most contentious issues, including governance and conditionality, would send a strong signal on the prospects for the breakthrough in the near future."

Sam Cooper, Vice President of Market Risk Solutions at Silicon Valley Bank ,  agrees:

"The decision to leave interest rates unchanged and keep the powder dry was no surprise to FX markets. The main area of focus remains on the upcoming leaders meeting in Brussels and the form in which the blocwide support package will take, until then we can expect the euro to keep testing it's recent upward momentum, particularly against the dollar. "

block-time published-time 12.51pm BST

ECB maintains Covid-19 stimulus

Newsflash from Frankfurt: The European Central Bank has left eurozone interest rates at their current record lows.

That means the headline rate remains just 0%, with banks charged negative interest rates of -0.5% for leaving cash in the ECB's vaults.

The ECB is also maintaining its current Covid-19 stimulus package, and repeated its pledge to keep buying assets until next summer:

It says:

The Governing Council will continue its purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) with a total envelope of (EURO)1,350 billion.

These purchases contribute to easing the overall monetary policy stance, thereby helping to offset the pandemic-related downward shift in the projected path of inflation. The purchases will continue to be conducted in a flexible manner over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions. This allows the Governing Council to effectively stave off risks to the smooth transmission of monetary policy.

The Governing Council will conduct net asset purchases under the PEPP until at least the end of June 2021 and, in any case, until it judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over.

enltr #ECB leaves all rates unchg as expected: Main refi at 0%, Depo rate -0.5%. Keeps Pandemic Bond-Buying Program at (EURO)1.35tn. PEPP flexible regarding to time, asset classes, countries. Reinvest maturing PEPP bonds at least through end-2022. PEPP will run at least through end Jun21. pic.twitter.com/ExocTPqgzV

- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 12.24pm BST

ING economist Iris Pang has hiked her growth forecasts for China, while also warning that the recovery could be bumpy.

She writes:

The biggest risk we see is the technology war, not just with the US but also with the rest of the world. China has put a lot of money into R&D in advanced technology to achieve self-reliance on the most advanced semiconductor chips but it will take time to yield results.

But even so....ING have now raised the GDP forecasts upwards to 0.5% YoY for 3Q20 and 5.0%YoY for 4Q20, from our previous forecasts of -0.5% YoY and +4.5% YoY, respectively.

The full year 2020 forecast is revised upwards to 0.48% due to:

•Better foreign demand from countries coming out of Covid-19 lockdowns Faster implementation of infrastructure investment projectsBetter job market situation in the manufacturing sector when foreign demand improves

Better foreign demand from countries coming out of Covid-19 lockdowns Faster implementation of infrastructure investment projectsBetter job market situation in the manufacturing sector when foreign demand improves

enltrWhen things look too good I usually take another look. China's 3.2% positive GDP growth on a yearly basis worth taking a second look when retail sales were shrinking, infrastructure investments were slow. I find out why it is a posive GDP growth. #China https://t.co/tuhW9FOUTT

- Iris Pang (@Iris_Pang_China) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 12.15pm BST

Ed Moya of OANDA thinks investors are being too pessimistic about the drop in Chinese retail sales:

China's economy is back into growth territory following steady stimulus and relatively strong success in battling COVID-19. The rebound in China however is mostly on the industrial side and not the consumer. The Chinese retail data however is not as bad it seems, as automobiles, catering, jewelry, and petroleum goods were the main categories that posted declines.

The decline in cars, which is about 10% of the retail sales value was mainly attributed to the strong base it had a year ago.

China retail sales details Photograph: ING

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.20pm BST

block-time published-time 12.08pm BST

Reuters is reporting that Nissan will cut its car production worldwide sharply this year, due to the pandemic.

It's another sign that the world economy is weak, with the lockdown denting demand for travel, consumers nervous about big purchases, and production lost to factory shutdowns.

Here's the story :

Nissan Motor Co is planning a 30% year-on-year cut in global vehicle production through December as falling demand due to the coronavirus complicates its efforts to recover profitability, two sources with knowledge of the matter have told Reuters.

Japan's No. 2 automaker plans to produce around 2.6 million vehicles between April and December, down from 3.7 million during the same period last year, the sources said.

Global automakers are struggling after factories were shuttered earlier this year to stem the spread of the coronavirus outbreak.

Car dealerships were also closed in many countries, pummelling vehicle sales in March through May, although the fall in sales slowed in June.

Nissan employs around 6,000 people at its UK factory in Sunderland, where one worker tested positive for Covid-19 this week.

block-time published-time 11.59am BST

Here's my colleague Richard Partington on today's worrying UK jobs data:

Paid employment in Britain has plunged by almost 650,000 employees since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic in March, official figures show, as growing numbers of companies cut jobs.

According to the Office for National Statistics, the number of payroll employees fell by 2.2%, or 649,000, from March to June. However, it said the rate of decline in employment slowed in June compared with May.

In a reflection of the shock to the economy during lockdown as businesses were forced to temporarily close, the latest snapshot showed the number of hours worked in Britain plummeted between March to May 2019 and March to May 2020 at a record pace. Hours worked each week dropped by 175.3m, or 16.7%, to 877.1m in total, marking the steepest fall since records began in 1971....

More here:

Related:  UK paid employment falls by almost 650,000 as Covid-19 crisis bites

block-time published-time 11.43am BST

Analysts at trading firm XM also see a V-shaped recovery in China's GDP figures today :

As far as V-shaped recoveries go, China's economic recuperation from the coronavirus couldn't look more V-shaped. Gross domestic product (GDP) jumped by 11.5% over the quarter to June after collapsing by almost 10% in the first quarter.

Year-on-year growth also returned to positive territory, with GDP rising by 3.2%, well above forecasts of 2.5%.

But the markets continue to shrug. US crude oil, a decent gauge of growth prospects, is down 1% today at $40.74 per barrel.

XM, like other economists today, blame the surprise drop in Chinese retail sales in June....

But rather than be reassured by the upbeat headline numbers, investors finally seem to be touching base with reality as the warning signs that the global recovery will be a bumpy one continue to grow. Up until now, the resurgence of virus infections in several countries had failed to dent hopes of a speedy and robust recovery. But the slow pickup in domestic demand in China appears to have dealt a major blow to those expectations.

Retail sales in China fell on an annual basis for the fifth straight month in June, suggesting consumers are not yet feeling confident enough to revert to their pre-pandemic spending habits.

block-time published-time 11.21am BST

Getting back to the Chinese growth figures, economist George Magnus argues that China is enjoying a V-shaped recovery.

He's written an interesting Twitter thread analysing the 3.2% annual growth recorded in April-June :

enltrChina GDP thread: Q2 estimate out puts GDP 3.2% up over the year. The V-shape is alive and well in China. Others take note? As this chart from CE illustrates 1/n pic.twitter.com/9Tq94Dne9P

- George Magnus (@georgemagnus1) July 16, 2020

enltrThe quarterly rise, seas adj, was +11.5%, more than offsetting the prior 10% slump. In the entrails, production and construction have recovered strongly, services and demand much less so but overall the economy is back from the dead. June data showed more 2/n

- George Magnus (@georgemagnus1) July 16, 2020

enltrBigger stimulus and faster credit creation than are being acknowledged are fuelling a decent comeback in infravstruture and some other investment tho mfg and property still soft. June capex esp infra was a stonker. Retail sales were less negative y/y than in May. 3/n

- George Magnus (@georgemagnus1) July 16, 2020

enltrSo the dichotomy between output and demand still there. I remember plummet officially dropped from 5.9 to 5.7% and the number of migrant workers not yet back at work is now much smaller. 4/n

- George Magnus (@georgemagnus1) July 16, 2020

enltrSo between February and June, china's roller coaster economy is now quite clear. Where to next? The momentum of growth will almost certainly slow from this bounce and is contingent on stimulus. Aggregate financing is growing 3 x as fast as GDP. So watch this space esp. ends

- George Magnus (@georgemagnus1) July 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.39am BST

block-time published-time 10.59am BST

The UK is gearing up for a record-breaking year for government debt sales.

The Treasury announced this morning that the Debt Management Office will raise £385bn through sales of gilts, from April to November this year -- more than in any year before.

The DMO had previously been aiming to raise £275bn in April to August, so this implies another £110bn will be raised in September to November.

The Treasury adds:

The higher volume of issuance seen so far this year due to COVID-19 is not expected to persist over the final four months of the year.

Yesterday, chancellor Rishi Sunak warned of 'tough choices' to address the deficit, which is going to hit a peacetime record in 2020-21.

But with bond yields around record lows, the UK can borrow for a decade at just 0.15% per year. That suggests it's a good time to fund long-term investment projects.

enltrPandemics are pricey things. pic.twitter.com/QHN6b7HE2x

- Duncan Weldon (@DuncanWeldon) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 10.38am BST

Covid-19 has also taken a chunk out of Europe's trade surplus.

Exports from the EU shrank by 29.7% in May, year-on-year, to (EURO)129.8bn. France and Greece suffered the biggest plunges, according to new data from Eurostat this morning.

Imports from the rest of the world also shrank, by 26.2% to (EURO)122.6bn.

As a result, the EU recorded a (EURO)7.1bn surplus in trade in goods with the rest of the world in May 2020, compared with (EURO)18.6bn in May 2019.

The EU's trade surplus with the UK has also narrowed this year.

In January to May, exports to Britain from European Union members are down 22.2%, to (EURO)107.4bn from (EURO)138.1bn in the first five months of 2019.

Imports into the EU from the UK are down 16.9%, to (EURO)68.9bn from (EURO)82.9bn.

This has shrunk the EU-UK trade balance from (EURO)55.2bn to (EURO)38.5bn.  You can see the data here.

block-time published-time 10.19am BST

Heineken revenues slump in lockdown

Over in Amsterdam, brewing giant Heineken's revenues have turned sour due to the Covid-19 crisis.

Heineken has reported that revenues slumped by 16.4% in the first half of 2020, as pubs, bars and restaurants across the globe were locked down to slow the virus's spread.

Shares in Heineken are down 3% this morning, as it said beer volumes had "started to gradually recover into June" after hitting their lowest point in April.

William Ryder, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown,  says Heineken's reliance on bars and restaurants left it badly exposed to the pandemic.

People have been enjoying a pint since the dawn of agriculture, and they're not going to stop any time soon. This summer has been painful for Heineken, and the balance sheet may force some hard decisions in the future, but in the long run we think they'll do just fine.

The brands are still strong and, though it may take some time, once the pubs get back into full swing profits should pick back up."

block-time published-time 10.06am BST

The Central district of Hong Kong today Photograph: Anthony Wallace/AFP/Getty Images

Hong Kong's stock market also had a rough day, dropping 2% - its worst drop in a month.

Neil Wilson of Markets.com reckons geopolitical jitters are hitting stocks:

US-China tensions are bubbling away - plans by the White House to impose travel restrictions on millions of Chinese Communist party members is the latest in the saga.

block-time published-time 9.57am BST

The markets continue to demonstrate a one step forward, one step back behavioural pattern,says Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell.

"Weighing on global markets was new data from China which showed its economy returned to growth in the second quarter of 2020, but domestic consumption and investment remained weak.

"On the UK market, technology, miners and consumer stocks were the main culprits for the index retreating. Energy, telecoms and utilities were the only sectors making any progress.

block-time published-time 9.51am BST

European stock markets are being dragged down today too.

The main indices are all in the red, with Britain's FTSE 100 losing 0.8% or 50 points at 6243.

Medical devices firm Smith & Nephew (-3.5%), online supermarket Ocado  (-2.8%) and fashion group Burberry  (-2.5%) are among the fallers in London.

The EU-wide Stoxx 600 is down 1%, with losses in Paris, Frankfurt, Milan and Madrid.

European stock markets this morning Photograph: Refinitiv

The sell-off in China is spooking the City a little, with concerns that relations between Washington and Beijing may be weakening.

Yesterday, markets had rallied sharply on hopes for a Covid-19 medical breakthrough , with reports that Oxford's vaccine is showing good results.

Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, spies a tug-of-war between vaccine optimism and geopolitical angst:

"Progress on vaccines and drug treatments is one of the reasons we retain a positive outlook on equities, as it helps underpin the case for controlling the virus without a return to full lockdowns.

However, we continue to see geopolitical risks generating volatility, including the US election and US-China tensions."

block-time published-time 9.44am BST

Ironically, China's better-than-expected growth in the last quarter could also be hurting stocks today.

The economic rebound in Q2 could encourage Beijing to tighten policy, having hiked government spending and poured money into the economy to ward off the slump.

That splurge has helped to drive equities up, so some traders may be tempted to take profits while they can.....

Nathan Chow, economist at DBS Bank in Singapore, explains:

Policy will remain supportive, but the pace of loosening may moderate given the strong credit expansion of the past months and the recent market surge.

block-time published-time 9.17am BST

Today's slump means China's stock market has now lost over 7% since Monday, when it hit a five-year high.

The CSI 300 over the last decade Photograph: Refinitiv

But remarkably, the CSI 300 index is still up 10% this year, following a surge since late March that fuelled fears of a stock market bubble.

block-time published-time 9.04am BST

China's stock market suffers worst fall since February

Oof! China's stock market has just suffered its worst one-day fall in five months.

The CSI 300 benchmark index has tumbled by 4.8% today to a 10-day low, as a burst of selling rattled the exchanges.

As this chart shows, we've not seen such a big fall since Chinese investors returned from the Lunar New Year break on 3rd February (as the Covid-19 crisis was raging).

China's CSI 300 stock index Photograph: Refinitiv

That may sound like a surprising response to China dodging a recession today with 3.2% growth in April-June.

But clearly the decline in retail sales has caused serious jitters - suggesting that households are still too nervous to spend heavily in the shops.

Alicia García Herrero,  chief economist for Asia Pacific at Natixis, says Chinese consumption looks weak, with retail sales down 3.9% in the second quarter.

enltrEven with positive GDP growth?... the reality is that the message is not positive: consumption is not back nor is disposable income @YuanTalks https://t.co/A3IcqyWmfr

- Alicia GarciaHerrero (@Aligarciaherrer) July 16, 2020

Consumer-focused firms and technology companies led today's rout:

UK China CSI 300 by sector, July 16 2020 Photograph: Refinitiv

Beijing's stimulus measures seem to be boosting manufacturing, but not feeding through to consumption. As Tapas  Strickland, an economist at National Australia Bank, put it:

"Maybe today there's some kind of realisation that while the industrial side of the economy is really being driven by fiscal stimulus, the consumer side of the economy is a bit more problematic,"

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.09am BST

block-time published-time 8.44am BST

China : We'll take necessary measures over Huawei ban

China has also hit back at the UK for banning Huawei from its superfast 5G mobile network.

In a stern warning, the commerce ministry says the decision will make China warier of investing in the UK, and pledged to take measures in response....

Reuters has the details:

Britain's "discriminatory" ban on Huawei has severely damaged China's investment confidence in the country, China's commerce ministry said on Thursday, adding it will take necessary measures to defend Chinese firms' legal rights.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Tuesday ordered Huawei equipment to be purged completely from Britain's 5G network by the end of 2027.

enltrThe spokesman of Ministry of Business said, China will take necessary measure to retaliate UK blocking Huawei 5G.

- Timothy Chou (@ChouTi1982) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 8.40am BST

This chart from Bloomberg shows how China's economy returned to growth in April-June, but still weak in historic terms:

block-time published-time 8.34am BST

Stephen Innes, Chief Global Markets Strategist at AxiCorp, has put his finger on the problem with today's Chinese economic data -- consumers aren't really spending yet.

China's Q2 GDP growth beat consensus expectation, which is unambiguously positive for risk sentiment. But its what under the hood that matters most.

China's economic data for June and Q2 show that it's easier for it to normalize the supply side of the economy with industrial production +4.8% y/y, than the demand side with retail sales -1.8% y/y, after the covid-19 shock.

No matter how much stimulus and fiscal sugar you try to entice consumers with, they will not leave their apartment and go on a spending spree until they feel confident the landscape is virus-free.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.35am BST

block-time published-time 8.30am BST

China GDP: What the economists say

Louis Kuijs, head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics, is optimistic that China's economy will avoid shrinking again this year, due to solid domestic demand.

Kuijs explains ( via the FT ):

In China the story is very reliant on what is happening domestically.

The momentum should be strong enough to make it quite unlikely [we] see another fall in GDP.

Rodrigo Catril, a foreign exchange strategist at NAB, confirms the 3.2% jump in growth is stronger than expected..... but the drop in retail sales in June is a worry.

"While in general it's fair to say that the numbers beat expectations, what the numbers also reveal is that we're seeing that the China consumer remains behind in terms of the recovery story.

Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank has plucked out some of the highlights:

China's Q2 GDP surprised on the upside with a reading of +3.2% yoy (vs. +2.4% yoy expected). Only 2 out of 28 economists on Bloomberg had pencilled in an above +3% print.

Bloomberg highlighted that public investment swung to growth of +2.1% yoy in 1H, after contracting in the first 5 months. China's 1H GDP growth now stands at -1.6% yoy (vs. -2.4% yoy expected). Alongside GDP we saw the other main data releases for June with industrial production rising in line with expectations at +4.8% yoy while YtD fixed asset investment came in at -3.1% yoy (vs. -3.3% yoy expected).

Iikka Korhonen, head of Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition, is also concerned by weak consumer demand:

enltrYear-on-year growth 3.2% in Q2/20, but GDP still 1.6% smaller than in Q4/19. Consumer demand remains weak. (And yes, usual caveats about the Chinese GDP numbers. Our own estimate tomorrow.) China's Economy Returns to Growth Amid Global Virus Struggle [" https://t.co/zx72sPXgXY "]

- Iikka Korhonen (@IikkaKorhonen) July 16, 2020

block-time published-time 8.13am BST

Introduction: China returns to growth     Pedestrians in the Central Business District (CBD) in Beijing Photograph: Wang Zhao/AFP/Getty Images

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business.

China has become the first major economy to return to growth since the Covid-19 pandemic began. But, a surprise drop in retail sales in June suggests there is more economic turbulence ahead.

Chines GDP grew by 3.2% in April-June, on an annual basis, the latest government figures show. That follows the 6.8% contraction in January-March as its economy shut down.

It's still much weaker than the 6%+ growth which China was averaging before the pandemic, but Beijing policymakers will be relieved that their stimulus efforts appear to be feeding through to companies and consumers.

enltr #China grew 3.2% in Q2 YoY, recovering from record 6.8% contraction in Q1. Has avoided recession. But debt problems piling up. In hl 2020, lenders issued record $1.7tn in fresh loans. In past, China outgrew bad debts, but that's unlikely to work this time. https://t.co/0gAjobxdY5 pic.twitter.com/mJgqyLbvfB

- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) July 16, 2020

But despite this growth, China's economy is still 1.6% smaller than at the end of 2019.

Liu Aihua, spokeswoman for the country's National Statistics Bureau, told reporters tht China is enjoying "a momentum of restorative growth and gradual recovery".

"We are confident on the economic recovery in the second half of this year,"

But Liu also warned there are "mounting external risks and challenges", as Covid-19 cases continue to rise at a record pace.

Industrial output jumped by 4.8% in June, as factories stepped up production. Investment in property development recovered too. China's service production index increased 2.3%.

But retail sales have taken an unexpected dive, sliding by 1.8% year-on-year in June. That suggests Chinese consumer are still cautious, which could signal a weak rebound in the months ahead.

enltrChina GDP grew +3.2% in Q2 (April-June) after contracting by -6.8% in Q1, avoiding a recession. Driven by industrial production +4.8% in June, +4.4% in May. But retail sales -1.8% in June, -2.8% in May. Fixed asset investment -3.1% in Jan-June. https://t.co/sww2iz8wsW

- Linda Yueh (@lindayueh) July 16, 2020

Reaction to follow...

Also coming up today

Britain's unemployment crisis has deepened this morning, with the Office for National Statistics reporting that 649,000 people have dropped off payrolls since March.

With millions of people on furlough, or working fewer hours, pay packets are suffering too.  The ONS reports that average total pay (including bonuses) among employees fell by 0.3% in the March to May quarter,  for the first time since April to June 2014. Regular pay growth (excluding bonuses) slowed to 0.7%.

And if you account for inflation, basic pay is falling as well - meaning significant pain for households:

UK earnings data Photograph: ONS

Our UK Coronavirus blog has more details:

Related:  Coronavirus UK: 649,000 people lose their jobs during lockdown - live updates

It's a busy day generally, with the European Central Bank's governing council setting monetary policy today, and new US retail sales and unemployment data.

The agenda •10am BST: Eurozone trade balance for May•12.15pm BST: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks on "Everyday economics: the importance of financial education post-Covid•12.45pm BST: European Central Bank interest rate decision•1.30pm BST: European Central Bank press conference•1.30pm BST: US weekly jobless figures•1.30pm BST: US retail sales for June

10am BST: Eurozone trade balance for May

12.15pm BST: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks on "Everyday economics: the importance of financial education post-Covid

12.45pm BST: European Central Bank interest rate decision

1.30pm BST: European Central Bank press conference

1.30pm BST: US weekly jobless figures

1.30pm BST: US retail sales for June

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.18am BST

4571 2020-07-19T07:15:00Z true 2020-07-16T07:18:53Z false false 2020-07-16T15:41:32Z false UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/eb57b

false true https://media.guim.co.uk/1019319a02a8621a63b10dcfb554753303dad9a6/0_190_3454_2073/500.jpg false en true And finally, European stock markets have ended the day with modest losses. In London, the FTSE 100 has ended 0.67% lower, losing 41 points to 6250, after a subdued day (as summarised here) Stocks particularly vulnerable to the Covid-19 crisis were among the fallers, with manufacturing group Melrose down 4%, hotels and eateries chain Whitbread losing 3.1% and catering supplier Compass losing 2.5%. Although China's sliding stock market caught the City's eye, as did the UK and US unemployment numbers, it was a somewhat dull day. The European Central Bank supplying few fireworks, with its governing council pledging to maintain stimulus measures - and quietly hoping Europe's politicians deliver the much-needed Recovery Fund. David Madden of CMC Markets sums up the day: Stocks handed back some of yesterday's gains amid a sluggish trading session. The mixed data from China overnight ensured that equities got off to a negative start. On a quarterly basis, the Chinese economy grew by 11.5%, and that was a massive rebound from -9.8% registered in the first quarter. The June retail sales figures showed there was negative growth of 1.8%, and that undershot the 0.3% forecast. Some people questioned the headline growth reading in light of the poor retail sales numbers - which have been in territory in the quarter in question - hence why stocks didn't drive higher on the back of the growth number. The uninteresting update from the ECB didn't inspire traders. Rates were kept on hold, and so was the PEPP - meeting forecasts. Christine Lagarde, ECB chief, said the rate of the bond buying has eased a little, but she added that unless there is a big surprise in terms of an economic rebound, the full stimulus package will be used. European governments are divided over the (EURO)750 billion rescue fund, as some are in favour the 2:1 grant to loan ratio, while others are opposed. Getting approval would be crucial to the region's recovery. Ms Lagarde said the ECB is working on the assumption that it will be approved. We'll find out over the weekend. Goodnight! GW More bad news for the UK economy -- 1,000 jobs could be at risk at Pizza Express, as the restaurant chain prepares to close up to 75 outlets. My colleague Sarah Butler has the details: The restaurant chain is lining up a company voluntary arrangement (CVA) - an insolvency process which allows it to exit stores and cut rents - linked to talks with bondholders over its heavy debt burden. Founded in 1965 in Soho, London, Pizza Express is now ubiquitous on British high streets, with 470 UK restaurants and a further 150 outlets internationally. It employs 8,000 people in the UK. Hony Capital, a Chinese company, bought Pizza Express in 2014 in a £900m deal, made shortly after the restaurant chain opened its first branch in Beijing. The investment firm hoped to drive the growth of Pizza Express in China. But Hony could lose control of Pizza Express to bondholders under a debt-for-equity swap.... The pandemic has also shown the dangers of loading a company up with debt. It can boost profits and payouts for private equity owners - but if your sales dry up, you can't service the borrowing any more... Time for a quick recap. China's economy has returned to growth, with official figures showing GDP grew by 3.2% year-on-year in April to June. Industrial production strengthened, encouraging Beijing officials to predict they were "confident on the economic recovery in the second half of this year". Some economists said China appears to have turned the corner, and could even be enjoying the fabled V-shaped recovery. But in a worrying sign, retail sales fell steadily during the quarter, down by 1.6% year-on-year in March. This appeared to spook traders, sending the Chinese stock market reeling by 4.8% today - its worst slump in five months. The latest US jobless figure also cast a shadow, with 1.3m Americans filing new unemployment benefit claims last week. Analysts fear that the recovery in the labor market is fading. The European Central Bank said it was worried about a second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic in America, as it left interest rates on hold at record lows. ECB president Christine Lagarde also predicted the pandemic would cause significant changes to global trade, with companies shifting supply chains closer to home. Dutch brewer Heikenen became the latest company to suffer from the lockdown, reporting a slump in sales this year as pubs and bars were closed. Britain's unemployment crisis also worsened, with more people leaving payrolls in June and real wages shrinking The US stock market has opened in the red, with the Dow Jones industrial average losing 162 points or 0.6% to 26,707. Wall Street had rallied yesterday, on optimism that Covid-19 vaccine work was going well. Today, though, investors are digesting the latest high weekly jobless figures, the slump in China's stock market, and the accelerating pandemic in the US. ECB president Christine Lagarde has also predicted that Covid-19 will have a major impact on global trade, for two reasons. First, there is the mechanical impact. As the pandemic rolls around the world, with some nations worse hit than others, export-led are suffering as potential customers are locked down. Some of those countries who were relying on trade are having to reconsider, and to rely more on their domestic market rather than exports. Secondly, Lagarde predicts a "cultural, sociological, and maybe philosophical change" from the pandemic -- with individuals and companies both giving more value to goods made locally. Consumers will be more attentive to the origin of goods, the place of manufacturing. And corporates themselves, who had been largely dependent on far away supply chains, or very complicated and fragmented supply chains, suddenly rediscover the benefit of proximity. The rise in Covid-19 cases in the US is worrying the European Central Bank. ECB chief Christine Lagarde was just asked about the surge of infections in America in recent weeks, at her press conference in Frankfurt. She replies that "of course it is a concern" - a concern for the livelihoods of people, the lives of people. It's something which the ECB's governing council discussed during its meeting this week, as it assessed the macroeconomic outlook. We have taken account of the environment in which the euro are zone operates We have taken into account the potential risk of a second wave and a measures that could be taken as a result of that. The latest data shows that Covid-19 cases are now increasing in 41 of America's 50 states, with nearly 3.5m people now having been infected. Our US liveblog has full details: Worryingly, the recovery in US unemployment seems to have fizzled out. As Bloomberg's Joe Weisenthal shows, the number of people losing their jobs and filing fresh welfare claims has only been falling slowly for weeks. There was virtually no improvement at all last week. That suggests alarming churn in the US economy, with swathes of workers losing their jobs each week. Before the crisis, the initial jobless claims figure was hovering in the low 200,000s. It's now hovering around 1.3m.... Economists are disappointed that so many Americans are being forced to file new claims for unemployment welfare, four months after the lockdown began. Here's some snap reaction to the initial claims report: Newsflash: 1.3 million Americans filed new claims for unemployment support last week, as the Covid-19 pandemic forced some states to lock down again. The weekly initial jobless claims total barely fell week-on-week - dipping to 1.3m from 1.31m a week ago. This suggests little progress in healing the US labor market - with many companies continuing to lay staff off. That could be due to weak demand, or because they were forced to shut following coronavirus spikes across the country. The number of Americans filing 'continued claims' for jobless suppport also barely shifted, coming in at 17.338m from 17.76m a week ago. The initial jobless claims total has now exceeded one million for every week since March - something that had never happened before this year. Economists reckon the European Central Bank is slipping into 'wait and see' mode, while it assesses the state of the eurozone economy. The ECB also wants to see the results of tomorrow's EU summit on the Recovery Fund. Can politicians square their differences and agree a (EURO)750bn package, or will arguments about shared debts and whether to hand out grants or loans scupper it? Anna Stupnytska of Fidelity International says: "As the ECB switches to the 'wait-and-see' mode for the rest of the summer, the focus shift towards the Recovery Fund and the long-term budget. This week's Summit might not bring a final agreement just yet, but any progress on the most contentious issues, including governance and conditionality, would send a strong signal on the prospects for the breakthrough in the near future." Sam Cooper, Vice President of Market Risk Solutions at Silicon Valley Bank, agrees: "The decision to leave interest rates unchanged and keep the powder dry was no surprise to FX markets. The main area of focus remains on the upcoming leaders meeting in Brussels and the form in which the blocwide support package will take, until then we can expect the euro to keep testing it's recent upward momentum, particularly against the dollar. " Newsflash from Frankfurt: The European Central Bank has left eurozone interest rates at their current record lows. That means the headline rate remains just 0%, with banks charged negative interest rates of -0.5% for leaving cash in the ECB's vaults. The ECB is also maintaining its current Covid-19 stimulus package, and repeated its pledge to keep buying assets until next summer: It says: The Governing Council will continue its purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) with a total envelope of (EURO)1,350 billion. These purchases contribute to easing the overall monetary policy stance, thereby helping to offset the pandemic-related downward shift in the projected path of inflation. The purchases will continue to be conducted in a flexible manner over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions. This allows the Governing Council to effectively stave off risks to the smooth transmission of monetary policy. The Governing Council will conduct net asset purchases under the PEPP until at least the end of June 2021 and, in any case, until it judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over. ING economist Iris Pang has hiked her growth forecasts for China, while also warning that the recovery could be bumpy. She writes: The biggest risk we see is the technology war, not just with the US but also with the rest of the world. China has put a lot of money into R&D in advanced technology to achieve self-reliance on the most advanced semiconductor chips but it will take time to yield results. But even so....ING have now raised the GDP forecasts upwards to 0.5% YoY for 3Q20 and 5.0%YoY for 4Q20, from our previous forecasts of -0.5% YoY and +4.5% YoY, respectively. The full year 2020 forecast is revised upwards to 0.48% due to: Better foreign demand from countries coming out of Covid-19 lockdowns Faster implementation of infrastructure investment projects Better job market situation in the manufacturing sector when foreign demand improves Ed Moya of OANDA thinks investors are being too pessimistic about the drop in Chinese retail sales: China's economy is back into growth territory following steady stimulus and relatively strong success in battling COVID-19. The rebound in China however is mostly on the industrial side and not the consumer. The Chinese retail data however is not as bad it seems, as automobiles, catering, jewelry, and petroleum goods were the main categories that posted declines. The decline in cars, which is about 10% of the retail sales value was mainly attributed to the strong base it had a year ago. Reuters is reporting that Nissan will cut its car production worldwide sharply this year, due to the pandemic. It's another sign that the world economy is weak, with the lockdown denting demand for travel, consumers nervous about big purchases, and production lost to factory shutdowns. Here's the story: Nissan Motor Co is planning a 30% year-on-year cut in global vehicle production through December as falling demand due to the coronavirus complicates its efforts to recover profitability, two sources with knowledge of the matter have told Reuters. Japan's No. 2 automaker plans to produce around 2.6 million vehicles between April and December, down from 3.7 million during the same period last year, the sources said. Global automakers are struggling after factories were shuttered earlier this year to stem the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. Car dealerships were also closed in many countries, pummelling vehicle sales in March through May, although the fall in sales slowed in June. Nissan employs around 6,000 people at its UK factory in Sunderland, where one worker tested positive for Covid-19 this week. Here's my colleague Richard Partington on today's worrying UK jobs data: Paid employment in Britain has plunged by almost 650,000 employees since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic in March, official figures show, as growing numbers of companies cut jobs. According to the Office for National Statistics, the number of payroll employees fell by 2.2%, or 649,000, from March to June. However, it said the rate of decline in employment slowed in June compared with May. In a reflection of the shock to the economy during lockdown as businesses were forced to temporarily close, the latest snapshot showed the number of hours worked in Britain plummeted between March to May 2019 and March to May 2020 at a record pace. Hours worked each week dropped by 175.3m, or 16.7%, to 877.1m in total, marking the steepest fall since records began in 1971.... More here: Analysts at trading firm XM also see a V-shaped recovery in China's GDP figures today: As far as V-shaped recoveries go, China's economic recuperation from the coronavirus couldn't look more V-shaped. Gross domestic product (GDP) jumped by 11.5% over the quarter to June after collapsing by almost 10% in the first quarter. Year-on-year growth also returned to positive territory, with GDP rising by 3.2%, well above forecasts of 2.5%. But the markets continue to shrug. US crude oil, a decent gauge of growth prospects, is down 1% today at $40.74 per barrel. XM, like other economists today, blame the surprise drop in Chinese retail sales in June.... But rather than be reassured by the upbeat headline numbers, investors finally seem to be touching base with reality as the warning signs that the global recovery will be a bumpy one continue to grow. Up until now, the resurgence of virus infections in several countries had failed to dent hopes of a speedy and robust recovery. But the slow pickup in domestic demand in China appears to have dealt a major blow to those expectations. Retail sales in China fell on an annual basis for the fifth straight month in June, suggesting consumers are not yet feeling confident enough to revert to their pre-pandemic spending habits. Getting back to the Chinese growth figures, economist George Magnus argues that China is enjoying a V-shaped recovery. He's written an interesting Twitter thread analysing the 3.2% annual growth recorded in April-June: The UK is gearing up for a record-breaking year for government debt sales. The Treasury announced this morning that the Debt Management Office will raise £385bn through sales of gilts, from April to November this year -- more than in any year before. The DMO had previously been aiming to raise £275bn in April to August, so this implies another £110bn will be raised in September to November. The Treasury adds: The higher volume of issuance seen so far this year due to COVID-19 is not expected to persist over the final four months of the year. Yesterday, chancellor Rishi Sunak warned of 'tough choices' to address the deficit, which is going to hit a peacetime record in 2020-21. But with bond yields around record lows, the UK can borrow for a decade at just 0.15% per year. That suggests it's a good time to fund long-term investment projects. Covid-19 has also taken a chunk out of Europe's trade surplus. Exports from the EU shrank by 29.7% in May, year-on-year, to (EURO)129.8bn. France and Greece suffered the biggest plunges, according to new data from Eurostat this morning. Imports from the rest of the world also shrank, by 26.2% to (EURO)122.6bn. As a result, the EU recorded a (EURO)7.1bn surplus in trade in goods with the rest of the world in May 2020, compared with (EURO)18.6bn in May 2019. The EU's trade surplus with the UK has also narrowed this year. In January to May, exports to Britain from European Union members are down 22.2%, to (EURO)107.4bn from (EURO)138.1bn in the first five months of 2019. Imports into the EU from the UK are down 16.9%, to (EURO)68.9bn from (EURO)82.9bn. This has shrunk the EU-UK trade balance from (EURO)55.2bn to (EURO)38.5bn. You can see the data here. Over in Amsterdam, brewing giant Heineken's revenues have turned sour due to the Covid-19 crisis. Heineken has reported that revenues slumped by 16.4% in the first half of 2020, as pubs, bars and restaurants across the globe were locked down to slow the virus's spread. Shares in Heineken are down 3% this morning, as it said beer volumes had "started to gradually recover into June" after hitting their lowest point in April. William Ryder, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says Heineken's reliance on bars and restaurants left it badly exposed to the pandemic. People have been enjoying a pint since the dawn of agriculture, and they're not going to stop any time soon. This summer has been painful for Heineken, and the balance sheet may force some hard decisions in the future, but in the long run we think they'll do just fine. The brands are still strong and, though it may take some time, once the pubs get back into full swing profits should pick back up." Hong Kong's stock market also had a rough day, dropping 2% - its worst drop in a month. Neil Wilson of Markets.com reckons geopolitical jitters are hitting stocks: US-China tensions are bubbling away - plans by the White House to impose travel restrictions on millions of Chinese Communist party members is the latest in the saga. The markets continue to demonstrate a one step forward, one step back behavioural pattern,says Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell. "Weighing on global markets was new data from China which showed its economy returned to growth in the second quarter of 2020, but domestic consumption and investment remained weak. "On the UK market, technology, miners and consumer stocks were the main culprits for the index retreating. Energy, telecoms and utilities were the only sectors making any progress. European stock markets are being dragged down today too. The main indices are all in the red, with Britain's FTSE 100 losing 0.8% or 50 points at 6243. Medical devices firm Smith & Nephew (-3.5%), online supermarket Ocado (-2.8%) and fashion group Burberry (-2.5%) are among the fallers in London. The EU-wide Stoxx 600 is down 1%, with losses in Paris, Frankfurt, Milan and Madrid. The sell-off in China is spooking the City a little, with concerns that relations between Washington and Beijing may be weakening. Yesterday, markets had rallied sharply on hopes for a Covid-19 medical breakthrough , with reports that Oxford's vaccine is showing good results. Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, spies a tug-of-war between vaccine optimism and geopolitical angst: "Progress on vaccines and drug treatments is one of the reasons we retain a positive outlook on equities, as it helps underpin the case for controlling the virus without a return to full lockdowns. However, we continue to see geopolitical risks generating volatility, including the US election and US-China tensions." Ironically, China's better-than-expected growth in the last quarter could also be hurting stocks today. The economic rebound in Q2 could encourage Beijing to tighten policy, having hiked government spending and poured money into the economy to ward off the slump. That splurge has helped to drive equities up, so some traders may be tempted to take profits while they can..... Nathan Chow, economist at DBS Bank in Singapore, explains: Policy will remain supportive, but the pace of loosening may moderate given the strong credit expansion of the past months and the recent market surge. Today's slump means China's stock market has now lost over 7% since Monday, when it hit a five-year high. But remarkably, the CSI 300 index is still up 10% this year, following a surge since late March that fuelled fears of a stock market bubble. Oof! China's stock market has just suffered its worst one-day fall in five months. The CSI 300 benchmark index has tumbled by 4.8% today to a 10-day low, as a burst of selling rattled the exchanges. As this chart shows, we've not seen such a big fall since Chinese investors returned from the Lunar New Year break on 3rd February (as the Covid-19 crisis was raging). That may sound like a surprising response to China dodging a recession today with 3.2% growth in April-June. But clearly the decline in retail sales has caused serious jitters - suggesting that households are still too nervous to spend heavily in the shops. Alicia García Herrero, chief economist for Asia Pacific at Natixis, says Chinese consumption looks weak, with retail sales down 3.9% in the second quarter. Consumer-focused firms and technology companies led today's rout: Beijing's stimulus measures seem to be boosting manufacturing, but not feeding through to consumption. As Tapas Strickland, an economist at National Australia Bank, put it: "Maybe today there's some kind of realisation that while the industrial side of the economy is really being driven by fiscal stimulus, the consumer side of the economy is a bit more problematic," China has also hit back at the UK for banning Huawei from its superfast 5G mobile network. In a stern warning, the commerce ministry says the decision will make China warier of investing in the UK, and pledged to take measures in response.... Reuters has the details: Britain's "discriminatory" ban on Huawei has severely damaged China's investment confidence in the country, China's commerce ministry said on Thursday, adding it will take necessary measures to defend Chinese firms' legal rights. Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Tuesday ordered Huawei equipment to be purged completely from Britain's 5G network by the end of 2027. This chart from Bloomberg shows how China's economy returned to growth in April-June, but still weak in historic terms: Stephen Innes, Chief Global Markets Strategist at AxiCorp, has put his finger on the problem with today's Chinese economic data -- consumers aren't really spending yet. China's Q2 GDP growth beat consensus expectation, which is unambiguously positive for risk sentiment. But its what under the hood that matters most. China's economic data for June and Q2 show that it's easier for it to normalize the supply side of the economy with industrial production +4.8% y/y, than the demand side with retail sales -1.8% y/y, after the covid-19 shock. No matter how much stimulus and fiscal sugar you try to entice consumers with, they will not leave their apartment and go on a spending spree until they feel confident the landscape is virus-free. Louis Kuijs, head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics, is optimistic that China's economy will avoid shrinking again this year, due to solid domestic demand. Kuijs explains (via the FT): In China the story is very reliant on what is happening domestically. The momentum should be strong enough to make it quite unlikely [we] see another fall in GDP. Rodrigo Catril, a foreign exchange strategist at NAB, confirms the 3.2% jump in growth is stronger than expected..... but the drop in retail sales in June is a worry. "While in general it's fair to say that the numbers beat expectations, what the numbers also reveal is that we're seeing that the China consumer remains behind in terms of the recovery story. Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank has plucked out some of the highlights: China's Q2 GDP surprised on the upside with a reading of +3.2% yoy (vs. +2.4% yoy expected). Only 2 out of 28 economists on Bloomberg had pencilled in an above +3% print. Bloomberg highlighted that public investment swung to growth of +2.1% yoy in 1H, after contracting in the first 5 months. China's 1H GDP growth now stands at -1.6% yoy (vs. -2.4% yoy expected). Alongside GDP we saw the other main data releases for June with industrial production rising in line with expectations at +4.8% yoy while YtD fixed asset investment came in at -3.1% yoy (vs. -3.3% yoy expected). Iikka Korhonen, head of Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition, is also concerned by weak consumer demand: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. China has become the first major economy to return to growth since the Covid-19 pandemic began. But, a surprise drop in retail sales in June suggests there is more economic turbulence ahead. Chines GDP grew by 3.2% in April-June, on an annual basis, the latest government figures show. That follows the 6.8% contraction in January-March as its economy shut down. It's still much weaker than the 6%+ growth which China was averaging before the pandemic, but Beijing policymakers will be relieved that their stimulus efforts appear to be feeding through to companies and consumers. But despite this growth, China's economy is still 1.6% smaller than at the end of 2019. Liu Aihua, spokeswoman for the country's National Statistics Bureau, told reporters tht China is enjoying "a momentum of restorative growth and gradual recovery". "We are confident on the economic recovery in the second half of this year," But Liu also warned there are "mounting external risks and challenges", as Covid-19 cases continue to rise at a record pace. Industrial output jumped by 4.8% in June, as factories stepped up production. Investment in property development recovered too. China's service production index increased 2.3%. But retail sales have taken an unexpected dive, sliding by 1.8% year-on-year in June. That suggests Chinese consumer are still cautious, which could signal a weak rebound in the months ahead. Reaction to follow... Also coming up today Britain's unemployment crisis has deepened this morning, with the Office for National Statistics reporting that 649,000 people have dropped off payrolls since March. With millions of people on furlough, or working fewer hours, pay packets are suffering too. The ONS reports that average total pay (including bonuses) among employees fell by 0.3% in the March to May quarter, for the first time since April to June 2014. Regular pay growth (excluding bonuses) slowed to 0.7%. And if you account for inflation, basic pay is falling as well - meaning significant pain for households: Our UK Coronavirus blog has more details: It's a busy day generally, with the European Central Bank's governing council setting monetary policy today, and new US retail sales and unemployment data. The agenda 10am BST: Eurozone trade balance for May 12.15pm BST: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks on "Everyday economics: the importance of financial education post-Covid 12.45pm BST: European Central Bank interest rate decision 1.30pm BST: European Central Bank press conference 1.30pm BST: US weekly jobless figures 1.30pm BST: US retail sales for June 27760 false false  Graeme Wearden       The skyline of the Beijing's Central Business District during the evening rush hour        European stock markets tonight        The New York Stock Exchange on Wall Street.        China retail sales details            The Central district of Hong Kong today        European stock markets this morning        The CSI 300 over the last decade        China's CSI 300 stock index        UK China CSI 300 by sector, July 16 2020         Pedestrians in the Central Business District (CBD) in Beijing        UK earnings data