block-time published-time 7.59am GMT

End-of-day summary

That is where we will leave the live blog for Wednesday. We will be back with all the latest news tomorrow, but here’s some of what you might have missed today:

•New South Wales recorded three cases of locally-acquired Covid-19, including an airport bus driver from south-west Sydney and two people in their 60s and 70s from the northern beaches. The two people so far have not been linked to the bus driver, and an alert has been issued for a number of venues in Sydney the pair visited.•Victoria’s attorney general, Jill Hennessy, announced her resignation , saying she wanted to spend more time with her daughters after a tough year. She will remain in parliament and has said she will contest the 2022 election.•Flood warnings have been issued down the coast of NSW as heavy rain continues to pelt the state.•The Australian government has called in the World Trade Organisation to adjudicate in the dispute with China over barley imports.•Former Greens leader Bob Brownwas arrested for the second time in two days at an anti-logging protest.

New South Wales recorded three cases of locally-acquired Covid-19, including an airport bus driver from south-west Sydney and two people in their 60s and 70s from the northern beaches. The two people so far have not been linked to the bus driver, and an alert has been issued for a number of venues in Sydney the pair visited.

Victoria’s attorney general, Jill Hennessy, announced her resignation , saying she wanted to spend more time with her daughters after a tough year. She will remain in parliament and has said she will contest the 2022 election.

Flood warnings have been issued down the coast of NSW as heavy rain continues to pelt the state.

The Australian government has called in the World Trade Organisation to adjudicate in the dispute with China over barley imports.

Former Greens leader Bob Brownwas arrested for the second time in two days at an anti-logging protest.

Until tomorrow, stay safe.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.13am GMT

block-time published-time 7.47am GMT

The latest storm warning for Victoria.

enltr?? The Severe Thunderstorm Warning has been updated for parts of #Victoria.  Heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding is possible with severe storms. ?? Check the warning details here: https://t.co/PaNqdEJji4 pic.twitter.com/5mUcr9CIbW

— Bureau of Meteorology, Victoria (@BOM_Vic) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 7.18am GMT

Just to recap, there have been three new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 in New South Wales.

The first is a 45-year-old man who is a driver for aircrew at the airport  from south-west Sydney.

His family members have so far tested negative but contact tracing is still under way and they remain in isolation.

The other two are a man and a woman in their 70s and 60s from the northern beaches. So far these two new cases reported in the early evening on Wednesday are not connected to the driver, or any other known case, and contact tracing is under way.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.29am GMT

block-time published-time 6.57am GMT

Important to note there: the two new cases in NSW so far have not been linked back to the airport driver who tested positive.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.13am GMT

block-time published-time 6.55am GMT

NSW reports two new cases of local transmission

New South Wales Health has just issued an alert that two more people have tested positive to Covid-19.

The two people, a man in his 70s and a woman in her 60s live in Sydney’s northern beaches and there are no links at this stage to other known cases.

Contact tracing and urgent genome sequencing are under way, with genome sequencing results expected in the next 24 to 48 hours.

People who have attended the following venues are considered close contacts and should get tested and isolate for 14 days even if they receive a negative result:

•Palm Beach female change rooms – Sunday, 13 December 9-9.15 am•Coast Palm Beach Cafe, Palm Beach – Sunday, 13 December 10-11am•AvalonBowlo (bowling club), Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 3-5pm•Sneaky Grind Cafe, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 10.30-11am

Palm Beach female change rooms – Sunday, 13 December 9-9.15 am

Coast Palm Beach Cafe, Palm Beach – Sunday, 13 December 10-11am

AvalonBowlo (bowling club), Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 3-5pm

Sneaky Grind Cafe, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 10.30-11am

People who have visited the following venues should get tested and isolate until they receive a negative result:

•Woolworths, Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 12-5pm•Oliver’s Pie, Careel Shopping Village, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 9-9.15am

Woolworths, Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 12-5pm

Oliver’s Pie, Careel Shopping Village, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 9-9.15am

Everyone living in the northern beaches area should monitor for even the mildest of symptoms and come forward for testing immediately if they appear, then isolate until a negative result is received.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.31am GMT

block-time published-time 6.31am GMT

That’s a lot of rain.

enltr??Severe Weather Warning??for HEAVY RAINFALL. For people in Northern Rivers Forecast District. Highest rainfall totals from 9am to 5pm Wednesday: 217mm at Tuckurimba 199mm at Lismore 177mm Kunghur 143mm Tuncester 129mm Bodalla 103mm Goolmangar ??Warnings: https://t.co/QdEjsofvRd pic.twitter.com/Uic43WJyTy

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 6.26am GMT

Moderate Liberals Andrew Bragg and Tim Wilson have brushed off calls from within the government for a fresh inquiry into banks’ decisions to stop lending to coal companies.

My colleague Paul Karp has more here:

Related:  Liberal MPs pour cold water on inquiry backed by Frydenberg into bank lending for coal projects

block-time published-time 6.19am GMT

More than a dozen firefighting crews are battling a large blaze at a factory near Brisbane’s port, AAP reports.

The fire started about 2.30pm on Wednesday in a building on Gosport Street, Hemmant, which is understood to be a recycling plant.

A Queensland Fire and Emergency Services spokeswoman said:

There is lots of smoke coming out and signs of structural collapse.

A large plume of black smoke billowing from the fire can be seen from more than 15km away.

A smoke warning has been issued.

Police, 14 fire crews and paramedics remain at the scene.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.26am GMT

block-time published-time 6.12am GMT

Here’s my full report on why people shouldn’t be playing in the sea foam on the beaches of northern NSW and southern Queensland.

Related:  Sea snakes may be lurking in foam covering storm-lashed Australian beaches

block-time published-time 5.50am GMT

South Australia drops border registration requirement

South Australia’s police commissioner, Grant Stevens , has announced people arriving in the state from other states and territories will no longer need to have registered online to travel into South Australia, effective immediately.

Stevens said police would be drawn back from the airport and the borders. People travelling into South Australia at the airport would still be greeted by police and asked whether they have been overseas in the past 14 days, whether they have Covid-19 symptoms, or if they have been in contact with someone with Covid in the past 14 days.

But otherwise there will be no other limits on entering the state. People will no longer need to register their intent to visit SA online if coming from another state or territory in Australia.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.51am GMT

block-time published-time 5.35am GMT

Covid-positive Sydney driver 'attended football event'

NSW Health has provided the following information on the airport driver who tested positive for Covid-19 today:

The person, who lives in south-western Sydney, attended the following sporting event while infectious. Anyone at the event at the times indicated is considered a casual contact. However, as a precaution we are advising any adults who were present to get tested immediately and isolate until they receive a negative result. They should continue to monitor for symptoms and if any symptoms occur, get tested again. Children who were present should be monitored for symptoms and get tested if any symptoms occur.

Forest Rangers FC, Little Rangers session at Gannons Park, Pindari Rd and Isaac Street, Peakhurst – Friday 11 December 2020, 4.30pm-5.30pm

We expect there will be more location information released as NSW Health conducts contact tracing.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.01am GMT

block-time published-time 5.34am GMT

ABC is reporting that developers who demolished the historic Corkman pub in Carlton in 2016 have been sent to jail for a month for contempt of court.

According to the report, the pair were were jailed and fined $400,000 on top of the $1m already fined for failing to turn the site into a public park, as ordered by the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02am GMT

block-time published-time 5.26am GMT

The NSW State Emergency Service is warning people to avoid the Lismore CBD because of flash flooding.

enltrAvoid the #Lismore  CBD due to flash flooding. ?? If you require SES assistance including sandbags, call 132 500. If it is a life-threatening emergency call 000.

— NSW SES (@NSWSES) December 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.30am GMT

block-time published-time 5.17am GMT

The ACT is included in BOM’s storm warnings.

enltr?SEVERE THUNDERSTORM WARNING? for HEAVY, LOCALLY INTENSE RAINFALL. Warning current for much of central and eastern NSW and the ACT. 79mm recorded at Hillview in 1hr to 3:45pm. ??Warnings: https://t.co/JMN9fxJ0fo ???Rainfall Map: https://t.co/BFoLpO2vgz #ifitsfloodedforgetit pic.twitter.com/ScOp77Bdfe

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 5.08am GMT

Some more on the storms in NSW, which will cover almost the entirety of the coast of the state, from Queensland down to Victoria.

The predicted reprieve from heavy rain and flooding across swathes of NSW is unlikely to eventuate yet, with only the state’s far west expected to be spared from afternoon thunderstorms, AAP reports.

Lismore, in the state’s north, copped more than 100mm in two hours on Wednesday afternoon, with the State Emergency Service performing five flood rescues in just over an hour.

The downpour in Lismore comes as the Bureau of Meteorology issued a fresh warning for severe thunderstorms, with swathes of the state expected to be hit.

An erosion-damaged beach at Byron Bay this week. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

The warning zone stretches for almost the entire state – from Mungindi, near the Queensland border, to Tumbarumba, near the Victorian border.

Almost the entire coast will also be hit, with BOM issuing a separate warning for residents of the South Coast and parts of the northern rivers and the Snowy Mountains.

They’re expected to be hit with heavy rain, but it looks like they will escape the thunderstorms.

Only the state’s far west will be spared the drenching, which has been causing havoc for days.

Rock slides, bridge closures and even a yawning sinkhole in a residential Coffs Harbour street have been caused by the extreme weather event.

The deluge has also prompted widespread flooding around the northern rivers, with evacuation orders remaining in place in Condong and Tumbulgum, north of Murwillumbah.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.29am GMT

block-time published-time 4.59am GMT

There’s now a major flooding warning issued for Orara River at Coutt’s Crossing.

enltr??UPDATE: #Major #Flood  Warning issued for #OraraRiver  at #CouttsCrossing.  #Major  flooding is possible at Coutts Crossing from Wednesday evening. Minor flooding is occurring at Glenreagh. See https://t.co/zp304ysZJt  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES.  #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/9RoZAtXWdk

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 4.56am GMT

There are a lot of ministerial resignation statements, but some parts of that from Victorian attorney general Jill Hennessy are a bit lighter.

She accuses her daughters of having a “growing level of teenage sass”, for example.

They are wonderful smart girls becoming young women and despite the growing level of teenage sass, they continue to be my greatest source of joy.

Hennessy also said this about her career:

My career has been a series of zigzags around the real stuff of life. There are many people juggling the demands of work with trying to be a good parent, partner or person. I am honoured to work with and know a lot of people, especially many amazing women, who do this every day with far less support than I have.

Jill Hennessy says her two daughters ‘continue to be my greatest source of joy’. Photograph: James Ross/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.42am GMT

block-time published-time 4.46am GMT

Some minor flood warnings for NSW.

enltr?? Minor Flood Warning updated for the #WilsonsRiver  issued for #Lismore.  Minor flood is occurring at #Lismore.  See https://t.co/RVrEX59FMW  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/u0pKvE9ZBw

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

enltr?? Minor Flood Warning updated for the #ClarenceRiver  issued for #Grafton #Ulmarra  & #Maclean.  See https://t.co/sgBWgkkhli  for details and updates; follow advice from @NSWSES #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/9WGvJqfnQL

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 4.44am GMT

WA premier Mark McGowan says the state’s chief health officer is liasing with the NSW chief health officer on that case in New South Wales.

He says the controlled border allows WA to put up a hard border when needed, but it will matter on the advice.

McGowan says it will depend on who the driver has been in contact with, and whether there has been any spread.

block-time published-time 4.41am GMT

Queensland is not considering closing the border with New South Wales again at this stage because the one new locally-acquired case of Covid-19 was from the state’s quarantine system, AAP reports.

Acting premier Steven Miles says the fact that the case is related to in the NSW quarantine system is concerning, but the government is not considering fresh border restrictions “at this stage”.

He told reporters the fact the case had been found could be a good thing.

What the chief health officers will now need to determine is what level of community exposure there has been to this person, as well as what the link is to known cases and that’s what they’ll be working on over the next few days.

We’ve talked about how important that first 48 hours is.

Miles said while he was concerned about the new case, he was confident in Queensland’s robust quarantine system.

He pointed out that Australia had come a long way since it was trying to tackle more widespread community transmission earlier in the year. The acting premier said:

There’s really no other country in the world that can be focusing in on just one case.

We’re very, very fortunate to be where we are and that means that our health authorities are very very well equipped to respond.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.11am GMT

block-time published-time 4.36am GMT

And after the shortest blog shift in Guardian history, I’m going to hand you over to my colleague  Josh Taylor.

block-time published-time 4.33am GMT

Jill Hennessy resigns as Victoria attorney general

Victorian attorney general Jill Hennessy  has announced she is resigning from the ministry after a “tough year”.

enltrSome news. https://t.co/DZuRbhJexi #springst pic.twitter.com/XsEblXT3Xw

— JillHennessyMP (@JillHennessyMP) December 16, 2020

She had this to say in a statement:

This tough year has prompted many Victorians to think about their lives, their families and the things that are most important to them.

Political life can be hard on families. Mine is at a stage where they need more of me and, even more importantly, I need more of them. Like everyone managing the collision between work and family life, sometimes something has to give, at least for a little while.

I have decided to step back from my ministerial role in the Andrews Labor government and will focus on representing my wonderful constituents across the Altona District. I intend to recontest the 2022 state election, and with their continued trust, hope to continue to serve these terrific communities well into the future.

I do so for no other reason than to be more involved in the lives of my two daughters as they move through the last years of high school. They are wonderful smart girls becoming young women and, despite the growing level of teenage sass, they continue to be my greatest source of joy.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am GMT

block-time published-time 4.15am GMT

And with that, my time on today’s blog will come to an end, and I will be handing it over to the ever switched-on Michael McGowan.

Enjoy your Wednesday, everyone!

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.23am GMT

block-time published-time 4.13am GMT

NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has told 2GB radio the close contacts to today’s positive case – his wife and two kids – have tested negative for the coronavirus. He said:

So that indicates some really positive aspects.

There’s a good chance he probably did pick it up from one of the aircrew members. If that’s the case well that’s particularly positive because it means there’s no local transmission on the normal assessment.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.14am GMT

block-time published-time 3.59am GMT

Businesses are struggling to find skilled staff, even though the unemployment rate remains high.

AAP has the story:

One in five businesses is having difficulty finding suitably skilled workers, even though the unemployment rate remains high as a result of the Covid-19 recession.

The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics survey on the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on business also found two-thirds of medium and large employing firms plan to hire new staff over the next three months.

ABS head of industry statistics John Shepherd  said on Wednesday:

Businesses reported having difficulty finding suitably skilled tradespersons, hospitality workers and Stem professionals.

Other in-demand jobs included labourers, drivers and managers.

Almost one in six businesses reported that, based on current operations, they did not have a sufficient number of employees.

Commonwealth Securities senior economist Ryan Felsman  said:

With the jobless rate at 7% nationally in October, it is hard to believe that Aussie businesses are experiencing a skills shortage.

But he warned it could present an obstacle to the employment recovery.

The findings came ahead of Thursday’s official labour force figures for November.

Economists’ forecasts centre on a 40,000 increase in the number of people employed during November, after the surprising 178,800 surge in October.

That is expected to keep the unemployment rate at7%, still shy of the 22-year high of 7.5%seen in June.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.02am GMT

block-time published-time 3.43am GMT

Storm and flooding warning issued for Riverina region

A severe weather warning has been issued for Wagga and much of the Riverina for flash flooding this afternoon.

Severe thunderstorms have been forecast for the entire region, all the way from Hay in the west, right across to the east coast, and from the Queensland border down to Tumbarumba.

enltr?SEVERE THUNDERSTORM WARNING? for HEAVY RAINFALL. Warning current for much of central and eastern NSW and the ACT. 2hr Obs: 92mm @ Lismore. 30min Obs: 26mm @ Glen Alice, 25mm at Mt.Werong & 22mm @ Lake Burley Griffin. ??Warnings: https://t.co/30woSZ6O2x #ifitsfloodedforgetit pic.twitter.com/L8OXMiSlAz

— Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) December 16, 2020

These thunderstorms “are likely to produce heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding... over the next several hours”, the Bureau of Meterology said in an alert issued around 1.45pm.

As well as Wagga, the warning covers other major NSW centres of Lismore, Newcastle, Gosford, Sydney, Wollongong, Armidale, Orange, Canberra, Goulburn, Tamworth, Moree and Dubbo.

But the low-pressure trough that has brought big rain and flooding to the state’s northern coast is weakening, according to the weather bureau.

The State Emergency Service advises that people should:

•Keep clear of creeks and storm drains•Don’t walk, ride your bike or drive through flood water•If you are trapped by flash flooding, seek refuge in the highest available place and ring 000 if you need rescue•Be aware that runoff from rainfall in fire-affected areas may behave differently and be more rapid. It may also contain debris such as ash, soil, trees and rocks•After bushfires, heavy rain and the loss of foliage can make the ground soft and heavy, leading to a greater chance of landslides•Unplug computers and appliances•Avoid using the phone during the storm•Stay indoors away from windows, and keep children and pets indoors as well•Stay vigilant and monitor conditions. Note that the landscape may have changed following bushfires•For emergency help in floods and storms, ring the SES (NSW and ACT) on 132 500.    Cars drive through a flooded road at Tumbulgum, northern NSW, this week. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP

Keep clear of creeks and storm drains

Don’t walk, ride your bike or drive through flood water

If you are trapped by flash flooding, seek refuge in the highest available place and ring 000 if you need rescue

Be aware that runoff from rainfall in fire-affected areas may behave differently and be more rapid. It may also contain debris such as ash, soil, trees and rocks

After bushfires, heavy rain and the loss of foliage can make the ground soft and heavy, leading to a greater chance of landslides

Unplug computers and appliances

Avoid using the phone during the storm

Stay indoors away from windows, and keep children and pets indoors as well

Stay vigilant and monitor conditions. Note that the landscape may have changed following bushfires

For emergency help in floods and storms, ring the SES (NSW and ACT) on 132 500.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.59am GMT

block-time published-time 3.35am GMT

Victoria police commissioner  Shane Patton  has sought to differentiate between the police approach during the Black Lives Matter protest in Melbourne in early June and anti-lockdown protests that were broken up during the second wave, with many more fined.

Patton told a Victorian parliament Covid-19 committee on Wednesday that at the time of the BLM protest , the spread of Covid was not as big as it was later on in the second wave, and there weren’t the severe restrictions at the time that were seen later – in June, groups of up to 20 people could assemble.

But Patton said part of the reason to let it go ahead was about keeping public order:

We eventually made a decision to reluctantly allow that Black Lives Matter to go ahead, because of the emotion that was in the community, because of the emotion that was being displayed across the world.

Patton said he was concerned about violence and looting seen in other parts of the world – which did not eventuate in Australia – and his major concern was ensuring public order.

And that’s what we did.

Patton pointed out that each of the organisers were fined $1,652 for the protests.

People in Victoria could now gather for protests in groups of up to 100 people, as long as they had a Covid-safe plan in place, Patton said.

Police minister  Lisa Neville revealed over 300,000 calls were made to the Covid hotline for reporting suspected breaches of the public health order, with 90,000 of those calls related to mass gatherings.

A total of 39,000 fines were issued for breaching Covid rules, and 4,869 were withdrawn. Just 2,086 have been paid in full.

Neville said 4,097 fines were issued for people not having a face mask.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.40am GMT

block-time published-time 3.23am GMT

An international and interstate drug syndicate has been busted by Queensland police, who have seized $1m in cash and $3.5m in drugs.

The bust came after the police intercepted a plane outside Brisbane, and simultaneously arrested and charged more than a dozen people allegedly involved in the syndicate, seizing another 50kg of cannabis and $1.5m in cash.

The drug syndicate allegedly operated out of Queensland, NSW, Victoria and the Northern Territory.

Detective Senior Sergeant Ken Rogers told reporters:

It was quite a sophisticated drug network. They all used cipher phones. They used Redcliffe Airport. They also used Archerfield [airport] and vehicles.

There are links to Thailand but at this stage that part of the investigation is ongoing.

A forensic police accounts team is also examining documents found at the properties, with further arrests expected.

The 14 men, aged 25 to 60, have been charged with about 150 offences, including trafficking in dangerous drugs, serious organised crime, receive or possess property obtained from trafficking.

The joint Queensland police and Australian federal police operation into the alleged network started 18 months ago and has led to the seizure of $9.2m in cash, weapons, ammunition, cocaine and cannabis.

Det Snr Sgt Rogers said:

Drugs of this magnitude being taken off the streets of Queensland and the ill-gotten gains taken out of the hands of these criminals makes Queensland a safer place for us all to live in.

The three men arrested at the airport appeared in Brisbane magistrates court on Wednesday and were granted bail to reappear on 1 February.

The other 11 men appeared in the same court on Tuesday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.34am GMT

block-time published-time 3.08am GMT

Western Australia nervous over fresh Covid case in NSW

Western Australia’s premier Mark McGowan ’s office has told the ABC  the state’s chief health officer was liaising with NSW Health to seek the latest information about the new case.

Quarantine-free travel between the states has only just begun, but with the new case announced in NSW today, there are new questions about the border in the lead-up to Christmas.

The WA government considered delaying opening their borders to NSW when another case emerged in early December, but decided to open up anyways as that case didn’t cause a community outbreak.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.14am GMT

block-time published-time 3.00am GMT

SA Health was promoting Liberal party by broadcasting premier's Covid statements, ombudsman says

The South Australian ombudsman has ordered South Australia Health to apologise for streaming the premier’s coronavirus statements, after it found the shares were promoting the Liberal party.

The ombudsman report found that SA health’s decision to share the livestreams on premier Steven Marshall’s Facebook page “promoted or gave the appearance of promoting” the Liberal party or the premier.

SA Health initially held the livestreamed press conferences on its own Facebook page, but in April and May, some of the press conferences were shared on Marshall’s Facebook page.

Ombudsman Wayne Lines found in his report that the posts may not have any “party-political messaging”, but it was their location that sparked some concern.

“By sharing content from the Steven Marshall Facebook account, the department has arguably promoted that account in a way that may have led to that account receiving more followers.”

South Australian premier Steven Marshall. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.18am GMT

block-time published-time 2.41am GMT

Facebook-owned app harvested Australians' data

A Facebook-owned app has been harvesting Australian data.

AAP has the story:

Facebook deceived Australians and tracked every move they made on their phones through a VPN app, Australia’s consumer watchdog says.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has started proceedings in the federal court against Facebook and two of its subsidiaries for false, misleading or deceptive conduct.

The ACCC alleges consumers were tricked by the companies about the nature of Facebook’s Onavo Protect mobile app – a VPN or virtual private network service.

When flogging the app to Australian consumers, the ACCC says, Facebook claimed it would keep users’ personal activity data private, protected and secret, and that the data would not be used for any purpose other than providing Onavo Protect’s products.

Instead the app tracked the users’ personal activity data and reported back to Facebook, logging their internet history, which apps they opened and how long they spent in them.

The data was then used to support Facebook’s market research, including helping it identify potential future acquisition targets.

“Consumers often use VPN services because they care about their online privacy, and that is what this Facebook product claimed to offer,” the ACCC chair, Rod Sims, said in a statement on Wednesday.

“In fact, Onavo Protect channelled significant volumes of their personal activity data straight back to Facebook.”

Apple removed Onavo Protect from its app store in 2018 because of the data harvesting.

It was later also removed from the Google Play store and was discontinued in 2019.

The ACCC will argue Facebook should be fined for its conduct.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.01am GMT

block-time published-time 2.25am GMT

Tasmania announces loosening of some coronavirus restrictions

The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein,  has announced some changes to coronavirus restrictions for the apple isle, including:

•Sporting events will be able to host 75% seating capacity at stadiums from 1 January•Theatres and cinemas will also be able to expand their seating capacity to 75%, with a maximum of 250 people, from 21 December

Sporting events will be able to host 75% seating capacity at stadiums from 1 January

Theatres and cinemas will also be able to expand their seating capacity to 75%, with a maximum of 250 people, from 21 December

Gutwein also announced that the first group of seasonal workers recently arrived from Timor Leste are due to finish quarantine on Thursday. They will be heading off to work from Thursday after no one from the group tested positive.

Finally, Gutwein announced that the next repatriation flight bringing Tasmanians home has been delayed until 8 January and will be arriving from India.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02am GMT

block-time published-time 2.19am GMT

Bob Brown arrested over anti-logging protest

Former Greens leader Bob Brown has been arrested. Again.

It’s the second time in two days Brown has been taken in while protesting against logging in north-east Tasmania.

enltrBreaking news - Bob Brown arrested for second time in two days defending Swift parrot habitat. Campaign Manager Jenny Weber also arrested. Kev, 72 is still locked on. @GutweinTeam  & @sussanley  Protect ALL Swift parrot habitat and halt logging in native forests. #politas pic.twitter.com/MnaOcXYgA9

— Bob Brown Foundation (@BobBrownFndn) December 15, 2020

The former senator was taken in along with two other activists, the Bob Brown Foundation said in a statement. He was arrested in the same area yesterday, and was accused of trespassing.

enltrBreaking news - Bob Brown arrested in Tasmania’s Eastern Tiers, defending critically endangered Swift parrot habitat. #politas #auspol pic.twitter.com/BkF0bYnZib

— Bob Brown Foundation (@BobBrownFndn) December 15, 2020

“I slept out last night under a logging bulldozer which had invaded the Lost Falls forest,” the 75-year-old said.

“We saw owls and I heard one of the 300 remaining swift parrots. It was rainy with temperatures down towards zero, but we were content just to know the swift parrot habitat destruction was slowed by us being there.”

The Eastern Tiers forest is home to the critically endangered swift parrot, with fewer than 300 remaining in Australia, according to a recent study.

Brown has taken state-owned logging group Sustainable Timber Tasmania, and the state and federal governments, to the federal court over forestry agreements his foundation claims are unlawful.

The full federal court hearing in Melbourne is examining whether Tasmania’s 20-year regional forest agreement, renewed in 2017, is invalid.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02am GMT

block-time published-time 2.11am GMT

Albanese joins locked-out Coles staff

A Coles warehouse has locked out its workers from a south-west Sydney depot until February after negotiations broke down.

AAP has the story:

The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has joined hundreds of workers locked out of a Coles warehouse without pay over Christmas.

The supermarket giant has locked the warehouse workers out of its south-west Sydney depot until February after negotiations over pay and conditions broke down.

Coles is planning to close the warehouse and shift to automation in 2023.

This week, workers agreed to accept a 3.5% pay rise after asking for 5.5%, but the vote did not signal an end to the bitter dispute.

They also want more generous redundancy provisions than the maximum 80 weeks Coles is offering and the option to be redeployed across other Coles warehouse facilities.

Albanese said the workers and members of the United Workers Union accepted that automation was occurring.

“What they want is a fair redundancy system and negotiations in good faith with the company about those issues relating to automation as Coles consolidates its distribution centres,” he told reporters in Smeaton Grange on Wednesday.

“We all know technological change can displace workers. What we need to do is make sure workers are looked after as change occurs.”

Albanese said the warehouse workers, some of whom had been with Coles for more than 30 years, were among those praised for getting Australia through the coronavirus pandemic.

“The fact the company is saying these workers will continue to be locked out over Christmas and up to February is quite frankly a disgrace,” he said.

“I have indicated that very clearly on behalf of the Australian Labor party to Coles management.

“It is completely unacceptable they are not prepared to negotiate in good faith to resolve these issues and to get these outstanding Australian men and women back to work.”

A Coles spokeswoman said the Smeaton Grange workers were already the highest-paid in the supermarket’s distribution network, earning up to 30% more than staff at other Sydney centres.

She described the company’s wage and redundancy offers as generous and urged the UWU to accept the proposals so its members could get back to work.

“Coles has been transparent with the UWU throughout months of negotiations that if they took industrial action at Smeaton Grange in the lead-up to Christmas, we would have to close the site temporarily and make other supply arrangements to ensure our NSW stores could meet demand over the busy Christmas and new year period,” she told AAP.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.03am GMT

block-time published-time 2.02am GMT

The attorney general has announced enhanced federal protections for journalists and whistleblowers.

The changes being made all come from recommendations from the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security’s recent press freedom inquiry, which will:

•ensure that only supreme or federal court judges can issue search warrants against journalists for disclosure offences;•ensure warrants can only be issued against journalists for disclosure offences after consideration by a public interest advocate;•enhance reporting requirements in relation to warrants exercised against journalists; and•require the government to consider additional defences for public interest journalism for secrecy offences

ensure that only supreme or federal court judges can issue search warrants against journalists for disclosure offences;

ensure warrants can only be issued against journalists for disclosure offences after consideration by a public interest advocate;

enhance reporting requirements in relation to warrants exercised against journalists; and

require the government to consider additional defences for public interest journalism for secrecy offences

The government has also accepted 30 recommendations from the Moss review of the Public Interest Disclosure Act, which recommended improvements to the regime governing disclosures made by public sector employees.

According to the statement, the reforms “will focus the act on more serious wrongdoing and misconduct, strengthen the oversight role of the commonwealth ombudsman and the inspector general of intelligence and security, require agencies to support public officials when making disclosures and improve the act’s interaction with other investigative processes”.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.06am GMT

block-time published-time 1.46am GMT

On second thought, perhaps it isn’t a good idea to play in the sea foam, after experts warned that snakes, pollution and viruses could be hidden there.

The storms battering the east coast have left many beaches covered in sea foam, with locals frolicking about among the soap-like substance.

enltrHazel the dog rescued from sea foam in Byron Bay, Australia. Sea foam often forms when strong winds and large waves whip up the cresting waves. pic.twitter.com/KSmREu2ADs

— BBC Weather (@bbcweather) December 14, 2020

But the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has told News.com.au  that sea foam forms when organic and artificial matter in the ocean is agitated by wind and waves.

And while the foam itself is usually harmless, it can hide sea snakes. So please, everyone, keep away from the funny-looking beach soap.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.53am GMT

block-time published-time 1.39am GMT

For more info on the new locally acquired case in NSW, you can take a look at the Guardian write up here:

Related:  NSW records new local Covid case, raising questions over airline crew quarantine

block-time published-time 1.35am GMT

Birmingham says the government recognises the decisions made by Chinese authorities, but that they were ultimately “not underpinned by facts and evidence”.

He also goes into the different practices employed by China on different industries, and how the government will contend with some of them at the WTO.

“The application of pressure on marketing distorting factors in the Chinese system where businesses within China are often state-owned enterprises being discouraged from purchasing Australian goods,” Birmingham said.

“That is a harder point to prove and where there are extensive judgements or rulings made by Chinese officials, in those areas we will monitor closely all of the trends unfolding in relation to purchasing decisions, watch that closely and see where that leads us.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.42am GMT

block-time published-time 1.27am GMT

Birmingham said this step was taken with “extensive consultation” with the Australian barley and grain industry, and that Australia has an “incredibly strong case to mount”.

We are highly confident that based on the evidence, data and analysis that we have put together already, Australia has an incredibly strong case to mount in relation to defending the integrity and proprietary of our grain growers and barley producers.

We have full confidence that they are not unduly subsidised, that they do not dump their product in global markets, they have operated with nothing but commercial imperatives in relation to the way they have engaged the China market, provided the Chinese customers, over a sustained period of time, with a high-quality, value-for-money, market-oriented opposition in relation to Australian barley.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.41am GMT

block-time published-time 1.24am GMT

WTO to adjudicate China barley dispute: trade minister

The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, is speaking now about how Australia is reacting to Chinese trade tensions, saying the government will make a formal request through the World Trade Organization to adjudicate the dispute.

“We are following this journey with all the appropriate policies processes and courtesies that Australia’s industries have engaged with the Chinese government and the Chinese counterparts. This is the logical and appropriate next step for Australia to take,” he said.

He referred to the WTO as the “umpire” in international trade disputes, and has called on said umpire to “adjudicate and ultimately help settle” this dispute.

He says the process “could take years”, saying the dispute resolution process was “not perfect”, but “ultimately, it is the right avenue for Australia to take at this point in time”.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.34am GMT

block-time published-time 1.18am GMT

In the meantime, I want to share with you this incredible footage:

enltrTIMELAPSE: Incredible images from the Bellingen region of the NSW Mid-North Coast show just how quickly floodwaters rise during heavy rainfall. Flood warnings have been upgraded further North: https://t.co/21EmsADbIJ Latest NSW flood information throughout the day on #9News pic.twitter.com/IYRJTi0JcI

— 9News Sydney (@9NewsSyd) December 16, 2020

block-time published-time 1.12am GMT

We’re expecting the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, to speak on China tensions in a moment, so stay tuned for that.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.14am GMT

block-time published-time 1.11am GMT

The last positive community transmission in New South Wales was also traced back to an airline crew.

The hotel worker who tested positive in early December was likely infected by aircrew who arrived on a flight from the US, the NSW Health minister, Brad Hazzard, said back then.

The woman is believed to have become infected while cleaning a hotel room in which the aircrew had stayed, according to News.com.au.

Airline staff don’t actually go into quarantine, the same way returning passengers do. Instead, NSW only requires the crews to self-isolate, citing the short turnaround times for their stay.

That means they are restricted to their places of accomodation, can only leave for medical emergencies or when given exemptions, and cannot welcome visitors.

Today’s positive result has obviously put the spotlight on the protocols, but it is again not the first time the issue has been raised.

But Hazzard also referred to strengthening protocols for aircrew in early December, saying: “We obviously need the aircrews to continue coming in … so what can we do to make [the coronavirus protocols] a little more rigorous? I instructed NSW Health just an hour ago to look at that issue.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.16am GMT

block-time published-time 1.00am GMT

Rightwing thinktank LibertyWorks has announced it has launched a federal court case challenging the health minister, Greg Hunt’s,  orders that ban Australians from leaving Australia.

The case will argue section 96 of the Biosecurity Act does not give Hunt that power, although it does not seek to dispute powers to impose quarantine obligations on returning travellers.

The LibertyWorks president, Andrew Cooper, said:

Minister Hunt has overstepped his legislative powers in preventing Australians from travelling overseas.

It’s an illiberal and a draconian restriction on the free movement of Australian citizens, many of whom want to see family and loved ones or to attend to urgent business in other countries.

“Preventing people from travelling overseas does nothing to make Australia safer. But it does create unnecessary pain for families who want to be together for Christmas or during this difficult and worrying period of global pandemic.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.03am GMT

block-time published-time 12.54am GMT

The acting chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, is also speaking now, saying Australia’s vaccine program is on track, with three vaccines likely to be available early next year.

Two of those are part of pre-purchase agreements, and one, the AstraZeneca vaccine, is being developed in Melbourne.

He said Australia’s immunisation advisory group met on Tuesday to work through the details of prioritisation.

Kelly said the details will be announced in January, but roughly laid it out, saying those most likely to get serious illnesses, such as the elderly, and people with chronic diseases will be given first priority.

The second priority will be frontline workers, specifically healthcare workers and aged care workers.

The third priority will be essential workers that keep the economy moving, with Kelly saying the “granular” details of the priorities will be clarified later.

He also said the plan is on track to begin vaccinations in March.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.58am GMT

block-time published-time 12.40am GMT

Hazzard says cases like this inevitably happen:

“You can’t expect in a Covid world pandemic that we won’t from time to time have a case. It will happen. We’ve been saying that for months. It will happen.”

He also outlines what he thinks is an ideal Christmas gift this year:

“But I would say this to the community – the best Christmas gift you can give to your family, your friends and your community is to go and get tested if you have any symptoms. And do it straight away.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.44am GMT

block-time published-time 12.37am GMT

Hazzard seems reluctant to lay down hard consequences for this case, citing the complexity of ensuring the protection of essential workers within the actual quarantine programs, such as workers at the hotel, or drivers moving airline staff.

He says the government is attempting to “strike a balance”, saying the state and Australia need airlines to keeping coming into the country, and that regulating across different airlines and crews would prove “challenging”.

But Hazzard rejected the idea he’s giving aircrews a free run for now.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40am GMT

block-time published-time 12.27am GMT

The man did not drive around members of the public, but worked for Sydney Ground Transport in Alexandria, ferrying aircrews.

He has three home contacts who are being tested, with results expected in the next hour or so.

NSW Health is working to trace his contacts and trips, and whom he has picked up and dropped off.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.34am GMT

block-time published-time 12.18am GMT

Sydney man tests positive for Covid-19

The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, is speaking now, announcing a new locally acquired case in the state.

A 45-year-old man has tested positive after 8pm last night. The man drives a van that carries international aircrews back and forth from Sydney airport.

Hazzard said the government are in discussion with international airlines, saying that all international aircrews arriving in the state will have to quarantine in the same way as other international visitors.

They won’t have to do the full 14 days, as they’re usually on 24 to 72-hour turnarounds, but it does mean they will be in quarantine.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.35am GMT

block-time published-time 12.11am GMT

Jarryd Hayne to face retrial on sexual assault charges

Jarryd Hayne is set to face a retrial on the sexual assault allegations against him, AAP reports:

Former NRL star Jarryd Hayne, who is accused of attacking a woman in her bedroom, will face a retrial in Sydney on rape charges.

Prosecutor Brian Costello confirmed on Wednesday in the Newcastle district court that the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions would pursue two rape charges against Hayne after his first trial in Newcastle ended in a hung jury.

The jury of eight men and four women was discharged on 7 December after a two-week trial when they failed to reach a verdict.

Judge Tim Gartelmann on Wednesday said if the trial went ahead in Newcastle, it was unlikely to be accommodated until late 2021 or early 2022.

The judge said the Newcastle courts’ diary had been impacted by Covid-19, causing delays.

Costello indicated there was a possibility the trial could be heard earlier in Sydney.

The case was briefly adjourned to allow Costello and Hayne’s defence lawyer, Penny Musgrave, to discuss their options.

Both parties returned a short time later with Musgrave, who appeared via audio visual link from Sydney, telling the court she had spoken to the court listings manager who indicated Hayne’s two-week trial could start in Sydney on 8 March.

Costello said the application to move the trial to Sydney was not opposed, given it would proceed much more expeditiously than if it returned to Newcastle.

The judge listed the case for a readiness hearing in Sydney on 29 January with the trial to begin on 8 March.

Hayne’s bail was continued until 29 January.

Hayne, 32, who was excused from appearing in court on Wednesday because he had legal representation, has pleaded not guilty to two charges of aggravated sexual assault recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.17am GMT

block-time published-time 12.09am GMT

PM: bringing home 30,000 Australians 'first priority'

The prime minister has reiterated that he is working to bring home the over 30,000 Australians stranded overseas.

Speaking to the Seven Network, Scott Morrison said the stranded Australians were his “first priority”.

“We are looking to get you home as soon as possible and that is what the record shows. We know you want to come home and you have every right to come home,” he said.

“You are Australian and you are my first priority in terms of people coming back into the country.”

Almost 10,000 people are looking to come to Australia from India and another 4,500 from the UK.

The PM shot down any suggestions of allowing international visitors back in Australia any time soon, saying the government has no planes to lift international border closures.

He also said the details of the vaccine rollout are not yet ironed out, but that health workers and others in “critical occupations” would be at the front of the queue.

“But the details of that plan are still being worked out,” he said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12am GMT

block-time published-time 12.00am GMT

Two cyclones are bearing down on the Pacific Islands, with Fiji’s main island bracing for potentially catastrophic damage as tropical cyclones Zazu and Yasa intensified off their coastlines on Wednesday.

Yasa, which has been upgraded to a category 5 cyclone with winds of up to 270km/h, is expected to make landfall on Thursday or early Friday, while Zazu is currently north-east of Tonga’s capital Nuku’alofa, is rated a category 1 system, with winds of up to 90km/h.

enltr #FijiNews Severe Tropical Cyclone Yasa has been upgraded to a Category 5 system. #veilomani pic.twitter.com/oYaU7s623u

— Fiji Infrastructure and Meteorological (@infra_fj) December 15, 2020

Fiji’s prime minister, Frank Bainimarama, has urged all Fijians to prepare evacuation plans. “We should all prepare now for heavy rain, damaging winds, coastal inundation and flooding across the country,” he said in a national address.

You can read more on the cyclones at our story here:

Related:  Cyclone Yasa: Fiji prepares for category 5 storm as Tonga braces for Zazu

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.04am GMT

block-time published-time 11.50pm GMT

Australia’s bushfire recovery fund has given $10m to a paper mill owned by one of the country’s richest men, and major political donor, Anthony Pratt.

A key element to the recovery fund is the local economic recovery fund, designed to supercharge economic recovery through community-led projects or direct industry assistance.

Despite promises that the fund would be simple and accessible to smaller community groups, bushfire-affected residents are struggling to navigate the complex grants processes – requiring the assistance, in some cases, of professional grant writers or full-time volunteers to even apply for money.

You can read more on the story here:

Related:  Anthony Pratt's Visy wins $10m from Australia's bushfire recovery fund

block-time published-time 11.31pm GMT

In other vaccine news, the US Food and Drug Administration will be voting on whether to approve the Moderna vaccine tomorrow.

The Moderna vaccine is similar to the Pfizer shot, but is easier to store as it does not need to be kept in -70C conditions. It shows similarly strong protection against the virus and uses the same technology as the Pfizer vaccine.

The news comes as the US passed 300,000 deaths on Monday, with about 2,400 deaths and 210,000 new cases every day.

Shipments of the Pfizer vaccine have already begun arriving on Tuesday, with the first 3m shots strictly reserved for frontline workers.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.47pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.22pm GMT

There’s been another day of no locally acquired Covid-19 cases in Queensland, but there was one new case acquired overseas.

enltrWednesday, 16 December – coronavirus cases in Queensland: • 0 locally acquired cases, 1 new case acquired overseas • 17 active cases • 1,229 total confirmed cases • 1,401,800 tests Sadly, six Queenslanders with COVID-19 have died. 1,204 patients have recovered. #covid19 pic.twitter.com/1GBM1z6Aeg

— Annastacia Palaszczuk (@AnnastaciaMP) December 15, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.24pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.18pm GMT

I’d just like to take a moment and highlight the fantastic headline for the Sydney Morning Herald’s investigation into the table tennis fixing scandal:

Bets, lies and table tennis: How police pinged an international pong

Terrible story, great headline. All in a day’s work.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.23pm GMT

block-time published-time 11.13pm GMT

China accuses Australia of 'discriminating' against its companies

The Chinese embassy has told the Guardian that Australia has been “politicising economic, investment and technological issues, and discriminating against Chinese companies”.

In a statement, the embassy backed China’s decision to block coal imports, saying Australia “dresses up as a victim”:

Recently we’ve seen many reports in which Australia dresses up as a victim, pointing an accusing finger at China, directly or by insinuation. This move is meant to confound the public and we will never accept it.

In fact, it is the Australian side that has been politicising economic, investment and technological issues, and discriminating against Chinese companies in violation of market economy principles and international trade rules. There is nothing to worry about if it is normal exchange and cooperation based on mutual respect and in compliance with rules. On the contrary, what is worrying for us is such moves as politicising and obstructing normal trade activities, interfering in others’ internal affairs in defiance of basic norms governing international relations and even provoking confrontation.

We hope that the Australian side will reflect upon its own conduct, match its words with deeds, and provide favourable conditions for bilateral practical cooperation in various fields, instead of the opposite.

It comes after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the ban would be a lose-lose for both countries and a clear breach of World Trade Organization rules, as well as a China-Australia free trade agreement.

The resources minister, Keith Pitt, said Australia expected all its trading partners to play by the rules.

“We are doing our part,” Pitt said on Wednesday.

“Australia has not moved in terms of the free trade agreements and we continue to meet what we said we would do. But we expect all of our exporters to have a level playing field, be treated fairly and that is what we are looking for.”

China has slapped a series of trade bans and tariffs on Australian goods as diplomatic tensions simmer over foreign interference and investment laws and calls for an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 coronavirus.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.34am GMT

block-time published-time 11.05pm GMT

A Brisbane-based company has received US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for the first rapid at-home Covid-19 tests that don’t require a prescription.

Ellume, a digital diagnostics company, announced its quick Covid-19 antigen test is the first of its kind to be granted emergency use authorisation.

A statement from the company said the test will be able to provide consumers with a quick diagnosis: “The Ellume self-test will help reduce the spread of Covid-19 through rapid self-detection, providing users with real-time results at home, enabling self-isolation and patient education on escalation of medical care.”

Stephen Hahn, the head of the FDA, praised the company and said in a statement the rollout of the tests would work in tandem with the vaccine to curb the pandemic in the US.

“By authorising a test for over-the-counter use, the FDA allows it to be sold in places like drug stores, where a patient can buy it, swab their nose, run the test and find out their results in as little as 20 minutes.”

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.56pm GMT

Table tennis match fix prompts NSW arrest

A Newcastle man has been arrested after being accused of betting on fixed ping pong matches and netting himself half a million dollars.

The man allegedly placed bets on European table tennis matches he knew were fixed, as part of a transnational gambling syndicate.

Police raided nine homes across Newcastle, Lake Macquarie and Port Stephens early on Wednesday, seizing documents and electronic devices.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.04pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.50pm GMT

Kayakers have been captured attempting to brave a gushing waterfall in northern NSW.

Video courtesy of Riley Carter

The men appear to be kayaking down the waterfall at Dorrigo Mountain in the Northern Tablelands.

Below, Waterfall Way, which cuts across the mountain, had been closed after waters rushing down had inundated the road.

enltrDORRIGO MOUNTAIN: Waterfall Way is closed in both directions btwn Little North Arm Rd & Maynards Plains Rd due to flooding. The Gwydir Hwy & Oxley Hwy can be used as alternative routes to travel btwn the Pacific Hwy & New England Hwy. Allow approx 2 hrs extra travel time. pic.twitter.com/NJgWune1WT

— Live Traffic NSW (@LiveTrafficNSW) December 14, 2020

Of course it is inadvisable to kayak down a flooding river, however some props must be paid to their bravery.

block-time published-time 10.36pm GMT

There is currently a risk of flash flooding at around 10am today to multiple rivers, including the Richmond, Clarence, Wilsons, Bellinger, McLean and Hastings after yesterday’s deluge.

undltr #NSWFloods pic.twitter.com/anXn3NaWb7

— Lynda_The_Mundane (@LMildwater) December 15, 2020

Flooding is still widespread around the Northern Rivers, with evacuation warnings still in place for south Murwillumbah and also low-lying areas north of Macksville.

enltrThe mouth of the Tweed river this arvo.. earl grey with a dash of milk?? pic.twitter.com/paOs6SzfYO

— Taggy (@Barrawensdy1) December 15, 2020

The SES says while rain is still around, roads will be flooded and the rivers are swollen. It attended 85 jobs overnight and has performed 24 flood rescues since the extreme weather began on the weekend.

In total the SES has attended more than 1,016 jobs.

enltrFLOODING continues to ease along the Tweed River this morning. Skinner Lowes Wharf on the northern bank at Murwillumbah went under, debris left on the roof after the water peaked at 3.8M. @TheTodayShow pic.twitter.com/BuDS6le2bv

— Reece D'Alessandro (@R_DAlessandro9) December 15, 2020

“The majority of those jobs are fixing leaking roofs and damage due to heavy rainfall or trees down due to strong winds and we’re also getting requests for sandbags,” an SES spokeswoman said on Wednesday.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.25pm GMT

The Coalition has been accused of wasting 18 months on a “nothing” electric vehicle strategy.

Critics are lambasting the government after a discussion paper on the strategy was leaked, showing no proposals for direct financial help to encourage people to buy electric vehicles (EVs) or a phase-out date for the sale of new fossil fuel cars.

The document only confirms a budget commitment of $74.5m in funding, mostly for charging infrastructure across the country, and a two-year EV trial for a government agency that provides cars and drivers for politicians and funding to update the “green vehicle guide” website.

“It’s been pretty clear that their ambition has been to end up with a paper that says ‘EV strategy’ on it and now they have one. But there is nothing in there,” the chief executive of the Electric Vehicle Council, Behyad Jafari, told the Guardian.

You can read more on the document here:

Related:  Coalition accused of wasting 18 months on 'nothing' electric vehicle strategy

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.29pm GMT

block-time published-time 10.16pm GMT

Northern Territory to wind back border patrols

The Northern Territory is moving to demobilise eight coronavirus road border patrols.

The chief minister, Michael Gunner, said police presence at the Northern Territory’s minor road border entry points of Docker River, Tobermorey, Lake Nash, Mulga Park, Curtain Springs, Tanami, Kintore and Finke would be wound back over the next week.

But police won’t completely disappear, maintaining a physical presence at three major entry points – the Stuart Highway, Victoria Highway and Barkly Highway, which could be demobilised by early next year.

The territory has recorded two new Covid cases this week, in international travellers who have returned on government-assisted repatriation flights.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.59pm GMT

Victoria reports no new Covid cases

Another doughnut day in Victoria!

enltrYesterday there were 0 new local cases, 0 new cases acquired overseas and 0 deaths reported. 9,711 test results were received - thanks, #EveryTestHelps  us to #StaySafeStayOpen.  More info: https://t.co/lIUrl0ZEco #COVID19Vic #COVID19VicData pic.twitter.com/RROl5F9glA

— VicGovDHHS (@VicGovDHHS) December 15, 2020

I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again: it’s an achievement worth celebrating every day.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.46pm GMT

Union wants fruit picker minimum wage rate

The Australian Workers’ Union is applying to have fruit pickers guaranteed minimum wage.

The union is fighting to change the horticulture award, to ensure casual fruit pickers are paid a minimum of $25 an hour.

The horticulture award currently allows farmers to pay workers either a piece rate, according to how much fruit they pick, or an hourly rate.

You can read more on the push here:

Related:  Australian Workers' Union push for fruit pickers to be guaranteed minimum pay rate

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.31pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.33pm GMT

Although the dangerous weather warning should be heeded across the north of NSW, I can’t help but feel like this looks like so much fun:

Tweed locals Noah Liles (left) and Preston Duggan, play in the foam at Froggy Beach at Coolangatta in Queensland on Tuesday. Photograph: Jason Obrien/AAP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.35pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.28pm GMT

People in NSW urged to avoid crowded shopping centres during Christmas rush

NSW Health is urging people to remain “Covid safe” during the Christmas shopping rush.

Shopping centres will be expecting visits from SafeWork NSW inspectors, who will be ensuring the last of the state’s Covid rules are maintained, and people remain safe while grabbing their gifts.

NSW Health’s Dr Chatu Yapa said there are many ways to keep safe while still managing to cross off your shopping lists.

“This year we’re asking people to avoid crowded shopping centres. If the shopping centre is too crowded, you should consider returning at an off-peak time, doing your gift shopping online or shopping locally at community businesses,” Yapa said.

They advise to continue:

•Maintaining 1.5 metre distance from other people•Washing your hands often and using hand sanitiser•To avoid crowded shopping centres, and to try and shop at off-peak times.•They also strongly recommend wearing a face mask if physical distancing isn’t possible.

Maintaining 1.5 metre distance from other people

Washing your hands often and using hand sanitiser

To avoid crowded shopping centres, and to try and shop at off-peak times.

They also strongly recommend wearing a face mask if physical distancing isn’t possible.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.36pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.20pm GMT

The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has apparently inflated the results of a landmark survey that show trust in the public service has increased during the pandemic.

The department appears to have combined responses that said they “somewhat” trust the government to those that responded that they “trust” the government, in the hopes of bolstering results.

It came after dismal results in a similar survey in March 2019 that showed only 25% believed the public service could “successfully implement changes to meet the needs of all Australians”, according to the heavily redacted document.

On Tuesday, the department released results claiming trust was much higher, at 59%, once the 28% of respondents who said they “somewhat trust” the public service were added.

You can read more on the survey here:

Related:  Does Australia trust its public service? PM's department inflates survey results

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.36pm GMT

block-time published-time 9.02pm GMT

Top special forces soldier steps down after Guardian Australia reveals leg-drinking photo

The top special forces soldier photographed drinking beer out of the prosthetic leg  of a dead Taliban soldier has stepped down.

The Australian  newspaper is reporting WO1 John Letch, recently identified as the man in the photo on social media, has relinquished his position and is understood to be considering his options.

The leg was taken from a Taliban insurgent, despite rules forbidding the taking of war trophies, and was used as a drinking vessel by SAS soldiers at the unofficial Tarin Kowt bar, known as the Fat Lady’s Arms.

It comes weeks after the Brereton report  found a “warrior culture” had contributed to an environment in which war crimes were allegedly committed.

Letch was supposed to work with Maj Gen Paul Kenny to implement the military’s response to the Brereton inquiry, looking into cultural change and imposing discipline on non-commissioned ranks.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.40pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.51pm GMT

A severe weather warning for heavy rainfall and abnormally high tides is still in place for parts of Northern Rivers and mid-north coast forecast districts of NSW, but the weather does appear to be easing.

People paddle along a flooded street in Tumbulgum, NSW. Photograph: Jason Obrien/EPA

Rainfall rates are expected to ease this morning as the trough weakens and extends south.

Tumbulgum resident Gavin Mcgahey rides through a flooded street with his huskies Max and Sienna. Photograph: Jason Obrien/AAP

The Bureau of Meteorology has issued flood warnings for the Wilsons, Bellinger and Kalang, Macleay, Hastings, Orara, Nambucca, Camden Haven and Richmond rivers. A flood watch remains in place for the remaining river catchments along the mid-north coast and Northern Rivers.

A flooded street in Tumbulgum. Photograph: Jason Obrien/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.39pm GMT

Infrastructure Australia releases study into impacts of pandemic

Infrastructure Australia has released a national study into the impacts of the pandemic on roads, internet and rubbish.

The report notes traffic levels largely rebounded after lockdowns across the country, with second-hand car sales rising as people opted to drive and avoided public transport.

A near-empty street in Melbourne during the strict restrictions due to the coronavirus. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images

Usage of public transport dropped enormously, to between 10% and 30% of usual levels, but rebounded to a “new normal” of 60% to 70%.

Infrastructure Australia estimated that up to 4 million employees have been working from home since March with about one-third keen to remain remote.

The shift has driven up energy, water and waste consumption in homes, and strained broadband networks. It also drove enormous growth in online retail trade, recording five times the annual growth of 2019.

The report labels six key areas as priorities to be addressed in the 2021 Australian Infrastructure Plan.

It calls for a mitigation of growing car dependency, improved waste management and examination of repurposing real estate in CBDs.

The report found some regional communities saw a boom in tourism and population growth, with people moving away from metropolitan areas.

That has resulted in a 200% increase in net migration from capital cities to regional areas.

The Infrastructure Australia chief executive, Romilly Madew, said the findings show that compared with other developed economies, the nation’s infrastructure networks were resilient.

“Across sectors, we found that Australia’s governments and infrastructure providers navigated dramatic changes to community behaviour and network requirements, and rapidly adjusted their service provision,” she said.

Related:  Some Covid changes are here to stay, Infrastructure Australia says as it ponders 2021 priorities

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.43pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.30pm GMT

On Malka Leifer, one of her alleged victims, Nicole Meyer ,  has spoken out, telling the ABC she welcomed the news of her extradition:

Our hearts were racing and it was absolutely incredible to hear the words. To understand that this point has finally been reached from the day we gave our police statements in 2011, it’s really staggering. It’s so huge, because it is something that we have been fighting for. With 74 court hearings and every single day in between.

Malka Leifer (right), is brought to a courtroom in Jerusalem in 2018. On Tuesday Israel’s supreme court rejected an appeal by the alleged child sex abuser to block her extradition to Australia. Photograph: Mahmoud Illean/AP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.44pm GMT

block-time published-time 8.25pm GMT

Summary

Good morning everyone, Mostafa Rachwani here, and welcome to another live blog. We are fewer than 10 days away from Christmas, so I hope you’ve gotten your shopping and planning done.

First up today, it appears the worst of the the storms lashing the NSW north coast and southern Queensland is behind us. The trough that has inundated the region in the past couple of days is easing, however thousands of residents have been asked to remain on alert by the Bureau of Meteorology.

They say the rain that has already fallen could still drive floods. Minor flooding alerts have been issued for Wilsons River at Lismore, Mackleay River at Kempsey, Camden Haven River at Laurieton and for Richmond River.

We’ll also be keeping an eye on the ongoing trade rift between Australia and China, with Chinese authorities defending their coal ban as both legal and “responsible”. Wang Wenbin, spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, accused Australia of “constantly accusing and attacking China by innuendo”.

Malka Leifer, accused of sexually assaulting female students during her time as principal of the ultra-Orthodox Adass Israel school in Melbourne’s south-east, is to be extradited to Australia after Israel’s supreme court rejected her appeal.

Finally, ahead of tomorrow’s release of the mid-year budget, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the health minister, Greg Hunt, will today reveal a nearly $1bn dollar investment in the aged care industry. The government has been under pressure to address the failings of the aged care system since the pandemic particularly hit the sector.

And in international news, the US Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has become the most senior Republican to recognise Joe Biden as the president-elect , after the electoral college formally affirmed his victory.

If you see any news that you think should be on here, don’t hesitate to shoot me a message on Twitter, @Rachwani91 , or by email on mostafa.rachwani@theguardian.com

Updated at 11.47pm GMT

90072020-12-16T06:30:00Ztrue2020-12-15T20:25:34Zfalsefalse2020-12-16T08:56:15ZfalseAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/fnddjfalsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/07df75be2af2c261a329c35bb26d669652283a7f/0_365_5472_3283/500.jpgfalseentrueThat is where we will leave the live blog for Wednesday. We will be back with all the latest news tomorrow, but here’s some of what you might have missed today: New South Wales recorded three cases of locally-acquired Covid-19, including an airport bus driver from south-west Sydney and two people in their 60s and 70s from the northern beaches. The two people so far have not been linked to the bus driver, and an alert has been issued for a number of venues in Sydney the pair visited. Victoria’s attorney general, Jill Hennessy, announced her resignation, saying she wanted to spend more time with her daughters after a tough year. She will remain in parliament and has said she will contest the 2022 election. Flood warnings have been issued down the coast of NSW as heavy rain continues to pelt the state. The Australian government has called in the World Trade Organisation to adjudicate in the dispute with China over barley imports. Former Greens leader Bob Brown was arrested for the second time in two days at an anti-logging protest. Until tomorrow, stay safe. The latest storm warning for Victoria. Just to recap, there have been three new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 in New South Wales. The first is a 45-year-old man who is a driver for aircrew at the airport from south-west Sydney. His family members have so far tested negative but contact tracing is still under way and they remain in isolation. The other two are a man and a woman in their 70s and 60s from the northern beaches. So far these two new cases reported in the early evening on Wednesday are not connected to the driver, or any other known case, and contact tracing is under way. Important to note there: the two new cases in NSW so far have not been linked back to the airport driver who tested positive. New South Wales Health has just issued an alert that two more people have tested positive to Covid-19. The two people, a man in his 70s and a woman in her 60s live in Sydney’s northern beaches and there are no links at this stage to other known cases. Contact tracing and urgent genome sequencing are under way, with genome sequencing results expected in the next 24 to 48 hours. People who have attended the following venues are considered close contacts and should get tested and isolate for 14 days even if they receive a negative result: Palm Beach female change rooms – Sunday, 13 December 9-9.15 am Coast Palm Beach Cafe, Palm Beach – Sunday, 13 December 10-11am AvalonBowlo (bowling club), Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 3-5pm Sneaky Grind Cafe, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 10.30-11am People who have visited the following venues should get tested and isolate until they receive a negative result: Woolworths, Avalon beach – Sunday, 13 December, 12-5pm Oliver’s Pie, Careel Shopping Village, Avalon beach – Monday, 14 December, 9-9.15am Everyone living in the northern beaches area should monitor for even the mildest of symptoms and come forward for testing immediately if they appear, then isolate until a negative result is received. That’s a lot of rain. Moderate Liberals Andrew Bragg and Tim Wilson have brushed off calls from within the government for a fresh inquiry into banks’ decisions to stop lending to coal companies. My colleague Paul Karp has more here: More than a dozen firefighting crews are battling a large blaze at a factory near Brisbane’s port, AAP reports. The fire started about 2.30pm on Wednesday in a building on Gosport Street, Hemmant, which is understood to be a recycling plant. A Queensland Fire and Emergency Services spokeswoman said: There is lots of smoke coming out and signs of structural collapse. A large plume of black smoke billowing from the fire can be seen from more than 15km away. A smoke warning has been issued. Police, 14 fire crews and paramedics remain at the scene. Here’s my full report on why people shouldn’t be playing in the sea foam on the beaches of northern NSW and southern Queensland. South Australia’s police commissioner, Grant Stevens, has announced people arriving in the state from other states and territories will no longer need to have registered online to travel into South Australia, effective immediately. Stevens said police would be drawn back from the airport and the borders. People travelling into South Australia at the airport would still be greeted by police and asked whether they have been overseas in the past 14 days, whether they have Covid-19 symptoms, or if they have been in contact with someone with Covid in the past 14 days. But otherwise there will be no other limits on entering the state. People will no longer need to register their intent to visit SA online if coming from another state or territory in Australia. NSW Health has provided the following information on the airport driver who tested positive for Covid-19 today: The person, who lives in south-western Sydney, attended the following sporting event while infectious. Anyone at the event at the times indicated is considered a casual contact. However, as a precaution we are advising any adults who were present to get tested immediately and isolate until they receive a negative result. They should continue to monitor for symptoms and if any symptoms occur, get tested again. Children who were present should be monitored for symptoms and get tested if any symptoms occur. Forest Rangers FC, Little Rangers session at Gannons Park, Pindari Rd and Isaac Street, Peakhurst – Friday 11 December 2020, 4.30pm-5.30pm We expect there will be more location information released as NSW Health conducts contact tracing. ABC is reporting that developers who demolished the historic Corkman pub in Carlton in 2016 have been sent to jail for a month for contempt of court. According to the report, the pair were were jailed and fined $400,000 on top of the $1m already fined for failing to turn the site into a public park, as ordered by the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. The NSW State Emergency Service is warning people to avoid the Lismore CBD because of flash flooding. The ACT is included in BOM’s storm warnings. Some more on the storms in NSW, which will cover almost the entirety of the coast of the state, from Queensland down to Victoria. The predicted reprieve from heavy rain and flooding across swathes of NSW is unlikely to eventuate yet, with only the state’s far west expected to be spared from afternoon thunderstorms, AAP reports. Lismore, in the state’s north, copped more than 100mm in two hours on Wednesday afternoon, with the State Emergency Service performing five flood rescues in just over an hour. The downpour in Lismore comes as the Bureau of Meteorology issued a fresh warning for severe thunderstorms, with swathes of the state expected to be hit. The warning zone stretches for almost the entire state – from Mungindi, near the Queensland border, to Tumbarumba, near the Victorian border. Almost the entire coast will also be hit, with BOM issuing a separate warning for residents of the South Coast and parts of the northern rivers and the Snowy Mountains. They’re expected to be hit with heavy rain, but it looks like they will escape the thunderstorms. Only the state’s far west will be spared the drenching, which has been causing havoc for days. Rock slides, bridge closures and even a yawning sinkhole in a residential Coffs Harbour street have been caused by the extreme weather event. The deluge has also prompted widespread flooding around the northern rivers, with evacuation orders remaining in place in Condong and Tumbulgum, north of Murwillumbah. There’s now a major flooding warning issued for Orara River at Coutt’s Crossing. There are a lot of ministerial resignation statements, but some parts of that from Victorian attorney general Jill Hennessy are a bit lighter. She accuses her daughters of having a “growing level of teenage sass”, for example. They are wonderful smart girls becoming young women and despite the growing level of teenage sass, they continue to be my greatest source of joy. Hennessy also said this about her career: My career has been a series of zigzags around the real stuff of life. There are many people juggling the demands of work with trying to be a good parent, partner or person. I am honoured to work with and know a lot of people, especially many amazing women, who do this every day with far less support than I have. Some minor flood warnings for NSW. WA premier Mark McGowan says the state’s chief health officer is liasing with the NSW chief health officer on that case in New South Wales. He says the controlled border allows WA to put up a hard border when needed, but it will matter on the advice. McGowan says it will depend on who the driver has been in contact with, and whether there has been any spread. Queensland is not considering closing the border with New South Wales again at this stage because the one new locally-acquired case of Covid-19 was from the state’s quarantine system, AAP reports. Acting premier Steven Miles says the fact that the case is related to in the NSW quarantine system is concerning, but the government is not considering fresh border restrictions “at this stage”. He told reporters the fact the case had been found could be a good thing. What the chief health officers will now need to determine is what level of community exposure there has been to this person, as well as what the link is to known cases and that’s what they’ll be working on over the next few days. We’ve talked about how important that first 48 hours is. Miles said while he was concerned about the new case, he was confident in Queensland’s robust quarantine system. He pointed out that Australia had come a long way since it was trying to tackle more widespread community transmission earlier in the year. The acting premier said: There’s really no other country in the world that can be focusing in on just one case. We’re very, very fortunate to be where we are and that means that our health authorities are very very well equipped to respond. And after the shortest blog shift in Guardian history, I’m going to hand you over to my colleague Josh Taylor. Victorian attorney general Jill Hennessy has announced she is resigning from the ministry after a “tough year”. She had this to say in a statement: This tough year has prompted many Victorians to think about their lives, their families and the things that are most important to them. Political life can be hard on families. Mine is at a stage where they need more of me and, even more importantly, I need more of them. Like everyone managing the collision between work and family life, sometimes something has to give, at least for a little while. I have decided to step back from my ministerial role in the Andrews Labor government and will focus on representing my wonderful constituents across the Altona District. I intend to recontest the 2022 state election, and with their continued trust, hope to continue to serve these terrific communities well into the future. I do so for no other reason than to be more involved in the lives of my two daughters as they move through the last years of high school. They are wonderful smart girls becoming young women and, despite the growing level of teenage sass, they continue to be my greatest source of joy. And with that, my time on today’s blog will come to an end, and I will be handing it over to the ever switched-on Michael McGowan. Enjoy your Wednesday, everyone! NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has told 2GB radio the close contacts to today’s positive case – his wife and two kids – have tested negative for the coronavirus. He said: So that indicates some really positive aspects. There’s a good chance he probably did pick it up from one of the aircrew members. If that’s the case well that’s particularly positive because it means there’s no local transmission on the normal assessment. Businesses are struggling to find skilled staff, even though the unemployment rate remains high. AAP has the story: One in five businesses is having difficulty finding suitably skilled workers, even though the unemployment rate remains high as a result of the Covid-19 recession. The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics survey on the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on business also found two-thirds of medium and large employing firms plan to hire new staff over the next three months. ABS head of industry statistics John Shepherd said on Wednesday: Businesses reported having difficulty finding suitably skilled tradespersons, hospitality workers and Stem professionals. Other in-demand jobs included labourers, drivers and managers. Almost one in six businesses reported that, based on current operations, they did not have a sufficient number of employees. Commonwealth Securities senior economist Ryan Felsman said: With the jobless rate at 7% nationally in October, it is hard to believe that Aussie businesses are experiencing a skills shortage. But he warned it could present an obstacle to the employment recovery. The findings came ahead of Thursday’s official labour force figures for November. Economists’ forecasts centre on a 40,000 increase in the number of people employed during November, after the surprising 178,800 surge in October. That is expected to keep the unemployment rate at 7%, still shy of the 22-year high of 7.5% seen in June. A severe weather warning has been issued for Wagga and much of the Riverina for flash flooding this afternoon. Severe thunderstorms have been forecast for the entire region, all the way from Hay in the west, right across to the east coast, and from the Queensland border down to Tumbarumba. These thunderstorms “are likely to produce heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding... over the next several hours”, the Bureau of Meterology said in an alert issued around 1.45pm. As well as Wagga, the warning covers other major NSW centres of Lismore, Newcastle, Gosford, Sydney, Wollongong, Armidale, Orange, Canberra, Goulburn, Tamworth, Moree and Dubbo. But the low-pressure trough that has brought big rain and flooding to the state’s northern coast is weakening, according to the weather bureau. The State Emergency Service advises that people should: Keep clear of creeks and storm drains Don’t walk, ride your bike or drive through flood water If you are trapped by flash flooding, seek refuge in the highest available place and ring 000 if you need rescue Be aware that runoff from rainfall in fire-affected areas may behave differently and be more rapid. It may also contain debris such as ash, soil, trees and rocks After bushfires, heavy rain and the loss of foliage can make the ground soft and heavy, leading to a greater chance of landslides Unplug computers and appliances Avoid using the phone during the storm Stay indoors away from windows, and keep children and pets indoors as well Stay vigilant and monitor conditions. Note that the landscape may have changed following bushfires For emergency help in floods and storms, ring the SES (NSW and ACT) on 132 500. Victoria police commissioner Shane Patton has sought to differentiate between the police approach during the Black Lives Matter protest in Melbourne in early June and anti-lockdown protests that were broken up during the second wave, with many more fined. Patton told a Victorian parliament Covid-19 committee on Wednesday that at the time of the BLM protest, the spread of Covid was not as big as it was later on in the second wave, and there weren’t the severe restrictions at the time that were seen later – in June, groups of up to 20 people could assemble. But Patton said part of the reason to let it go ahead was about keeping public order: We eventually made a decision to reluctantly allow that Black Lives Matter to go ahead, because of the emotion that was in the community, because of the emotion that was being displayed across the world. Patton said he was concerned about violence and looting seen in other parts of the world – which did not eventuate in Australia – and his major concern was ensuring public order. And that’s what we did. Patton pointed out that each of the organisers were fined $1,652 for the protests. People in Victoria could now gather for protests in groups of up to 100 people, as long as they had a Covid-safe plan in place, Patton said. Police minister Lisa Neville revealed over 300,000 calls were made to the Covid hotline for reporting suspected breaches of the public health order, with 90,000 of those calls related to mass gatherings. A total of 39,000 fines were issued for breaching Covid rules, and 4,869 were withdrawn. Just 2,086 have been paid in full. Neville said 4,097 fines were issued for people not having a face mask. An international and interstate drug syndicate has been busted by Queensland police, who have seized $1m in cash and $3.5m in drugs. The bust came after the police intercepted a plane outside Brisbane, and simultaneously arrested and charged more than a dozen people allegedly involved in the syndicate, seizing another 50kg of cannabis and $1.5m in cash. The drug syndicate allegedly operated out of Queensland, NSW, Victoria and the Northern Territory. Detective Senior Sergeant Ken Rogers told reporters: It was quite a sophisticated drug network. They all used cipher phones. They used Redcliffe Airport. They also used Archerfield [airport] and vehicles. There are links to Thailand but at this stage that part of the investigation is ongoing. A forensic police accounts team is also examining documents found at the properties, with further arrests expected. The 14 men, aged 25 to 60, have been charged with about 150 offences, including trafficking in dangerous drugs, serious organised crime, receive or possess property obtained from trafficking. The joint Queensland police and Australian federal police operation into the alleged network started 18 months ago and has led to the seizure of $9.2m in cash, weapons, ammunition, cocaine and cannabis. Det Snr Sgt Rogers said: Drugs of this magnitude being taken off the streets of Queensland and the ill-gotten gains taken out of the hands of these criminals makes Queensland a safer place for us all to live in. The three men arrested at the airport appeared in Brisbane magistrates court on Wednesday and were granted bail to reappear on 1 February. The other 11 men appeared in the same court on Tuesday. Western Australia’s premier Mark McGowan’s office has told the ABC the state’s chief health officer was liaising with NSW Health to seek the latest information about the new case. Quarantine-free travel between the states has only just begun, but with the new case announced in NSW today, there are new questions about the border in the lead-up to Christmas. The WA government considered delaying opening their borders to NSW when another case emerged in early December, but decided to open up anyways as that case didn’t cause a community outbreak. The South Australian ombudsman has ordered South Australia Health to apologise for streaming the premier’s coronavirus statements, after it found the shares were promoting the Liberal party. The ombudsman report found that SA health’s decision to share the livestreams on premier Steven Marshall’s Facebook page “promoted or gave the appearance of promoting” the Liberal party or the premier. SA Health initially held the livestreamed press conferences on its own Facebook page, but in April and May, some of the press conferences were shared on Marshall’s Facebook page. Ombudsman Wayne Lines found in his report that the posts may not have any “party-political messaging”, but it was their location that sparked some concern. “By sharing content from the Steven Marshall Facebook account, the department has arguably promoted that account in a way that may have led to that account receiving more followers.” A Facebook-owned app has been harvesting Australian data. AAP has the story: Facebook deceived Australians and tracked every move they made on their phones through a VPN app, Australia’s consumer watchdog says. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has started proceedings in the federal court against Facebook and two of its subsidiaries for false, misleading or deceptive conduct. The ACCC alleges consumers were tricked by the companies about the nature of Facebook’s Onavo Protect mobile app – a VPN or virtual private network service. When flogging the app to Australian consumers, the ACCC says, Facebook claimed it would keep users’ personal activity data private, protected and secret, and that the data would not be used for any purpose other than providing Onavo Protect’s products. Instead the app tracked the users’ personal activity data and reported back to Facebook, logging their internet history, which apps they opened and how long they spent in them. The data was then used to support Facebook’s market research, including helping it identify potential future acquisition targets. “Consumers often use VPN services because they care about their online privacy, and that is what this Facebook product claimed to offer,” the ACCC chair, Rod Sims, said in a statement on Wednesday. “In fact, Onavo Protect channelled significant volumes of their personal activity data straight back to Facebook.” Apple removed Onavo Protect from its app store in 2018 because of the data harvesting. It was later also removed from the Google Play store and was discontinued in 2019. The ACCC will argue Facebook should be fined for its conduct. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, has announced some changes to coronavirus restrictions for the apple isle, including: Sporting events will be able to host 75% seating capacity at stadiums from 1 January Theatres and cinemas will also be able to expand their seating capacity to 75%, with a maximum of 250 people, from 21 December Gutwein also announced that the first group of seasonal workers recently arrived from Timor Leste are due to finish quarantine on Thursday. They will be heading off to work from Thursday after no one from the group tested positive. Finally, Gutwein announced that the next repatriation flight bringing Tasmanians home has been delayed until 8 January and will be arriving from India. Former Greens leader Bob Brown has been arrested. Again. It’s the second time in two days Brown has been taken in while protesting against logging in north-east Tasmania. The former senator was taken in along with two other activists, the Bob Brown Foundation said in a statement. He was arrested in the same area yesterday, and was accused of trespassing. “I slept out last night under a logging bulldozer which had invaded the Lost Falls forest,” the 75-year-old said. “We saw owls and I heard one of the 300 remaining swift parrots. It was rainy with temperatures down towards zero, but we were content just to know the swift parrot habitat destruction was slowed by us being there.” The Eastern Tiers forest is home to the critically endangered swift parrot, with fewer than 300 remaining in Australia, according to a recent study. Brown has taken state-owned logging group Sustainable Timber Tasmania, and the state and federal governments, to the federal court over forestry agreements his foundation claims are unlawful. The full federal court hearing in Melbourne is examining whether Tasmania’s 20-year regional forest agreement, renewed in 2017, is invalid. A Coles warehouse has locked out its workers from a south-west Sydney depot until February after negotiations broke down. AAP has the story: The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has joined hundreds of workers locked out of a Coles warehouse without pay over Christmas. The supermarket giant has locked the warehouse workers out of its south-west Sydney depot until February after negotiations over pay and conditions broke down. Coles is planning to close the warehouse and shift to automation in 2023. This week, workers agreed to accept a 3.5% pay rise after asking for 5.5%, but the vote did not signal an end to the bitter dispute. They also want more generous redundancy provisions than the maximum 80 weeks Coles is offering and the option to be redeployed across other Coles warehouse facilities. Albanese said the workers and members of the United Workers Union accepted that automation was occurring. “What they want is a fair redundancy system and negotiations in good faith with the company about those issues relating to automation as Coles consolidates its distribution centres,” he told reporters in Smeaton Grange on Wednesday. “We all know technological change can displace workers. What we need to do is make sure workers are looked after as change occurs.” Albanese said the warehouse workers, some of whom had been with Coles for more than 30 years, were among those praised for getting Australia through the coronavirus pandemic. “The fact the company is saying these workers will continue to be locked out over Christmas and up to February is quite frankly a disgrace,” he said. “I have indicated that very clearly on behalf of the Australian Labor party to Coles management. “It is completely unacceptable they are not prepared to negotiate in good faith to resolve these issues and to get these outstanding Australian men and women back to work.” A Coles spokeswoman said the Smeaton Grange workers were already the highest-paid in the supermarket’s distribution network, earning up to 30% more than staff at other Sydney centres. She described the company’s wage and redundancy offers as generous and urged the UWU to accept the proposals so its members could get back to work. “Coles has been transparent with the UWU throughout months of negotiations that if they took industrial action at Smeaton Grange in the lead-up to Christmas, we would have to close the site temporarily and make other supply arrangements to ensure our NSW stores could meet demand over the busy Christmas and new year period,” she told AAP. The attorney general has announced enhanced federal protections for journalists and whistleblowers. The changes being made all come from recommendations from the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security’s recent press freedom inquiry, which will: ensure that only supreme or federal court judges can issue search warrants against journalists for disclosure offences; ensure warrants can only be issued against journalists for disclosure offences after consideration by a public interest advocate; enhance reporting requirements in relation to warrants exercised against journalists; and require the government to consider additional defences for public interest journalism for secrecy offences The government has also accepted 30 recommendations from the Moss review of the Public Interest Disclosure Act, which recommended improvements to the regime governing disclosures made by public sector employees. According to the statement, the reforms “will focus the act on more serious wrongdoing and misconduct, strengthen the oversight role of the commonwealth ombudsman and the inspector general of intelligence and security, require agencies to support public officials when making disclosures and improve the act’s interaction with other investigative processes”. On second thought, perhaps it isn’t a good idea to play in the sea foam, after experts warned that snakes, pollution and viruses could be hidden there. The storms battering the east coast have left many beaches covered in sea foam, with locals frolicking about among the soap-like substance. But the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has told News.com.au that sea foam forms when organic and artificial matter in the ocean is agitated by wind and waves. And while the foam itself is usually harmless, it can hide sea snakes. So please, everyone, keep away from the funny-looking beach soap. For more info on the new locally acquired case in NSW, you can take a look at the Guardian write up here: Birmingham says the government recognises the decisions made by Chinese authorities, but that they were ultimately “not underpinned by facts and evidence”. He also goes into the different practices employed by China on different industries, and how the government will contend with some of them at the WTO. “The application of pressure on marketing distorting factors in the Chinese system where businesses within China are often state-owned enterprises being discouraged from purchasing Australian goods,” Birmingham said. “That is a harder point to prove and where there are extensive judgements or rulings made by Chinese officials, in those areas we will monitor closely all of the trends unfolding in relation to purchasing decisions, watch that closely and see where that leads us.” Birmingham said this step was taken with “extensive consultation” with the Australian barley and grain industry, and that Australia has an “incredibly strong case to mount”. We are highly confident that based on the evidence, data and analysis that we have put together already, Australia has an incredibly strong case to mount in relation to defending the integrity and proprietary of our grain growers and barley producers. We have full confidence that they are not unduly subsidised, that they do not dump their product in global markets, they have operated with nothing but commercial imperatives in relation to the way they have engaged the China market, provided the Chinese customers, over a sustained period of time, with a high-quality, value-for-money, market-oriented opposition in relation to Australian barley. The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, is speaking now about how Australia is reacting to Chinese trade tensions, saying the government will make a formal request through the World Trade Organization to adjudicate the dispute. “We are following this journey with all the appropriate policies processes and courtesies that Australia’s industries have engaged with the Chinese government and the Chinese counterparts. This is the logical and appropriate next step for Australia to take,” he said. He referred to the WTO as the “umpire” in international trade disputes, and has called on said umpire to “adjudicate and ultimately help settle” this dispute. He says the process “could take years”, saying the dispute resolution process was “not perfect”, but “ultimately, it is the right avenue for Australia to take at this point in time”. In the meantime, I want to share with you this incredible footage: We’re expecting the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, to speak on China tensions in a moment, so stay tuned for that. The last positive community transmission in New South Wales was also traced back to an airline crew. The hotel worker who tested positive in early December was likely infected by aircrew who arrived on a flight from the US, the NSW Health minister, Brad Hazzard, said back then. The woman is believed to have become infected while cleaning a hotel room in which the aircrew had stayed, according to News.com.au. Airline staff don’t actually go into quarantine, the same way returning passengers do. Instead, NSW only requires the crews to self-isolate, citing the short turnaround times for their stay. That means they are restricted to their places of accomodation, can only leave for medical emergencies or when given exemptions, and cannot welcome visitors. Today’s positive result has obviously put the spotlight on the protocols, but it is again not the first time the issue has been raised. But Hazzard also referred to strengthening protocols for aircrew in early December, saying: “We obviously need the aircrews to continue coming in … so what can we do to make [the coronavirus protocols] a little more rigorous? I instructed NSW Health just an hour ago to look at that issue.” Rightwing thinktank LibertyWorks has announced it has launched a federal court case challenging the health minister, Greg Hunt’s, orders that ban Australians from leaving Australia. The case will argue section 96 of the Biosecurity Act does not give Hunt that power, although it does not seek to dispute powers to impose quarantine obligations on returning travellers. The LibertyWorks president, Andrew Cooper, said: Minister Hunt has overstepped his legislative powers in preventing Australians from travelling overseas. It’s an illiberal and a draconian restriction on the free movement of Australian citizens, many of whom want to see family and loved ones or to attend to urgent business in other countries. “Preventing people from travelling overseas does nothing to make Australia safer. But it does create unnecessary pain for families who want to be together for Christmas or during this difficult and worrying period of global pandemic. The acting chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, is also speaking now, saying Australia’s vaccine program is on track, with three vaccines likely to be available early next year. Two of those are part of pre-purchase agreements, and one, the AstraZeneca vaccine, is being developed in Melbourne. He said Australia’s immunisation advisory group met on Tuesday to work through the details of prioritisation. Kelly said the details will be announced in January, but roughly laid it out, saying those most likely to get serious illnesses, such as the elderly, and people with chronic diseases will be given first priority. The second priority will be frontline workers, specifically healthcare workers and aged care workers. The third priority will be essential workers that keep the economy moving, with Kelly saying the “granular” details of the priorities will be clarified later. He also said the plan is on track to begin vaccinations in March. Hazzard says cases like this inevitably happen: “You can’t expect in a Covid world pandemic that we won’t from time to time have a case. It will happen. We’ve been saying that for months. It will happen.” He also outlines what he thinks is an ideal Christmas gift this year: “But I would say this to the community – the best Christmas gift you can give to your family, your friends and your community is to go and get tested if you have any symptoms. And do it straight away.” Hazzard seems reluctant to lay down hard consequences for this case, citing the complexity of ensuring the protection of essential workers within the actual quarantine programs, such as workers at the hotel, or drivers moving airline staff. He says the government is attempting to “strike a balance”, saying the state and Australia need airlines to keeping coming into the country, and that regulating across different airlines and crews would prove “challenging”. But Hazzard rejected the idea he’s giving aircrews a free run for now. The man did not drive around members of the public, but worked for Sydney Ground Transport in Alexandria, ferrying aircrews. He has three home contacts who are being tested, with results expected in the next hour or so. NSW Health is working to trace his contacts and trips, and whom he has picked up and dropped off. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, is speaking now, announcing a new locally acquired case in the state. A 45-year-old man has tested positive after 8pm last night. The man drives a van that carries international aircrews back and forth from Sydney airport. Hazzard said the government are in discussion with international airlines, saying that all international aircrews arriving in the state will have to quarantine in the same way as other international visitors. They won’t have to do the full 14 days, as they’re usually on 24 to 72-hour turnarounds, but it does mean they will be in quarantine. Jarryd Hayne is set to face a retrial on the sexual assault allegations against him, AAP reports: Former NRL star Jarryd Hayne, who is accused of attacking a woman in her bedroom, will face a retrial in Sydney on rape charges. Prosecutor Brian Costello confirmed on Wednesday in the Newcastle district court that the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions would pursue two rape charges against Hayne after his first trial in Newcastle ended in a hung jury. The jury of eight men and four women was discharged on 7 December after a two-week trial when they failed to reach a verdict. Judge Tim Gartelmann on Wednesday said if the trial went ahead in Newcastle, it was unlikely to be accommodated until late 2021 or early 2022. The judge said the Newcastle courts’ diary had been impacted by Covid-19, causing delays. Costello indicated there was a possibility the trial could be heard earlier in Sydney. The case was briefly adjourned to allow Costello and Hayne’s defence lawyer, Penny Musgrave, to discuss their options. Both parties returned a short time later with Musgrave, who appeared via audio visual link from Sydney, telling the court she had spoken to the court listings manager who indicated Hayne’s two-week trial could start in Sydney on 8 March. Costello said the application to move the trial to Sydney was not opposed, given it would proceed much more expeditiously than if it returned to Newcastle. The judge listed the case for a readiness hearing in Sydney on 29 January with the trial to begin on 8 March. Hayne’s bail was continued until 29 January. Hayne, 32, who was excused from appearing in court on Wednesday because he had legal representation, has pleaded not guilty to two charges of aggravated sexual assault recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm. The prime minister has reiterated that he is working to bring home the over 30,000 Australians stranded overseas. Speaking to the Seven Network, Scott Morrison said the stranded Australians were his “first priority”. “We are looking to get you home as soon as possible and that is what the record shows. We know you want to come home and you have every right to come home,” he said. “You are Australian and you are my first priority in terms of people coming back into the country.” Almost 10,000 people are looking to come to Australia from India and another 4,500 from the UK. The PM shot down any suggestions of allowing international visitors back in Australia any time soon, saying the government has no planes to lift international border closures. He also said the details of the vaccine rollout are not yet ironed out, but that health workers and others in “critical occupations” would be at the front of the queue. “But the details of that plan are still being worked out,” he said. Two cyclones are bearing down on the Pacific Islands, with Fiji’s main island bracing for potentially catastrophic damage as tropical cyclones Zazu and Yasa intensified off their coastlines on Wednesday. Yasa, which has been upgraded to a category 5 cyclone with winds of up to 270km/h, is expected to make landfall on Thursday or early Friday, while Zazu is currently north-east of Tonga’s capital Nuku’alofa, is rated a category 1 system, with winds of up to 90km/h. Fiji’s prime minister, Frank Bainimarama, has urged all Fijians to prepare evacuation plans. “We should all prepare now for heavy rain, damaging winds, coastal inundation and flooding across the country,” he said in a national address. You can read more on the cyclones at our story here: Australia’s bushfire recovery fund has given $10m to a paper mill owned by one of the country’s richest men, and major political donor, Anthony Pratt. A key element to the recovery fund is the local economic recovery fund, designed to supercharge economic recovery through community-led projects or direct industry assistance. Despite promises that the fund would be simple and accessible to smaller community groups, bushfire-affected residents are struggling to navigate the complex grants processes – requiring the assistance, in some cases, of professional grant writers or full-time volunteers to even apply for money. You can read more on the story here: In other vaccine news, the US Food and Drug Administration will be voting on whether to approve the Moderna vaccine tomorrow. The Moderna vaccine is similar to the Pfizer shot, but is easier to store as it does not need to be kept in -70C conditions. It shows similarly strong protection against the virus and uses the same technology as the Pfizer vaccine. The news comes as the US passed 300,000 deaths on Monday, with about 2,400 deaths and 210,000 new cases every day. Shipments of the Pfizer vaccine have already begun arriving on Tuesday, with the first 3m shots strictly reserved for frontline workers. There’s been another day of no locally acquired Covid-19 cases in Queensland, but there was one new case acquired overseas. I’d just like to take a moment and highlight the fantastic headline for the Sydney Morning Herald’s investigation into the table tennis fixing scandal: Bets, lies and table tennis: How police pinged an international pong Terrible story, great headline. All in a day’s work. The Chinese embassy has told the Guardian that Australia has been “politicising economic, investment and technological issues, and discriminating against Chinese companies”. In a statement, the embassy backed China’s decision to block coal imports, saying Australia “dresses up as a victim”: Recently we’ve seen many reports in which Australia dresses up as a victim, pointing an accusing finger at China, directly or by insinuation. This move is meant to confound the public and we will never accept it. In fact, it is the Australian side that has been politicising economic, investment and technological issues, and discriminating against Chinese companies in violation of market economy principles and international trade rules. There is nothing to worry about if it is normal exchange and cooperation based on mutual respect and in compliance with rules. On the contrary, what is worrying for us is such moves as politicising and obstructing normal trade activities, interfering in others’ internal affairs in defiance of basic norms governing international relations and even provoking confrontation. We hope that the Australian side will reflect upon its own conduct, match its words with deeds, and provide favourable conditions for bilateral practical cooperation in various fields, instead of the opposite. It comes after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the ban would be a lose-lose for both countries and a clear breach of World Trade Organization rules, as well as a China-Australia free trade agreement. The resources minister, Keith Pitt, said Australia expected all its trading partners to play by the rules. “We are doing our part,” Pitt said on Wednesday. “Australia has not moved in terms of the free trade agreements and we continue to meet what we said we would do. But we expect all of our exporters to have a level playing field, be treated fairly and that is what we are looking for.” China has slapped a series of trade bans and tariffs on Australian goods as diplomatic tensions simmer over foreign interference and investment laws and calls for an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 coronavirus. A Brisbane-based company has received US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for the first rapid at-home Covid-19 tests that don’t require a prescription. Ellume, a digital diagnostics company, announced its quick Covid-19 antigen test is the first of its kind to be granted emergency use authorisation. A statement from the company said the test will be able to provide consumers with a quick diagnosis: “The Ellume self-test will help reduce the spread of Covid-19 through rapid self-detection, providing users with real-time results at home, enabling self-isolation and patient education on escalation of medical care.” Stephen Hahn, the head of the FDA, praised the company and said in a statement the rollout of the tests would work in tandem with the vaccine to curb the pandemic in the US. “By authorising a test for over-the-counter use, the FDA allows it to be sold in places like drug stores, where a patient can buy it, swab their nose, run the test and find out their results in as little as 20 minutes.” A Newcastle man has been arrested after being accused of betting on fixed ping pong matches and netting himself half a million dollars. The man allegedly placed bets on European table tennis matches he knew were fixed, as part of a transnational gambling syndicate. Police raided nine homes across Newcastle, Lake Macquarie and Port Stephens early on Wednesday, seizing documents and electronic devices. Kayakers have been captured attempting to brave a gushing waterfall in northern NSW. The men appear to be kayaking down the waterfall at Dorrigo Mountain in the Northern Tablelands. Below, Waterfall Way, which cuts across the mountain, had been closed after waters rushing down had inundated the road. Of course it is inadvisable to kayak down a flooding river, however some props must be paid to their bravery. There is currently a risk of flash flooding at around 10am today to multiple rivers, including the Richmond, Clarence, Wilsons, Bellinger, McLean and Hastings after yesterday’s deluge. Flooding is still widespread around the Northern Rivers, with evacuation warnings still in place for south Murwillumbah and also low-lying areas north of Macksville. The SES says while rain is still around, roads will be flooded and the rivers are swollen. It attended 85 jobs overnight and has performed 24 flood rescues since the extreme weather began on the weekend. In total the SES has attended more than 1,016 jobs. “The majority of those jobs are fixing leaking roofs and damage due to heavy rainfall or trees down due to strong winds and we’re also getting requests for sandbags,” an SES spokeswoman said on Wednesday. The Coalition has been accused of wasting 18 months on a “nothing” electric vehicle strategy. Critics are lambasting the government after a discussion paper on the strategy was leaked, showing no proposals for direct financial help to encourage people to buy electric vehicles (EVs) or a phase-out date for the sale of new fossil fuel cars. The document only confirms a budget commitment of $74.5m in funding, mostly for charging infrastructure across the country, and a two-year EV trial for a government agency that provides cars and drivers for politicians and funding to update the “green vehicle guide” website. “It’s been pretty clear that their ambition has been to end up with a paper that says ‘EV strategy’ on it and now they have one. But there is nothing in there,” the chief executive of the Electric Vehicle Council, Behyad Jafari, told the Guardian. You can read more on the document here: The Northern Territory is moving to demobilise eight coronavirus road border patrols. The chief minister, Michael Gunner, said police presence at the Northern Territory’s minor road border entry points of Docker River, Tobermorey, Lake Nash, Mulga Park, Curtain Springs, Tanami, Kintore and Finke would be wound back over the next week. But police won’t completely disappear, maintaining a physical presence at three major entry points – the Stuart Highway, Victoria Highway and Barkly Highway, which could be demobilised by early next year. The territory has recorded two new Covid cases this week, in international travellers who have returned on government-assisted repatriation flights. Another doughnut day in Victoria! I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again: it’s an achievement worth celebrating every day. The Australian Workers’ Union is applying to have fruit pickers guaranteed minimum wage. The union is fighting to change the horticulture award, to ensure casual fruit pickers are paid a minimum of $25 an hour. The horticulture award currently allows farmers to pay workers either a piece rate, according to how much fruit they pick, or an hourly rate. You can read more on the push here: Although the dangerous weather warning should be heeded across the north of NSW, I can’t help but feel like this looks like so much fun: NSW Health is urging people to remain “Covid safe” during the Christmas shopping rush. Shopping centres will be expecting visits from SafeWork NSW inspectors, who will be ensuring the last of the state’s Covid rules are maintained, and people remain safe while grabbing their gifts. NSW Health’s Dr Chatu Yapa said there are many ways to keep safe while still managing to cross off your shopping lists. “This year we’re asking people to avoid crowded shopping centres. If the shopping centre is too crowded, you should consider returning at an off-peak time, doing your gift shopping online or shopping locally at community businesses,” Yapa said. They advise to continue: Maintaining 1.5 metre distance from other people Washing your hands often and using hand sanitiser To avoid crowded shopping centres, and to try and shop at off-peak times. They also strongly recommend wearing a face mask if physical distancing isn’t possible. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has apparently inflated the results of a landmark survey that show trust in the public service has increased during the pandemic. The department appears to have combined responses that said they “somewhat” trust the government to those that responded that they “trust” the government, in the hopes of bolstering results. It came after dismal results in a similar survey in March 2019 that showed only 25% believed the public service could “successfully implement changes to meet the needs of all Australians”, according to the heavily redacted document. On Tuesday, the department released results claiming trust was much higher, at 59%, once the 28% of respondents who said they “somewhat trust” the public service were added. You can read more on the survey here: The top special forces soldier photographed drinking beer out of the prosthetic leg of a dead Taliban soldier has stepped down. The Australian newspaper is reporting WO1 John Letch, recently identified as the man in the photo on social media, has relinquished his position and is understood to be considering his options. The leg was taken from a Taliban insurgent, despite rules forbidding the taking of war trophies, and was used as a drinking vessel by SAS soldiers at the unofficial Tarin Kowt bar, known as the Fat Lady’s Arms. It comes weeks after the Brereton report found a “warrior culture” had contributed to an environment in which war crimes were allegedly committed. Letch was supposed to work with Maj Gen Paul Kenny to implement the military’s response to the Brereton inquiry, looking into cultural change and imposing discipline on non-commissioned ranks. A severe weather warning for heavy rainfall and abnormally high tides is still in place for parts of Northern Rivers and mid-north coast forecast districts of NSW, but the weather does appear to be easing. Rainfall rates are expected to ease this morning as the trough weakens and extends south. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued flood warnings for the Wilsons, Bellinger and Kalang, Macleay, Hastings, Orara, Nambucca, Camden Haven and Richmond rivers. A flood watch remains in place for the remaining river catchments along the mid-north coast and Northern Rivers. Infrastructure Australia has released a national study into the impacts of the pandemic on roads, internet and rubbish. The report notes traffic levels largely rebounded after lockdowns across the country, with second-hand car sales rising as people opted to drive and avoided public transport. Usage of public transport dropped enormously, to between 10% and 30% of usual levels, but rebounded to a “new normal” of 60% to 70%. Infrastructure Australia estimated that up to 4 million employees have been working from home since March with about one-third keen to remain remote. The shift has driven up energy, water and waste consumption in homes, and strained broadband networks. It also drove enormous growth in online retail trade, recording five times the annual growth of 2019. The report labels six key areas as priorities to be addressed in the 2021 Australian Infrastructure Plan. It calls for a mitigation of growing car dependency, improved waste management and examination of repurposing real estate in CBDs. The report found some regional communities saw a boom in tourism and population growth, with people moving away from metropolitan areas. That has resulted in a 200% increase in net migration from capital cities to regional areas. The Infrastructure Australia chief executive, Romilly Madew, said the findings show that compared with other developed economies, the nation’s infrastructure networks were resilient. “Across sectors, we found that Australia’s governments and infrastructure providers navigated dramatic changes to community behaviour and network requirements, and rapidly adjusted their service provision,” she said. On Malka Leifer, one of her alleged victims, Nicole Meyer, has spoken out, telling the ABC she welcomed the news of her extradition: Our hearts were racing and it was absolutely incredible to hear the words. To understand that this point has finally been reached from the day we gave our police statements in 2011, it’s really staggering. It’s so huge, because it is something that we have been fighting for. With 74 court hearings and every single day in between. Good morning everyone, Mostafa Rachwani here, and welcome to another live blog. We are fewer than 10 days away from Christmas, so I hope you’ve gotten your shopping and planning done. First up today, it appears the worst of the the storms lashing the NSW north coast and southern Queensland is behind us. The trough that has inundated the region in the past couple of days is easing, however thousands of residents have been asked to remain on alert by the Bureau of Meteorology. They say the rain that has already fallen could still drive floods. Minor flooding alerts have been issued for Wilsons River at Lismore, Mackleay River at Kempsey, Camden Haven River at Laurieton and for Richmond River. We’ll also be keeping an eye on the ongoing trade rift between Australia and China, with Chinese authorities defending their coal ban as both legal and “responsible”. Wang Wenbin, spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, accused Australia of “constantly accusing and attacking China by innuendo”. Malka Leifer, accused of sexually assaulting female students during her time as principal of the ultra-Orthodox Adass Israel school in Melbourne’s south-east, is to be extradited to Australia after Israel’s supreme court rejected her appeal. Finally, ahead of tomorrow’s release of the mid-year budget, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the health minister, Greg Hunt, will today reveal a nearly $1bn dollar investment in the aged care industry. The government has been under pressure to address the failings of the aged care system since the pandemic particularly hit the sector. And in international news, the US Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has become the most senior Republican to recognise Joe Biden as the president-elect, after the electoral college formally affirmed his victory. If you see any news that you think should be on here, don’t hesitate to shoot me a message on Twitter, @Rachwani91, or by email on mostafa.rachwani@theguardian.com.55110falsefalseJosh Taylor and Mostafa Rachwani (earlier)Coronavirus testing in Sydney, where two more people have tested positive.An erosion-damaged beach at Byron Bay this week.Jill Hennessy says her two daughters ‘continue to be my greatest source of joy’.Cars drive through a flooded road at Tumbulgum, northern NSW, this week.South Australian premier Steven Marshall.Tweed locals Noah Liles (left) and Preston Duggan, play in the foam at Froggy Beach at Coolangatta in Queensland on Tuesday.People paddle along a flooded street in Tumbulgum, NSW.Tumbulgum resident Gavin Mcgahey rides through a flooded street with his huskies Max and Sienna.A flooded street in Tumbulgum.A near-empty street in Melbourne during the strict restrictions due to the coronavirus.Malka Leifer (right), is brought to a courtroom in Jerusalem in 2018. On Tuesday Israel’s supreme court rejected an appeal by the alleged child sex abuser to block her extradition to Australia.