Good morning, this is James Murray bringing you the main stories and must-reads on Thursday 12 March.



Top stories

The World Health has declared that the Covid-19 virus is now pandemic.  Director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said "pandemic" was not a word to use carelessly or lightly, but 4,291 people had lost their lives and thousands more were seriously ill in hospital. "In the days and weeks ahead we expect to see the many cases, the many deaths and the number of affected countries climb even higher," he said. Warning against alarming levels of inaction, Ghebreyesus said the virus could still be controlled if countries took "urgent and aggressive action". Countries in China's vicinity have all had some measure of success in tackling the virus, using techniques such as drive-through testing, mass screening to identify infection hotspots and financial support for the self-isolated.

Here's how South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan are tackling the virus. In Australia, the government followed a $2.4bn health package with an            $8.7bn stimulus for businesses. "The economy needs temporary help right now to bounce back better so the livelihoods of all Australians are protected," said Scott Morrison. Meanwhile, health minister Greg Hunt said the government was            unable to predict how many people would catch the disease or how many would die. Australian stock markets had another poor day,            as the number of cases reached 112.

Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood titan turned convicted rapist, has been sentenced to 23 years in prison.  Weinstein was given a 20-year sentence for  for forcing oral sex on a production assistant, Miriam Haley, in 2006 and another three years for third-degree rape of a woman whom the Guardian is not naming. In her victim impact statement, Haley said Weinstein "not only stripped me of my dignity as a human being and as a woman ... it diminished my confidence and faith in myself". Weinstein, who was rolled into the courtroom in a wheelchair, made a rambling address in which he said "men are confused about all of this issue". Unsealed court documents saw Weinstein's rage laid bare as it was revealed he said that Jennifer Aniston "should be killed"            after it was claimed he sexually assaulted the actor.

Democratic presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders says he will remain in the race despite crushing losses to Joe Biden in the most recent round of primaries. The former vice president secured delegate-rich Michigan, along with Mississippi, Missouri and Idaho, leaving Sanders with an almost impossible hill to climb to become the man who will take on Donald Trump. Addressing reporters at his campaign headquarters in Vermont, Sanders said he was winning the generational and ideological argument and still wanted to challenge Biden in this Sunday's debate. "Joe, what are you going to do to end the absurdity of the United States of America being the only major country on Earth where healthcare is not a human right?" Sanders asked rhetorically.

Australia

George Pell's lawyers say the jury that convicted him of child sexual abuse was wrong to reject arguments about the improbability of the offending occurring.  Pell's final chance of appealing his verdict began at the high court on Wednesday.

Five people have died after a government charter flight crashed into the Lockhart River in Queensland.  Queensland police confirmed the 10-seat plane had attempted to land two times at Lockhart River in wild weather.

There's hope for the critically endangered snapping turtle after a breeding program at Taronga Zoo saw 35 turtles hatch.                      A virus wiped out more than 90% of the adult population in 2015.

Rich Australians are not paying their fair share of the tax burden, according to the Australian Tax Office.  New data shows the wealthiest Australians and their businesses are short by $960m.

The world

On the distant exoplanet Wasp-76b, scientists have identified rain made of molten iron.  Conditions on the planet in Pisces include temperatures of 2,400C and 16,000km/h per hour winds.

Wuhan doctor Ai Fen, director of the emergency at Wuhan Central hospital, has spoken out against authorities' response to the disease.  Fen criticised hospital management for suppressing early warnings of the outbreak.

The coronavirus death toll in the US has now reached 31.  A top federal health official warned America on Wednesday that the worst is yet to come.

Russian hoaxers posing as Greta Thunberg and her father have duped Prince Harry into a candid conversation about "Megxit".  In the phone call, the Harry describes the UK political system as "broken" but refuses to comment on Prince Andrew.

Recommended reads

Three months after the bushfires, many living in remote Australian communities are in limbo.  With a lack of accommodation and a struggle for clean water and food, Verona resident Lindy Marshall tells of the interminable wait for normalcy to return. Despite the government encouraging tourists to return to the region, hundreds of people living on the New South Wales south coast continue to live a day-to-day existence. Though Marshall's home insurance has been paid out, the property clean-up company is yet to visit, and thanks to a scarcity of rental properties she's been unable to secure short-term accommodation. "This is what people in the city don't understand," Marshall told Guardian Australia.

A doctor in a small, remote hospital with many Aboriginal patients talks anonymously about the "mayhem" he expects to come hand in hand with coronavirus. "                     Our patients are already among the sickest in the world. They suffer from diabetes, heart disease, obesity and hypertension more severely and at a younger age than any other group anywhere," he writes. The doctor expects very high death rates among the Aboriginal communities that he works with. In the 2009 swine flu pandemic, Indigenous Australians made up 11% of all cases and had a six-fold higher death rate than non-Indigenous Australians.

Not sure exactly what a "pandemic" is?  The WHO just declared Covid-19 to be pandemic, but what does that exactly mean for the world. Melissa Davey           lays it out clearly in our explainer.

Listen

The Today In Focus podcast looks at how the coronavirus took hold in Italy.  The country is now in total lockdown as it became the centre of the disease in Europe. All travel was banned unless justified on professional or health grounds. The Guardian's Peter Beaumont talks to           Anushka Asthana           about the origins of the virus in Italy, while Lorenzo Tondo, based in Palermo, describes the impact the virus is having on Italy's health service and economy.

Sport

Three F1 team members have been placed in self-isolation over coronavirus fears.  One McLaren and two Haas team members have been tested as the decision to continue with the race comes under fire.

Bad news for the Brisbane Broncos as star player Jack Bird suffered his second ACL tear in two years.  The injury occurred moments after coach Anthony Seibold saluted Bird's triumphant return.

Media roundup

Most of the major news websites focus on the WHO's declaration of a pandemic. The  Sydney Morning Herald  and ABC News  both lead with the story along with takes on the government's            $8bn stimulus for businesses affected by the virus. No mention of the pandemic on the Australian, but there are headlines calling the            "big shot of stimulus" the            "PM's cash splash". The Age  has an interview with Celeste Barber ahead of her runway debut at the Melbourne fashion festival. She responds to allegations her $52m bushfire fundraising effort was misguided by saying she'd "do it all again".

Coming up

Cardinal George Pell's appeal bid in continues in the high court.

The NSW State Parole Authority will resume consideration of parole for paedophile and former TV star Robert Hughes.

Sign up

If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.