block-time published-time 6.31pm GMT

And finally... here's our economics editor Larry Elliott on today's market moves:

Shares in London closed at their highest level since June as stock markets around the world rose sharply after news of successful trials of a second Covid-19 vaccine.

For the second Monday in a row, equity prices soared on all the world's leading bourses after Moderna said its treatment for the pandemic was almost 95% effective.

Analysts said the announcement by the pharmaceutical company - following that made by Pfizer a week ago - had boosted confidence that an end to the pandemic was in sight.

Despite warnings that distributing the vaccine would be a "D-day" style exercise, investors sought shares in companies previously worst affected by the lockdowns and other restrictions imposed to slow the spread of the virus...

Here's the full story:

Related:  Equity prices soar as markets react to Moderna vaccine

Goodnight. GW

block-time published-time 6.28pm GMT

The World Economic Forum have published more of Christine Lagarde's comments about the pandemic, and its impact on young people, at their Pioneers of Change summit today.

"We were standing on one side of a massive river of uncertainty and hardship... thanks to the tremendous hard work of companies in the US, Germany and other corners of the world we're now seeing the other side of the river," Lagarde said in the opening plenary of the Pioneers summit.

However, crossing the choppy water would be a struggle necessitating both private sector innovation and a "policy bridge" to help countries recover from the worst economic shock in generations.

"If we get the policy mix right, hopefully we will protect the economy in the aggregate, but we will not prevent it from being transformed. We need to focus on that so that those transformations are not scars but transformations for the better," she said.

A generation of young job-seekers risked having their "dreams crushed" without a rebound in jobs growth in the private sector, Lagarde warned. Investment in Research & Development would be crucial.

More here: 'We're seeing the other side of the river' - top quotes on life after the pandemic

block-time published-time 5.41pm GMT

One more thing to flag up....Britain has now secured a deal for an initial five million doses of Moderna's new vaccine, my colleagues Jessica Elgot and Ian Sample report:

The deal done on Monday will mean vaccines could be delivered to the UK from spring 2021 if approved by the medicines regulator and increases the total number of doses secured by the UK to 355m.

At a Downing Street press conference, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, said the preliminary results were "excellent news", adding: "Although I stress that this is preliminary, the safety data is limited and their production facilities are not yet at scale." Hancock said the government had secured an "initial agreement" for 5m doses.

Related:  UK buys 5m doses of Moderna Covid vaccine

enltrThe Moderna vaccine was always one of the front runners, why wasn't it part of the UK stockpile from the very start? Health Secretary @MattHancock tells @SkyNewsThomas that the govt's approach is to have a "good spread of the vaccines". Live updates ?? https://t.co/ihliqcoispic.twitter.com/jE2xyuiAUQ

- SkyNews (@SkyNews) November 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 5.21pm GMT

The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 index over the last year Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 5.19pm GMT

Europe's Stoxx 600 index hits highest close since February

European stock markets all closed higher tonight, led by Spain -- where stocks have been particularly badly hit by the pandemic.

This lifted the Europe-wide Stoxx 600 index to its highest closing level since late February - the first week of the market crash.

Here's how it panned out:

•FTSE 100: up 104 points or 1.66% at 6,421•German DAX : up 61 points or 0.5% at 13,138•French CAC : up 91 points or 1.7% at 5,471•Spain's IBEX : up 202 points or 2.6% at 7,986•Italian FTSE MIB : up 413 points or 2% at 21,317

FTSE 100: up 104 points or 1.66% at 6,421

German DAX : up 61 points or 0.5% at 13,138

French CAC : up 91 points or 1.7% at 5,471

Spain's IBEX : up 202 points or 2.6% at 7,986

Italian FTSE MIB : up 413 points or 2% at 21,317

David Madden of CMC Markets reports that property firms, airlines, transport companies, pub chains and hotels all benefited from vaccine optimism:

Similar to last Monday, the news that great progress been made in relation to a possible Covid-19 vaccine has boosted stocks. This time around, the update has come from Moderna Inc. The pharma company announced that a possible coronavirus drug has been 94.5% effective. Every sector has been impacted by the pandemic but some have been hit harder than others. Airlines, transport, real estate investment trusts (REIT) and hospitality stocks were severely impacted because they are arguably the most exposed to the health crisis.

Like with the moves seen one week ago, those sectors have benefitted the most today, as they have the most to gain from the health emergency being resolved.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.42pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.52pm GMT

FTSE 100 hits highest close since June amid vaccine optimism

Britain's FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has just hit its highest closing level in over five months.

The FTSE 100 ended the day 104.9 points higher at 6421 points, a gain of 1.66% today, lifted by optimism over Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine.

That's its highest closing level since 8th June, extending its already-impressive November gains.

It adds over £26bn to the FTSE 100's value (last Monday it surged by £70bn after Pfizer's vaccine trial news).

The FTSE 100 over the last six months Photograph: Refinitiv

Jet engine maker Rolls-Royce (+9.9%), hotel chain Whitbread  (+9.8%) and airline group IAG  (+9.7%) ended the day as the top risers.

Ocado  fell 4%, though, as investors moved out of tech stocks and into companies badly hurt by the pandemic.

Among smaller companies, cinema group Cineworld  jumped 13.5% and cruise operator Carnival  gained 12.1%.

Vaccine hopes are helping investors to look through the dreadful health crisis caused by the pandemic, explains Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at  IG :

Another day, another vaccine with promising results. Like buses, good news on the Covid front appears to be coming all at once, or at least with respect to vaccines. The virus itself continues to wreak havoc, but the market is continuing to look past all this towards a time when nations are engaged in widespread vaccination programmes. While the bounce today on the Moderna news isn't anything like what we saw last week, there is still plenty of positivity, and with equity inflows picking up as well it looks like the bullish November momentum in equity markets still has plenty of room to run.

Again, like last week, value has outperformed growth, with the Nasdaq's paltry gains easily outdone, and for those lucky enough to have picked the (apparent) low in many 'reopening' stocks it seems more gains are on the way. Once again the Dow has shied away from smashing through 30,000, touching and then retreating from this level for the second Monday in a row, but it seems a matter of when, not if, the index will finally breach this latest impressive round number.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.34pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.39pm GMT

Dow Jones hits new record high after Moderna news

Back in New York, the Dow Jones industrial average has just touched a new all-time high.

The Dow has hit 29,942 points, just above last Monday's intraday high, and putting the index on track for its first record closing high since February.

enltr* DOW HITS RECORD HIGH @Reuters

- Carl Quintanilla (@carlquintanilla) November 16, 2020

enltrDow on verge of 30,000 and first record close in 10 months on back of Apple's stock surge https://t.co/a1jWUiUSzo

- MarketWatch (@MarketWatch) November 16, 2020

Edward Moya  of OANDA  says the news that Moderna's vaccine has proved effective in tests has 'cemented optimism' in the markets.

US stocks raced higher on Moderna's upbeat vaccine news, which along with Pfizer's vaccine raise expectations for a return to pre-pandemic life before next winter. The rotation into value stocks continues as the best-case vaccine scenarios unfold. Last week, Pfizer gave hope that vaccine progress was getting us closer to a post-COVID economy. Today, Moderna's vaccine news cemented optimism that highly effective vaccines should be readily available next year.

The Russell 2000 index hit a fresh intraday record high, the Dow is poised to surge above 30,000 and the Nasdaq is still seeing some love.

On paper, it looks like Moderna won the vaccine race, a slightly more effective rate than Pfizer and much easier to store. But this would be Moderna's first approved drug for vaccination and will likely mean they will have more hurdles for ramping up production. Operation Warp Speed will provide all the resources to both Pfizer and Moderna and possibly others.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.41pm GMT

block-time published-time 4.12pm GMT

Reuters: global markets at record high

A gauge of global stocks has hit a record high today  as the latest batch of positive data for a possible COVID-19 vaccine boosted sentiment, along with signs of economic recovery in Asia, while oil prices jumped, Reuters reports :

The MSCI World Index of global shares, building on strong overnight gains in Asia's leading markets and a stronger open for most European bourses, managed to extend gains after  the Moderna announcement to hit a record.

The MSCI World stocks index Photograph: Refinitiv

The US S&P 50 0 closed at a record high on Friday night, and is still up another 1% today - on track for a new record close.

block-time published-time 4.03pm GMT

The head of the European Central Bank,  Christine Lagarde, has warned that young people could see their dreams crushed, unless business and policymakers protect them from the economic damage of the pandemic:

enltr'We're now seeing the other side of the river' - but we need businesses and policy to avoid 'crushing the dreams' of young people - @Lagarde#PioneersOfChange

- World Economic Forum (@wef) November 16, 2020

block-time published-time 3.44pm GMT

With around 45 minutes until trading ends in Europe, the London stock market is still on track for its highest closing level since early June.

The FTSE 100 is currently holding its gains, up 118 points or 1.9% at 6434 points, with travel firms, hospitality companies and oil giant still in the top risers.

Property developers are also rallying, with British Land up 6.5% and Land Securities up 5%.

Willem Sels,  Chief Market Strategist at  HSBC Global Private Banking  says news of a second effective Covid-19 vaccine is reassuring investors:

"As several companies make progress on a COVID vaccine, the execution risk drops as the roll-out doesn't now depend on a single firm.

The lowered execution risk should broaden the recovery - rather than just manufacturing and technology, we expect the recovery to also include consumption, which in many countries makes up more than 50% of GDP. This will help stock markets and support cyclicals.

block-time published-time 3.35pm GMT

Rubenstein: distributing vaccine will be D-Day challenge

Billionaire investor David Rubenstein has warned that distributing Covid-19 vaccines will be a massive challenge for the next US administration.

Rubenstein, cofounder of the Carlyle Group, told CNBC that investors are anticipating that effective vaccines will be rolled out, allowing the economy to recover.

The market really wants to have this vaccine distributed, because until the vaccine is distributed, and it's vaccinated a large part of the population, we are not going to be able to get back to the economy we want.

But getting to that point will probably take a year, Rubenstein warns.

And while he hails the "terrific job" that Moderna, Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca have all done, in "heroic fashion", Rubenstein adds that vaccines need to be distributed, otherwise they're useless.

Large consumer companies, such as pharmaceuticals chain CVS  and hypermarket giant Walmart, need to be involved, he insists.

This means Joe Biden and his team face an enormous challenge when it takes over in January.

As Rubenstein puts it:

That's what the new administration is going to have to worry about, getting the distribution method done, and it's going to be like a D-Day event.

It's an enormous logistical problem, and it can be done, but it's going to be a lot of work.

enltr"It's going to be like a D-Day event." @OneCarlyle 's David Rubenstein says a COVID-19 vaccine must be distributed or it will be useless. "It's an enormous logistical problem." https://t.co/o9u9mPipXipic.twitter.com/RNsS8oHDqj

- CNBC (@CNBC) November 16, 2020

block-time published-time 3.08pm GMT

Michael Breen, director of infectious diseases and ophthalmology at analytics firm  GlobalData,  says Moderna and Pfizer's vaccines have both performed much better than expected:

Moderna's vaccine's efficacy data exceeded expectations and could not have come at a better time. Like Pfizer, the length of time from concept, to clinic, to data readouts for Moderna's vaccine - less than one year from the discovery of this novel coronavirus - is nothing short of remarkable.

"Furthermore, the results from both developers underscore the potential that mRNA technology has not only for addressing any infectious disease, but also as a rapid-response platform for dealing with emerging diseases.

"More data are needed for both vaccines that might highlight differences between them and inform how each should be used. It is entirely possible that both vaccines have similar efficacies across all groups, in which case they should both be rolled out as rapidly as possible.

"One key difference is that Moderna's vaccine does not require deep-freeze storage, while Pfizer's does. This creates significant logistical difficulties that could easily give the advantage for COVID-19 vaccines to Moderna.

"However, in the end, the broadening of our armamentarium  to control the pandemic might be the boon that healthcare workers and economists alike have been longing for. These vaccines could not only offer a solution to the problem but can help accelerate the timeframe to recovering from the damage done."

block-time published-time 2.57pm GMT

Energy companies, banks, and travel companies are among the risers in New York.

Oil producer Chevron  is leading the Dow risers, up 4%, with aircraft maker Boeing  gaining 3.2%. JP Morgan is up 2.9%, and retailer Walgreen Boots Alliance has picked up 3%.

block-time published-time 2.42pm GMT

Wall Street jumps     A street sign for Wall Street outside the New York Stock Exchange in Manhattan. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters

The US stock market has opened sharply higher, as investors welcome the news that Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine was 94.5% effective in medical trials.

The Dow Jones i ndustrial average, the broader S&P 500 index and the tech-focused Nasdaq  are all heading towards the record intraday highs set a week ago (after Pfizer's vaccine results were released).

•Dow Jones industrial average: up 329 points or 1.1% at 29,809 points•S&P 500: up 23 points or 0.65% at 3,608.5 points•Nasdaq: up 31 points or 0.27% at 11,861 points

Dow Jones industrial average: up 329 points or 1.1% at 29,809 points

S&P 500: up 23 points or 0.65% at 3,608.5 points

Nasdaq: up 31 points or 0.27% at 11,861 points

enltrU.S. stocks open higher https://t.co/kP8XWFoLjcpic.twitter.com/wU6jwXjB1p

- Bloomberg Markets (@markets) November 16, 2020

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44pm GMT

block-time published-time 2.22pm GMT

The list of top risers and fallers on London's FTSE 100 shows that investors are anticipating that Covid-19 vaccines will help the global economy recover from this year's slump.

Oil companies, hotel chains and airlines are still leading the rally; British Airway's parent company IAG  is still up over 11%, and BP  and Royal Dutch Shell have now gained over 6%, following the oil price move.

But online grocery business Ocado  has fallen 4.5%, having benefitted from the surge in home deliveries during lockdowns. Takeaway firm Just Eat has also dropped, along with Rentokil  (which runs a specialist cleaning service).

The top risers and fallers on the FTSE 100 so far today Photograph: Refinitiv

Adam Vettese, analyst at investment platform eToro, suggests investors should be a little cautious...

While this is clearly very good news, the vaccine has not yet been submitted for approval, meaning it will be weeks - or even months - before it is ready to be distributed. On top of that, there is no way of telling whether or not Moderna will be able to keep up with what will no doubt be extraordinarily high demand for its vaccine.

"Until it is available for widespread use, then I expect markets to remain volatile and to reflect the general nervousness currently felt by investors.

"However, once - or even if - that happens, you can expect fresh rally in share prices, particularly for stocks in sectors most affected by coronavirus, such as oil, retail and travel."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.23pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.51pm GMT

Shares in Moderna have jumped over 12% in pre-market trading, ahead of the start of trading in New York.

enltrModerna shares soared in premarket trade Monday after the biotech said its COVID-19 vaccine candidate met its primary endpoint in a Phase 3 trial, demonstrating 94.5% efficacy. $MRNAhttps://t.co/0s88zVuy6Hpic.twitter.com/pBEfwtdpoB

- MarketWatch (@MarketWatch) November 16, 2020

Reuters reported in July  that Moderna and Merck & Co both told a U.S. Congressional panel that they expected to profit from their coronavirus vaccines once approved, rather than selling it at cost price.

The New York Times wrote :

Three of the firms - AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Moderna - are getting federal funds for their vaccine development efforts. AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson pledged to the lawmakers that they would produce hundreds of millions of doses of their vaccines at no profit to themselves. Moderna, however, which has been granted $483 million from the government to develop its product, made no such promise.

"We will not sell it at cost," said Dr. Stephen Hoge, the president of Moderna.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.10pm GMT

block-time published-time 1.37pm GMT

Ayush Ansal,  chief investment officer at the hedge fund,  Crimson Black Capital, predicts stocks will keep rising in the coming days, as vaccine optimism cheers the markets.

" The FTSE 100 was up immediately when news of the early results from the Moderna tests came in and the feel-good factor created by Pfizer's vaccine should further rally markets in the days ahead.

"More than anything markets need certainty, and the knowledge that the pandemic could be brought under control a lot sooner than most imagined could see stocks surge as sentiment rebounds.

block-time published-time 1.29pm GMT

An oil rig and pump jack in Midland, Texas. Photograph: Jacob Ford/AP

The oil price has jumped too, following the news that  Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine has been over 94% effective in trials.

Brent crude has gained 3.8% to $44.40 per barrel, while US crude is up over 4% at $41.83.

That takes oil back towards the two-month highs seen last week, as traders anticipating that effective vaccine rollouts will lift economic growth next year.

Energy prices had already risen this morning on the back of Japan's better-than-expected growth figures for the last quarter, and the signing of the RCEP Asia-Pacific trade pact.

block-time published-time 1.20pm GMT

The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares is now 2% higher at 6444 points, its highest since early June, as investors digest Moderna's vaccine trial news.

Today's gains means the FTSE 100 has now gained over 15% since the start of November, in a remarkable rally. It began with relief that Joe Biden had won the US election, followed by the surge after Pfizer's vaccine trial news last Monday, and now Moderna's impressive results today.

The FTSE 100 during 2020 Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 1.06pm GMT

Shares in holiday firm TUI  have jumped 8.5%, while cruise operator Carnival  are up 10%, on hopes that vaccine rollouts will allow people to travel more normally again.

SSP, the catering company behind Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza branches at airports and railway stations, has gained 11%.

Cinema chain Cineworld  (whose sites are currently closed in the UK and US) has surged 16%.

Pub chains are getting a lift too, with Mitchells & Butler jumping 9% (it runs the All Bar One, Harvester and Toby Carvery chains) and JD Wetherspoon up 6%.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.07pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.55pm GMT

Investors hail Moderna vaccine news

Seema Shah, chief strategist at  Principal Global Investors, says Moderna's vaccine trial results  will boost hopes of an economic recovery from the pandemic next year, despite the alarming increase in Covid-19 cases in recent weeks.

"The global population couldn't have asked for more from the Moderna vaccine. With an almost 95% efficacy and more acceptable logistical and storage dynamics, today's news should solidify the market rally that has been in play since last week. Visibility towards a return to normality is increasing, and this should provide more fuel to the reflation rally, with small caps, value and cyclicals clear beneficiaries.

"Of course, there is still a tough winter to get through, and mobility numbers suggest that lockdowns in Europe are clearly taking their toll on economic activity. In the US, rising cases and even deaths suggests that mobility may soon also start to wane. Yet, today's vaccine news should make investors more tolerant of the surging virus cases, permitting them to look through to the strong dynamics that seem to be taking shape for 2021. Easy monetary policy, fiscal stimulus, recovering economic growth - there are many reasons for investors to be optimistic as we move closer to the end of this awful year."

Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarkets, also points to the Moderna vaccine's shelf life  as a potential 'game changer':

This was in response to news from Moderna announcing longer shelf life for its COVID-19 vaccine candidate at refrigerated temperatures. This is very important, perhaps a game changer, as the Pfizer vaccine had to be kept in very cold temperatures of minus 70 degrees Celsius, making it logistically difficult to produce and transport large doses of the vaccine.

Moderna said that the phase 3 study shows vaccine efficacy of 94.5% - similar, or perhaps even higher than Pfizer's results. As a result, Moderna plans to seek emergency use authorization for its covid-19 vaccine in coming weeks from US authorities.

Stephen Innes, chief global markets strategist at AXI,  is also excited by the news:

The news on Moderna's vaccine seems positive, both in terms of the 94.5% efficacy rate but also the news that the vaccine has a longer shelf life at refrigerated temperatures.

If confirmed that could make it easier to distribute, as some of the other vaccine candidates need to be stored at much lower temperatures.

block-time published-time 12.43pm GMT

This is the second Monday in a row in which vaccine trial results have sent markets soaring.

Last week, Pfizer and BioNTech triggered  the biggest surge on the London stock market since March, when they reported a 90% success rate in trials.

Science editor Ian Sample explains that Moderna's vaccine has some advantages over Pfizer's vaccine - including not needing to be kept as cold.

If the results remain as impressive as the trial goes on, the Moderna vaccine could potentially provide a major advantage over the Pfizer vaccine. While Pfizer's vaccine requires ultracold freezing between -70C and -80C from production facility to patient, Moderna said it had improved the shelf life and stability of its own vaccine, meaning that it can be stored at standard refrigeration temperatures of 2C to 8C for 30 days. It can be stored for six months at -20C for shipping and long-term storage, the company said.

But at £38 to £45 for a course of two shots, Moderna's vaccine is more expensive than the other frontrunners. AstraZeneca and Oxford University are aiming to sell their vaccine at about £3 a dose, while vaccines in trial with Johnson and Johnson and a collaboration between Sanofi and GSK are both expected to cost about £8 per dose. Pfizer is charging the US about £30 for a two-shot course. The UK has ordered 40m Pfizer shots but none of the Moderna vaccine.

block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT

European stocks hit eight-month high

European stock markets are all rallying strongly now, with France's CAC  index surging 2.3%, and Germany's DAX  up 1.3%.

European stock markets after Moderna's announcement Photograph: Refinitiv

This has driven the Stoxx 600 index of European companies to its highest level since the end of February, when the pandemic triggered turmoil in the stock markets.

Financial stocks, energy firms, travel companies and property groups are all driving the rally.

block-time published-time 12.14pm GMT

Moderna vaccine results drives FTSE 100 to five-month high

Shares in travel companies and hospitality firms are surging in London, on the back of Moderna's highly encouraging vaccine trial results.

IAG, which owns British Airways, are up 14%, with jet engine maker Rolls-Royce  jumping 10%.

Whitbread, who run the Premier Inn chain, is up 8.5% while InterContinental Hotel s are up 8.1%

This has pushed the FTSE 100 up by 1.7%, or 106 points, to 6418 points for the first time since early June.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.14pm GMT

block-time published-time 12.06pm GMT

Moderna: Covid vaccine candidate almost 95% effective, trials show

NEWSFLASH: US biotech firm Moderna has reported that its Covid-19 vaccine candidate has been 94.5% effective in phase 3 trials.

The news is driving stock markets higher across Europe, on renewed optimism that Covid-19 vaccines will be rolled out successfully soon, helping the world economy recover from the pandemic.

Our science editor Ian Sample has the details:

The race for a coronavirus vaccine has received another shot in the arm with the US biotech firm Moderna becoming the latest to reveal impressive results from phase 3 trials of its jab.

An interim analysis released on Monday, and based on 95 patients with confirmed Covid infections, found the candidate vaccine has an efficacy of 94.5%. The company said it now plans to apply to the US regulator, the Food and Drug Administration, for emergency-use authorisation in the coming weeks. In the trial, 90 of the patients received the placebo with the remaining five the vaccine.

The results are the latest encouraging news to emerge from the breakneck effort to develop a vaccine against coronavirus and follow a similar interim analysis earlier this month from a collaboration between Pfizer and the German firm BioNTech, which suggest its vaccine is 90% effective at preventing illness.

The Moderna vaccine is not expected to be available outside the US until next year. The biotech said it would have 20 million doses ready to ship in the US before the end of 2020 and hoped to manufacture 500 million to one billion doses globally next year.

Related:  Moderna Covid vaccine candidate almost 95% effective, trials show

block-time published-time 11.58am GMT

Stocks have just turned sharply higher in London, with the FTSE 100 surging by 89 points or 1.4% to 6,400 points.

The FTSE 100 today Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 11.53am GMT

Morgan Stanley; Keep faith in the recovery

Analysts at Morgan Stanley have recommended that investors should keep their faith in the global recovery, despite the rise in Covid-19 cases.

In their 2021 Global Strategy Outlook, they say a 'V-shaped' recovery, greater clarity on vaccines and continued policy support should support shares and bonds next year.

And they advise being overweight in equities and credit against cash and government bonds, predicting that the S&P 500  will reach 3,900 points by the end of 2021 (around 8% above last week, when it closed at a record 3,585 points).

In the report, Morgan Stanley strategist Andrew Sheets predicts a return to 'more normal conditions' next year:

2020 was defined by abnormality. A global pandemic. A 31%Q drop in 2Q20 US real GDP. US$7.3 trillion of G4 central bank balance sheet expansion year-to-date. Oil prices trading at -US$37. Some of the fastest declines, and rallies, for markets on record. We think that 2021, in contrast, will be defined by a return to more normal conditions. This feels odd to write, as the global pandemic rages and many lives remain disrupted. But we think that it will be true.

The year ahead should see economic growth recover, control of the virus improve and uncertainty decline. Challenges remain, 'new normals' will materialize at the 'micro' level and we doubt that the recovery will be a smooth, one-way street. But we think that things will be better. Trust the recovery, keep the faith.

enltrMorgan Stanley strategists:  "Keep the faith, trust the recovery." https://t.co/6xLTf3y8Bb via @ossingerjpic.twitter.com/v9cSJIWg2F

- Stuart Wallace (@StuartLWallace) November 16, 2020

block-time published-time 11.21am GMT

Germany's central bank has predicted that the country's economy could shrink again this quarter, as the second wave of Covid-19 cases hits Europe.

In its monthly report, the Bundesbank warns that the strong growth recorded over the summer will fade in the final three months of 2020, due to restrictions at home, and abroad.

"Overall economic performance could stagnate or even decline after very vigorous growth in the summer."

It also warns that more workers could be put onto short-time working this winter, setting back the recovery in the labour market.

But, the Bundesbank doesn't expect a repeat of the severe economic slump seen in the spring, as Germany's current 'lockdown light'  isn't as restrictive [schools and shops are still open, although hospitality venues are shut].

deltr #Monatsbericht November: Erholung der deutschen Wirtschaft vorerst unterbrochen https://t.co/L9RGVjYOjH#BIP#Konjunktur#Wirtschaft#Deutschland#Coronakrise#Covid19pic.twitter.com/lkKmzpzUeL

- Deutsche Bundesbank (@bundesbank) November 16, 2020

Economy minister Peter Altmaier warned yesterday, though, that Germans should brace for another 4-5 months of severe measures.

Altmaier told the Bild am Sonntag newspaper that:

"We're not out of the woods yet.

We cannot afford a yo-yo shutdown with the economy constantly opening and closing.

block-time published-time 10.45am GMT

The pound is becalmed this morning, at the start of a crunch week of Brexit trade deal talks.

Sterling is down 0.15% against the euro at (EURO)1.112, and pretty much flat against the US dollar at $1.318.

Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says traders are 'in limbo' as they look for any progress between the negotiation teams ahead of Thursday's meeting of EU leaders.

She warns:

It's looking increasingly likely that it will be just another deadline that will just loom and pass, and instead talks will go down to the wire.''

Ireland's foreign minister, Simon Coveney, has warned that there's still deadlock over fishing rights - one of the key areas to resolve.

Coveney said:

"We really are in the last week to 10 days of this, if there is not a major breakthrough over the next week to 10 days then I think we really are in trouble and the focus will shift to preparing for a no-trade deal and all the disruption that that bring."

Here's the full story:

Related:  Major breakthrough needed to avert no-deal Brexit, says Irish minister

block-time published-time 10.20am GMT

The Covid-19 pandemic has driven a boom in online shopping...and a surge in complaints about parcel deliveries.

Citizens Advice reports that complaints about home deliveries have trebled since coronavirus hit, often due to items arriving late or damaged, or not arriving at all.

My colleague Miles Brignall  has the details:

Ahead of the busiest period of the year for home deliveries, the charity is reminding consumers that it is the seller's responsibility to deliver the items to the buyer's door, and consumers are entitled to a refund if its service fails....

Its report chimes with the Guardian's own postbag which has similarly recorded a big jump in complaints about parcels being delivered to the wrong address, and the stores wrongly refusing to refund the customer.

One woman who got in touch with the charity for help said that she has had "nothing but trouble with couriers".

Related:  Parcel delivery complaints treble amid UK's Covid online shopping boom

block-time published-time 10.05am GMT

Japan's forecast-beating growth figures and the RCEP trade deal have helped European markets to post steady gains this morning, says AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould:

"Solid and steady gains are arguably just what investors need after a very volatile period. The catalyst for the latest move for equities is  more positive noises on vaccines, the formation of a new trading bloc involving the likes of China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand, and better-than-expected Japanese GDP figures.

"These factors helped Asian markets sprint ahead before passing the baton on to European markets with the FTSE 100 up 0.7% early on.

Here are the top risers on the FTSE 100, which is currently up 48 points at 6365 Photograph: Refinitiv

block-time published-time 9.53am GMT

Mobile phone giant Vodafone's revenues have taken a hit from the slump in international travel in the pandemic.

Group revenues dropped by 2.3% for the first half of the financial year, including a 0.8% drop in services revenue due to weak roaming income.

Vodafone says its "good underlying momentum" was offset by lower revenue from roaming and visitor revenue, due to Covid-19. Handset sales were also lower.

However, its fixed broadband service kept adding customers, with the lockdown increasing demand for high-speed home internet.

CEO Nick Read says the pandemic is 'obscuring' Vodafone's progress (services revenue was UP, if you exclude roaming).

"Today's results underline increased confidence in our full year outlook. We are reporting a resilient first half performance and we continue to see good commercial momentum across the Group. The results demonstrate the success of our strategic priorities to date, namely increasing customer loyalty, growing our fixed broadband base, driving digitisation to simplify the company and capture significant cost savings, and deliver 5G efficiently through network sharing.

COVID-19 and the reduction in roaming revenues, through the significant reduction in international travel, is currently obscuring our underlying commercial progress, with Q2 service revenue growing by 1.5% excluding roaming.

Despite the drop in revenues, the company posted a profit of (EURO)1.bn for the six months to September 30th, compared with a loss of (EURO)1.89bn a year ago.

Shares in Vodafone have jumped 3.8% this morning to 124p, the highest since 24th July.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.54am GMT

block-time published-time 9.30am GMT

European stock markets have opened higher, lifting the Stoxx 600 index by around 0.6% - back towards last week's eight-month highs.

European stock markets, November 16 Photograph: Refinitiv

Fiona Cincotta of Gain Capital  reports that Covid vaccine optimism and encouraging data from China and Japan are lifting shares.

Retail sales in China rose at the fastest rate of the year in October, a strong sign that improving consumer demand is contributing to the economy's solid economic recovery from the covid pandemic. Sales rose an impressive 4.3% MoM, well ahead of the 3.3% increase recorded in September. Retail sales returned to growth in August after 7 consecutive months of decline.

Adding to the upbeat mood data revealed that Japan's economy rebounded sharply in Q3 with the economy growing by 5% QoQ, ahead of the 4.4% forecast, boosting the world's third largest economy out of recession.

block-time published-time 9.07am GMT

The FTSE 250 index of mid-sized companies, has also opened higher - with some pandemic-battered firms among the risers.

Cineworld, which was forced to shut its UK and US screens last month, are up 8.5%, while cruise operator Carnival  has gained 5.5% and easyJet  is up 4%.

That shows that the 'rotation trade', out of companies who profited from the pandemic and into those who suffered badly, is still in play:

enltr".. it seems to be a more fundamentally-based rotation from the stay-at-home stocks to the re-open stocks... You can see this below with the Goldman Sachs 'closing' basket making lower highs while the 're-open' basket is catching up fast." @TimmerFidelitypic.twitter.com/jFdPdnoPbI

- Carl Quintanilla (@carlquintanilla) November 15, 2020

block-time published-time 8.55am GMT

FTSE 100 opens higher

In the City, shares in travel and hospitality companies, miners and banks are rising - as traders continue to price in a vaccine-led recovery in 2021.

Airline group IAG  is the top riser on the FTSE 100, up 5%, while hotel chain Whitbread  has gained 3.5% (helped by an upgrade to 'buy' from 'sell' from Goldman Sachs).

Hopes of a pick-up in travel have also lifted engineering firm Rolls-Royce  (which manufacturers and services jet engines)  by 3.5%.

Mining firms Glencore  (3%) is also being lifted by economic recovery hopes.

Standard Chartered, the Asia-Pacific focused bank, are up 3.6% following the RCEP trade deal and Japan's faster-than-expected recovery.

The broader FTSE 100 is up 35 points or 0.5%, at 6350, close to last week's five-month highs.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.13am GMT

block-time published-time 8.47am GMT

RCEP trade deal cheers markets

Markets have also been lifted by the news that 15 Asia-Pacific countries have signed a historic free trade deal.

The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) is one of the largest free trade deals in history, covering 2.2 billion people and 30% of the world's economic output.

China, Australia, Japan, New Zealand and South Korea all signed the deal, alongside members of the 10-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.

It bundles together a patchwork of previous smaller agreements into a single pact, boosting economic integration and giving manufacturers a common rules of origin framework to work with. All good for growth, analysts say.

My colleague Jasper Jolly explains:

The deal sets the terms of trade in goods and services, cross-border investment and new rules for increasingly important areas such as electronic commerce and intellectual property. The effect on the trade of finished goods between Asian nations will be particularly marked, analysts have said.

In a joint statement, the leaders of the countries said the trade deal would form a crucial part of their plans to recover from the pandemic, which has forced countries around the world to lock down their economies.

Related:  China and 14 Asia-Pacific countries agree historic free trade deal

block-time published-time 8.28am GMT

Stock markets across the Asia-Pacific region rose sharply today, lifted by vaccine optimism and the news that Japan's economy grew faster than expected last quarter.

Japan's Nikkei jumped 2% to fresh 29-year peak, extending its recent gains.

MSCI's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan gained 1.1% to hit its highest since its launch in 1987, Reuters reports.

enltrGlobal markets start the week in Risk-On mood w/Asia stocks hit record peak following ATH on Wall St as vaccine hopes dampen virus fears. Bonds steady w/US 10y yields at 0.89%. Dollar retreats w/Euro at $1.1848. Oil pushed higher w/Brent $43.29/bbl. Gold $1891. Bitcoin $16.2k. pic.twitter.com/ebRX965hlY

- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) November 16, 2020

However, traders in Australia were left on the sidelines. The Sydney stock market had to suspend trading for the day after its stock market suffered technical problems.

Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, says:

With vaccine hopes on the rise, and central banks signalling globally that monetary policy will remain ultra-easy even if a vaccine does arrive, equity markets will remain either a straight to go, or a buy on the dip.

block-time published-time 8.17am GMT

BBC: Japan leads economic 'Zoom boom' out of recession

The BBC says Japan's return to growth is is part of a wider global economic recovery across Asia's economics that has been dubbed a "Zoom boom":

The global economy as a whole is expected to contract by 4.4% this year, while the US will shrink by 4.3%, according to the International Monetary Fund.

However, Asian economies are leading the way when it comes to showing signs of recovery. China remains on track to grow by about 2% this year, the most of any major economy.

"We call it the Zoom boom," said Rory Green, an economist at research firm TS Lombard.

Also on Monday, China released new economic data that showed its factory output grew 6.9% in October, compared to the same month last year.

enltrJapan leads economic 'Zoom boom' out of recession https://t.co/1b13Hnc93o

- BBC Business (@BBCBusiness) November 16, 2020

The Financial Times, though, points out that the 5% growth recorded in July-September certainly hasn't repaired all the damage caused by Covid-19:

The partial rebound suggests a full recovery from the pandemic will prove protracted and difficult, especially if a recent rise in coronavirus cases develops into a larger wave. Japan recorded 1,722 new cases of Covid-19 on Saturday, the most recent day for which data was available, compared with 868 a fortnight earlier.

"The economy has come back steadily but the recovery is a work in progress," said Yasutoshi Nishimura, Japan's economy minister. "People are still in a defensive mindset."

block-time published-time 8.10am GMT

Japan returns to growth after Covid-19 slump     Pedestrians crossing a street in Tokyo today. Photograph: Franck Robichon/EPA

Japan has cheered global investors today by returning to growth, after the pandemic dragged its economy into an unprecedented recession.

Japanese GDP grew by 5% in the third quarter of the year -- faster than expected, and the best quarterly growth on record after three quarters of contraction.

That follows a record downturn of around 8.2% in April-June, and means that Japan's economy is still almost 6% smaller than it was a year ago.

Growth was driven by household spending, and a pick-up in net trade, as Japan benefited from rising demand at home and abroad.

However, business expenditure continued to fall (-3.4%), suggesting that firms are still understandably cautious given the health crisis.

enltrICYMI! #Japan 's economy grew 5% in Q3, beating expectations. On an annualized basis, #GDP grew 21.4%. pic.twitter.com/eFW2okEvYH

- jeroen blokland (@jsblokland) November 16, 2020

Tokyo's government warned that the economic situation was still tough, saying:

"The Japanese economy for July-September 2020 is still in a severe situation due to the COVID-19, but it is showing movements of picking up later in the quarter."

block-time published-time 7.46am GMT

Introduction: Vaccine hopes lift markets

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business.  After its best week since April, the UK stock market is beginning the new week on the front foot.

European equities have opened higher at the start of trading, as investors continue to grasp onto hopes of successful Covid-19 vaccine rollouts.

enltrEuropean Opening Calls: #FTSE 6369 +0.84% #DAX 13219 +1.09% #CAC 5449 +1.28% #AEX 605 +1.28% #MIB 21206 +1.44% #IBEX 7898 +1.47% #OMX 1913 +0.85% #STOXX 3472 +1.16% #IGOpeningCall

- IGSquawk (@IGSquawk) November 16, 2020

Chris Weston, head of research at Pepperstone, says investors are increasingly confident:

There is certainly elevated chatter that potential shutdowns in the US will weigh more in the near-term and maybe so, but investor sentiment is the most elevated since 2017 - two standard deviations of the mean of past 10 years [ according to AAII ].

Over the weekend, one of the scientists behind the BioNTech/Pfizer coronavirus vaccine predicted it would result in a "dramatic reduction in cases

Ugur Sahin, the chief executive of BioNTech, expressed confidence that the vaccine could halve transmission of the virus, telling the BBC's Andrew Marr show that:

"I'm very confident that transmission between people will be reduced by such a highly effective vaccine - maybe not 90% but maybe 50% - but we should not forget that even that could result in a dramatic reduction of the pandemic spread."

Professor Sahin cautioned that the full impact of the vaccine would not be felt until next summer, but that life could be "back to normal" by next winter.

Related:  BioNTech vaccine scientist says jab could halve Covid transmission

Another vaccine trial is beginning in the UK today, which will see around 6,000 British volunteers injected with a vaccine developed by a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson.

It is the third Covid vaccine to enter large-scale clinical trials in the UK, after Oxford Covid vaccine, and one being developed by the US biotech company Novavax.

Related:  6,000 UK volunteers to be injected with Covid vaccine in phase 3 trial

Jim Reid of D eutsche Bank says:

Markets will be on high alert for any further vaccine news, especially efficacy data from Moderna and AstraZeneca even if we don't know the exact timings.

We could also hear that the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine will get FDA emergency use approval later in the week.

The rally comes despite ever more alarming Covid-19 data out of the US, where a record total of 184,000 new cases were reported on Friday.

Related:  US sees record 184,000 new daily Covid cases as Trump politicises vaccine effort

The agenda  •1pm BST: ECB president Christine Lagarde speaks at the World Economic Forum's Pioneers of Change Summit•From 1pm BST: Bloomberg's New Economy Forum

1pm BST: ECB president Christine Lagarde speaks at the World Economic Forum's Pioneers of Change Summit

From 1pm BST: Bloomberg's New Economy Forum

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.03am GMT

6347 2020-11-16T19:00:00Z true 2020-11-16T08:07:46Z false false 2020-11-16T18:57:44Z true UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/ffv3n

false true https://media.guim.co.uk/aab03a04caa25a240d2371c7cf98d8cfdd7d2832/0_0_5568_3341/500.jpg false en true And finally... here's our economics editor Larry Elliott on today's market moves: Shares in London closed at their highest level since June as stock markets around the world rose sharply after news of successful trials of a second Covid-19 vaccine. For the second Monday in a row, equity prices soared on all the world's leading bourses after Moderna said its treatment for the pandemic was almost 95% effective. Analysts said the announcement by the pharmaceutical company - following that made by Pfizer a week ago - had boosted confidence that an end to the pandemic was in sight. Despite warnings that distributing the vaccine would be a "D-day" style exercise, investors sought shares in companies previously worst affected by the lockdowns and other restrictions imposed to slow the spread of the virus... Here's the full story: Goodnight. GW The World Economic Forum have published more of Christine Lagarde's comments about the pandemic, and its impact on young people, at their Pioneers of Change summit today. "We were standing on one side of a massive river of uncertainty and hardship... thanks to the tremendous hard work of companies in the US, Germany and other corners of the world we're now seeing the other side of the river," Lagarde said in the opening plenary of the Pioneers summit. However, crossing the choppy water would be a struggle necessitating both private sector innovation and a "policy bridge" to help countries recover from the worst economic shock in generations. "If we get the policy mix right, hopefully we will protect the economy in the aggregate, but we will not prevent it from being transformed. We need to focus on that so that those transformations are not scars but transformations for the better," she said. A generation of young job-seekers risked having their "dreams crushed" without a rebound in jobs growth in the private sector, Lagarde warned. Investment in Research & Development would be crucial. More here: 'We're seeing the other side of the river' - top quotes on life after the pandemic One more thing to flag up....Britain has now secured a deal for an initial five million doses of Moderna's new vaccine, my colleagues Jessica Elgot and Ian Sample report: The deal done on Monday will mean vaccines could be delivered to the UK from spring 2021 if approved by the medicines regulator and increases the total number of doses secured by the UK to 355m. At a Downing Street press conference, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, said the preliminary results were "excellent news", adding: "Although I stress that this is preliminary, the safety data is limited and their production facilities are not yet at scale." Hancock said the government had secured an "initial agreement" for 5m doses. European stock markets all closed higher tonight, led by Spain -- where stocks have been particularly badly hit by the pandemic. This lifted the Europe-wide Stoxx 600 index to its highest closing level since late February - the first week of the market crash. Here's how it panned out: FTSE 100: up 104 points or 1.66% at 6,421 German DAX: up 61 points or 0.5% at 13,138 French CAC: up 91 points or 1.7% at 5,471 Spain's IBEX: up 202 points or 2.6% at 7,986 Italian FTSE MIB: up 413 points or 2% at 21,317 David Madden of CMC Markets reports that property firms, airlines, transport companies, pub chains and hotels all benefited from vaccine optimism: Similar to last Monday, the news that great progress been made in relation to a possible Covid-19 vaccine has boosted stocks. This time around, the update has come from Moderna Inc. The pharma company announced that a possible coronavirus drug has been 94.5% effective. Every sector has been impacted by the pandemic but some have been hit harder than others. Airlines, transport, real estate investment trusts (REIT) and hospitality stocks were severely impacted because they are arguably the most exposed to the health crisis. Like with the moves seen one week ago, those sectors have benefitted the most today, as they have the most to gain from the health emergency being resolved. Britain's FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has just hit its highest closing level in over five months. The FTSE 100 ended the day 104.9 points higher at 6421 points, a gain of 1.66% today, lifted by optimism over Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine. That's its highest closing level since 8th June, extending its already-impressive November gains. It adds over £26bn to the FTSE 100's value (last Monday it surged by £70bn after Pfizer's vaccine trial news). Jet engine maker Rolls-Royce (+9.9%), hotel chain Whitbread (+9.8%) and airline group IAG (+9.7%) ended the day as the top risers. Ocado fell 4%, though, as investors moved out of tech stocks and into companies badly hurt by the pandemic. Among smaller companies, cinema group Cineworld jumped 13.5% and cruise operator Carnival gained 12.1%. Vaccine hopes are helping investors to look through the dreadful health crisis caused by the pandemic, explains Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG: Another day, another vaccine with promising results. Like buses, good news on the Covid front appears to be coming all at once, or at least with respect to vaccines. The virus itself continues to wreak havoc, but the market is continuing to look past all this towards a time when nations are engaged in widespread vaccination programmes. While the bounce today on the Moderna news isn't anything like what we saw last week, there is still plenty of positivity, and with equity inflows picking up as well it looks like the bullish November momentum in equity markets still has plenty of room to run. Again, like last week, value has outperformed growth, with the Nasdaq's paltry gains easily outdone, and for those lucky enough to have picked the (apparent) low in many 'reopening' stocks it seems more gains are on the way. Once again the Dow has shied away from smashing through 30,000, touching and then retreating from this level for the second Monday in a row, but it seems a matter of when, not if, the index will finally breach this latest impressive round number. Back in New York, the Dow Jones industrial average has just touched a new all-time high. The Dow has hit 29,942 points, just above last Monday's intraday high, and putting the index on track for its first record closing high since February. Edward Moya of OANDA says the news that Moderna's vaccine has proved effective in tests has 'cemented optimism' in the markets. US stocks raced higher on Moderna's upbeat vaccine news, which along with Pfizer's vaccine raise expectations for a return to pre-pandemic life before next winter. The rotation into value stocks continues as the best-case vaccine scenarios unfold. Last week, Pfizer gave hope that vaccine progress was getting us closer to a post-COVID economy. Today, Moderna's vaccine news cemented optimism that highly effective vaccines should be readily available next year. The Russell 2000 index hit a fresh intraday record high, the Dow is poised to surge above 30,000 and the Nasdaq is still seeing some love. On paper, it looks like Moderna won the vaccine race, a slightly more effective rate than Pfizer and much easier to store. But this would be Moderna's first approved drug for vaccination and will likely mean they will have more hurdles for ramping up production. Operation Warp Speed will provide all the resources to both Pfizer and Moderna and possibly others. A gauge of global stocks has hit a record high today as the latest batch of positive data for a possible COVID-19 vaccine boosted sentiment, along with signs of economic recovery in Asia, while oil prices jumped, Reuters reports: The MSCI World Index of global shares, building on strong overnight gains in Asia's leading markets and a stronger open for most European bourses, managed to extend gains after the Moderna announcement to hit a record. The US S&P 500 closed at a record high on Friday night, and is still up another 1% today - on track for a new record close. The head of the European Central Bank, Christine Lagarde, has warned that young people could see their dreams crushed, unless business and policymakers protect them from the economic damage of the pandemic: With around 45 minutes until trading ends in Europe, the London stock market is still on track for its highest closing level since early June. The FTSE 100 is currently holding its gains, up 118 points or 1.9% at 6434 points, with travel firms, hospitality companies and oil giant still in the top risers. Property developers are also rallying, with British Land up 6.5% and Land Securities up 5%. Willem Sels, Chief Market Strategist at HSBC Global Private Banking says news of a second effective Covid-19 vaccine is reassuring investors: "As several companies make progress on a COVID vaccine, the execution risk drops as the roll-out doesn't now depend on a single firm. The lowered execution risk should broaden the recovery - rather than just manufacturing and technology, we expect the recovery to also include consumption, which in many countries makes up more than 50% of GDP. This will help stock markets and support cyclicals. Billionaire investor David Rubenstein has warned that distributing Covid-19 vaccines will be a massive challenge for the next US administration. Rubenstein, cofounder of the Carlyle Group, told CNBC that investors are anticipating that effective vaccines will be rolled out, allowing the economy to recover. The market really wants to have this vaccine distributed, because until the vaccine is distributed, and it's vaccinated a large part of the population, we are not going to be able to get back to the economy we want. But getting to that point will probably take a year, Rubenstein warns. And while he hails the "terrific job" that Moderna, Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca have all done, in "heroic fashion", Rubenstein adds that vaccines need to be distributed, otherwise they're useless. Large consumer companies, such as pharmaceuticals chain CVS and hypermarket giant Walmart, need to be involved, he insists. This means Joe Biden and his team face an enormous challenge when it takes over in January. As Rubenstein puts it: That's what the new administration is going to have to worry about, getting the distribution method done, and it's going to be like a D-Day event. It's an enormous logistical problem, and it can be done, but it's going to be a lot of work. Michael Breen, director of infectious diseases and ophthalmology at analytics firm GlobalData, says Moderna and Pfizer's vaccines have both performed much better than expected: Moderna's vaccine's efficacy data exceeded expectations and could not have come at a better time. Like Pfizer, the length of time from concept, to clinic, to data readouts for Moderna's vaccine - less than one year from the discovery of this novel coronavirus - is nothing short of remarkable. "Furthermore, the results from both developers underscore the potential that mRNA technology has not only for addressing any infectious disease, but also as a rapid-response platform for dealing with emerging diseases. "More data are needed for both vaccines that might highlight differences between them and inform how each should be used. It is entirely possible that both vaccines have similar efficacies across all groups, in which case they should both be rolled out as rapidly as possible. "One key difference is that Moderna's vaccine does not require deep-freeze storage, while Pfizer's does. This creates significant logistical difficulties that could easily give the advantage for COVID-19 vaccines to Moderna. "However, in the end, the broadening of our armamentarium to control the pandemic might be the boon that healthcare workers and economists alike have been longing for. These vaccines could not only offer a solution to the problem but can help accelerate the timeframe to recovering from the damage done." Energy companies, banks, and travel companies are among the risers in New York. Oil producer Chevron is leading the Dow risers, up 4%, with aircraft maker Boeing gaining 3.2%. JP Morgan is up 2.9%, and retailer Walgreen Boots Alliance has picked up 3%. The US stock market has opened sharply higher, as investors welcome the news that Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine was 94.5% effective in medical trials. The Dow Jones industrial average, the broader S&P 500 index and the tech-focused Nasdaq are all heading towards the record intraday highs set a week ago (after Pfizer's vaccine results were released). Dow Jones industrial average: up 329 points or 1.1% at 29,809 points S&P 500: up 23 points or 0.65% at 3,608.5 points Nasdaq: up 31 points or 0.27% at 11,861 points The list of top risers and fallers on London's FTSE 100 shows that investors are anticipating that Covid-19 vaccines will help the global economy recover from this year's slump. Oil companies, hotel chains and airlines are still leading the rally; British Airway's parent company IAG is still up over 11%, and BP and Royal Dutch Shell have now gained over 6%, following the oil price move. But online grocery business Ocado has fallen 4.5%, having benefitted from the surge in home deliveries during lockdowns. Takeaway firm Just Eat has also dropped, along with Rentokil (which runs a specialist cleaning service). Adam Vettese, analyst at investment platform eToro, suggests investors should be a little cautious... While this is clearly very good news, the vaccine has not yet been submitted for approval, meaning it will be weeks - or even months - before it is ready to be distributed. On top of that, there is no way of telling whether or not Moderna will be able to keep up with what will no doubt be extraordinarily high demand for its vaccine. "Until it is available for widespread use, then I expect markets to remain volatile and to reflect the general nervousness currently felt by investors. "However, once - or even if - that happens, you can expect fresh rally in share prices, particularly for stocks in sectors most affected by coronavirus, such as oil, retail and travel." Shares in Moderna have jumped over 12% in pre-market trading, ahead of the start of trading in New York. Reuters reported in July that Moderna and Merck & Co both told a U.S. Congressional panel that they expected to profit from their coronavirus vaccines once approved, rather than selling it at cost price. The New York Times wrote: Three of the firms - AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Moderna - are getting federal funds for their vaccine development efforts. AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson pledged to the lawmakers that they would produce hundreds of millions of doses of their vaccines at no profit to themselves. Moderna, however, which has been granted $483 million from the government to develop its product, made no such promise. "We will not sell it at cost," said Dr. Stephen Hoge, the president of Moderna. Ayush Ansal, chief investment officer at the hedge fund, Crimson Black Capital, predicts stocks will keep rising in the coming days, as vaccine optimism cheers the markets. "The FTSE 100 was up immediately when news of the early results from the Moderna tests came in and the feel-good factor created by Pfizer's vaccine should further rally markets in the days ahead. "More than anything markets need certainty, and the knowledge that the pandemic could be brought under control a lot sooner than most imagined could see stocks surge as sentiment rebounds. The oil price has jumped too, following the news that Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine has been over 94% effective in trials. Brent crude has gained 3.8% to $44.40 per barrel, while US crude is up over 4% at $41.83. That takes oil back towards the two-month highs seen last week, as traders anticipating that effective vaccine rollouts will lift economic growth next year. Energy prices had already risen this morning on the back of Japan's better-than-expected growth figures for the last quarter, and the signing of the RCEP Asia-Pacific trade pact. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares is now 2% higher at 6444 points, its highest since early June, as investors digest Moderna's vaccine trial news. Today's gains means the FTSE 100 has now gained over 15% since the start of November, in a remarkable rally. It began with relief that Joe Biden had won the US election, followed by the surge after Pfizer's vaccine trial news last Monday, and now Moderna's impressive results today. Shares in holiday firm TUI have jumped 8.5%, while cruise operator Carnival are up 10%, on hopes that vaccine rollouts will allow people to travel more normally again. SSP, the catering company behind Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza branches at airports and railway stations, has gained 11%. Cinema chain Cineworld (whose sites are currently closed in the UK and US) has surged 16%. Pub chains are getting a lift too, with Mitchells & Butler jumping 9% (it runs the All Bar One, Harvester and Toby Carvery chains) and JD Wetherspoon up 6%. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, says Moderna's vaccine trial results will boost hopes of an economic recovery from the pandemic next year, despite the alarming increase in Covid-19 cases in recent weeks. "The global population couldn't have asked for more from the Moderna vaccine. With an almost 95% efficacy and more acceptable logistical and storage dynamics, today's news should solidify the market rally that has been in play since last week. Visibility towards a return to normality is increasing, and this should provide more fuel to the reflation rally, with small caps, value and cyclicals clear beneficiaries. "Of course, there is still a tough winter to get through, and mobility numbers suggest that lockdowns in Europe are clearly taking their toll on economic activity. In the US, rising cases and even deaths suggests that mobility may soon also start to wane. Yet, today's vaccine news should make investors more tolerant of the surging virus cases, permitting them to look through to the strong dynamics that seem to be taking shape for 2021. Easy monetary policy, fiscal stimulus, recovering economic growth - there are many reasons for investors to be optimistic as we move closer to the end of this awful year." Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarkets, also points to the Moderna vaccine's shelf life as a potential 'game changer': This was in response to news from Moderna announcing longer shelf life for its COVID-19 vaccine candidate at refrigerated temperatures. This is very important, perhaps a game changer, as the Pfizer vaccine had to be kept in very cold temperatures of minus 70 degrees Celsius, making it logistically difficult to produce and transport large doses of the vaccine. Moderna said that the phase 3 study shows vaccine efficacy of 94.5% - similar, or perhaps even higher than Pfizer's results. As a result, Moderna plans to seek emergency use authorization for its covid-19 vaccine in coming weeks from US authorities. Stephen Innes, chief global markets strategist at AXI, is also excited by the news: The news on Moderna's vaccine seems positive, both in terms of the 94.5% efficacy rate but also the news that the vaccine has a longer shelf life at refrigerated temperatures. If confirmed that could make it easier to distribute, as some of the other vaccine candidates need to be stored at much lower temperatures. This is the second Monday in a row in which vaccine trial results have sent markets soaring. Last week, Pfizer and BioNTech triggered the biggest surge on the London stock market since March, when they reported a 90% success rate in trials. Science editor Ian Sample explains that Moderna's vaccine has some advantages over Pfizer's vaccine - including not needing to be kept as cold. If the results remain as impressive as the trial goes on, the Moderna vaccine could potentially provide a major advantage over the Pfizer vaccine. While Pfizer's vaccine requires ultracold freezing between -70C and -80C from production facility to patient, Moderna said it had improved the shelf life and stability of its own vaccine, meaning that it can be stored at standard refrigeration temperatures of 2C to 8C for 30 days. It can be stored for six months at -20C for shipping and long-term storage, the company said. But at £38 to £45 for a course of two shots, Moderna's vaccine is more expensive than the other frontrunners. AstraZeneca and Oxford University are aiming to sell their vaccine at about £3 a dose, while vaccines in trial with Johnson and Johnson and a collaboration between Sanofi and GSK are both expected to cost about £8 per dose. Pfizer is charging the US about £30 for a two-shot course. The UK has ordered 40m Pfizer shots but none of the Moderna vaccine. European stock markets are all rallying strongly now, with France's CAC index surging 2.3%, and Germany's DAX up 1.3%. This has driven the Stoxx 600 index of European companies to its highest level since the end of February, when the pandemic triggered turmoil in the stock markets. Financial stocks, energy firms, travel companies and property groups are all driving the rally. Shares in travel companies and hospitality firms are surging in London, on the back of Moderna's highly encouraging vaccine trial results. IAG, which owns British Airways, are up 14%, with jet engine maker Rolls-Royce jumping 10%. Whitbread, who run the Premier Inn chain, is up 8.5% while InterContinental Hotels are up 8.1% This has pushed the FTSE 100 up by 1.7%, or 106 points, to 6418 points for the first time since early June. NEWSFLASH: US biotech firm Moderna has reported that its Covid-19 vaccine candidate has been 94.5% effective in phase 3 trials. The news is driving stock markets higher across Europe, on renewed optimism that Covid-19 vaccines will be rolled out successfully soon, helping the world economy recover from the pandemic. Our science editor Ian Sample has the details: The race for a coronavirus vaccine has received another shot in the arm with the US biotech firm Moderna becoming the latest to reveal impressive results from phase 3 trials of its jab. An interim analysis released on Monday, and based on 95 patients with confirmed Covid infections, found the candidate vaccine has an efficacy of 94.5%. The company said it now plans to apply to the US regulator, the Food and Drug Administration, for emergency-use authorisation in the coming weeks. In the trial, 90 of the patients received the placebo with the remaining five the vaccine. The results are the latest encouraging news to emerge from the breakneck effort to develop a vaccine against coronavirus and follow a similar interim analysis earlier this month from a collaboration between Pfizer and the German firm BioNTech, which suggest its vaccine is 90% effective at preventing illness. The Moderna vaccine is not expected to be available outside the US until next year. The biotech said it would have 20 million doses ready to ship in the US before the end of 2020 and hoped to manufacture 500 million to one billion doses globally next year. Stocks have just turned sharply higher in London, with the FTSE 100 surging by 89 points or 1.4% to 6,400 points. Analysts at Morgan Stanley have recommended that investors should keep their faith in the global recovery, despite the rise in Covid-19 cases. In their 2021 Global Strategy Outlook, they say a 'V-shaped' recovery, greater clarity on vaccines and continued policy support should support shares and bonds next year. And they advise being overweight in equities and credit against cash and government bonds, predicting that the S&P 500 will reach 3,900 points by the end of 2021 (around 8% above last week, when it closed at a record 3,585 points). In the report, Morgan Stanley strategist Andrew Sheets predicts a return to 'more normal conditions' next year: 2020 was defined by abnormality. A global pandemic. A 31%Q drop in 2Q20 US real GDP. US$7.3 trillion of G4 central bank balance sheet expansion year-to-date. Oil prices trading at -US$37. Some of the fastest declines, and rallies, for markets on record. We think that 2021, in contrast, will be defined by a return to more normal conditions. This feels odd to write, as the global pandemic rages and many lives remain disrupted. But we think that it will be true. The year ahead should see economic growth recover, control of the virus improve and uncertainty decline. Challenges remain, 'new normals' will materialize at the 'micro' level and we doubt that the recovery will be a smooth, one-way street. But we think that things will be better. Trust the recovery, keep the faith. Germany's central bank has predicted that the country's economy could shrink again this quarter, as the second wave of Covid-19 cases hits Europe. In its monthly report, the Bundesbank warns that the strong growth recorded over the summer will fade in the final three months of 2020, due to restrictions at home, and abroad. "Overall economic performance could stagnate or even decline after very vigorous growth in the summer." It also warns that more workers could be put onto short-time working this winter, setting back the recovery in the labour market. But, the Bundesbank doesn't expect a repeat of the severe economic slump seen in the spring, as Germany's current 'lockdown light' isn't as restrictive [schools and shops are still open, although hospitality venues are shut]. Economy minister Peter Altmaier warned yesterday, though, that Germans should brace for another 4-5 months of severe measures. Altmaier told the Bild am Sonntag newspaper that: "We're not out of the woods yet. We cannot afford a yo-yo shutdown with the economy constantly opening and closing. The pound is becalmed this morning, at the start of a crunch week of Brexit trade deal talks. Sterling is down 0.15% against the euro at (EURO)1.112, and pretty much flat against the US dollar at $1.318. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says traders are 'in limbo' as they look for any progress between the negotiation teams ahead of Thursday's meeting of EU leaders. She warns: It's looking increasingly likely that it will be just another deadline that will just loom and pass, and instead talks will go down to the wire.'' Ireland's foreign minister, Simon Coveney, has warned that there's still deadlock over fishing rights - one of the key areas to resolve. Coveney said: "We really are in the last week to 10 days of this, if there is not a major breakthrough over the next week to 10 days then I think we really are in trouble and the focus will shift to preparing for a no-trade deal and all the disruption that that bring." Here's the full story: The Covid-19 pandemic has driven a boom in online shopping...and a surge in complaints about parcel deliveries. Citizens Advice reports that complaints about home deliveries have trebled since coronavirus hit, often due to items arriving late or damaged, or not arriving at all. My colleague Miles Brignall has the details: Ahead of the busiest period of the year for home deliveries, the charity is reminding consumers that it is the seller's responsibility to deliver the items to the buyer's door, and consumers are entitled to a refund if its service fails.... Its report chimes with the Guardian's own postbag which has similarly recorded a big jump in complaints about parcels being delivered to the wrong address, and the stores wrongly refusing to refund the customer. One woman who got in touch with the charity for help said that she has had "nothing but trouble with couriers". Japan's forecast-beating growth figures and the RCEP trade deal have helped European markets to post steady gains this morning, says AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould: "Solid and steady gains are arguably just what investors need after a very volatile period. The catalyst for the latest move for equities is more positive noises on vaccines, the formation of a new trading bloc involving the likes of China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand, and better-than-expected Japanese GDP figures. "These factors helped Asian markets sprint ahead before passing the baton on to European markets with the FTSE 100 up 0.7% early on. Mobile phone giant Vodafone's revenues have taken a hit from the slump in international travel in the pandemic. Group revenues dropped by 2.3% for the first half of the financial year, including a 0.8% drop in services revenue due to weak roaming income. Vodafone says its "good underlying momentum" was offset by lower revenue from roaming and visitor revenue, due to Covid-19. Handset sales were also lower. However, its fixed broadband service kept adding customers, with the lockdown increasing demand for high-speed home internet. CEO Nick Read says the pandemic is 'obscuring' Vodafone's progress (services revenue was UP, if you exclude roaming). "Today's results underline increased confidence in our full year outlook. We are reporting a resilient first half performance and we continue to see good commercial momentum across the Group. The results demonstrate the success of our strategic priorities to date, namely increasing customer loyalty, growing our fixed broadband base, driving digitisation to simplify the company and capture significant cost savings, and deliver 5G efficiently through network sharing. COVID-19 and the reduction in roaming revenues, through the significant reduction in international travel, is currently obscuring our underlying commercial progress, with Q2 service revenue growing by 1.5% excluding roaming. Despite the drop in revenues, the company posted a profit of (EURO)1.bn for the six months to September 30th, compared with a loss of (EURO)1.89bn a year ago. Shares in Vodafone have jumped 3.8% this morning to 124p, the highest since 24th July. European stock markets have opened higher, lifting the Stoxx 600 index by around 0.6% - back towards last week's eight-month highs. Fiona Cincotta of Gain Capital reports that Covid vaccine optimism and encouraging data from China and Japan are lifting shares. Retail sales in China rose at the fastest rate of the year in October, a strong sign that improving consumer demand is contributing to the economy's solid economic recovery from the covid pandemic. Sales rose an impressive 4.3% MoM, well ahead of the 3.3% increase recorded in September. Retail sales returned to growth in August after 7 consecutive months of decline. Adding to the upbeat mood data revealed that Japan's economy rebounded sharply in Q3 with the economy growing by 5% QoQ, ahead of the 4.4% forecast, boosting the world's third largest economy out of recession. The FTSE 250 index of mid-sized companies, has also opened higher - with some pandemic-battered firms among the risers. Cineworld, which was forced to shut its UK and US screens last month, are up 8.5%, while cruise operator Carnival has gained 5.5% and easyJet is up 4%. That shows that the 'rotation trade', out of companies who profited from the pandemic and into those who suffered badly, is still in play: In the City, shares in travel and hospitality companies, miners and banks are rising - as traders continue to price in a vaccine-led recovery in 2021. Airline group IAG is the top riser on the FTSE 100, up 5%, while hotel chain Whitbread has gained 3.5% (helped by an upgrade to 'buy' from 'sell' from Goldman Sachs). Hopes of a pick-up in travel have also lifted engineering firm Rolls-Royce (which manufacturers and services jet engines) by 3.5%. Mining firms Glencore (3%) is also being lifted by economic recovery hopes. Standard Chartered, the Asia-Pacific focused bank, are up 3.6% following the RCEP trade deal and Japan's faster-than-expected recovery. The broader FTSE 100 is up 35 points or 0.5%, at 6350, close to last week's five-month highs. Markets have also been lifted by the news that 15 Asia-Pacific countries have signed a historic free trade deal. The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) is one of the largest free trade deals in history, covering 2.2 billion people and 30% of the world's economic output. China, Australia, Japan, New Zealand and South Korea all signed the deal, alongside members of the 10-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. It bundles together a patchwork of previous smaller agreements into a single pact, boosting economic integration and giving manufacturers a common rules of origin framework to work with. All good for growth, analysts say. My colleague Jasper Jolly explains: The deal sets the terms of trade in goods and services, cross-border investment and new rules for increasingly important areas such as electronic commerce and intellectual property. The effect on the trade of finished goods between Asian nations will be particularly marked, analysts have said. In a joint statement, the leaders of the countries said the trade deal would form a crucial part of their plans to recover from the pandemic, which has forced countries around the world to lock down their economies. Stock markets across the Asia-Pacific region rose sharply today, lifted by vaccine optimism and the news that Japan's economy grew faster than expected last quarter. Japan's Nikkei jumped 2% to fresh 29-year peak, extending its recent gains. MSCI's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan gained 1.1% to hit its highest since its launch in 1987, Reuters reports. However, traders in Australia were left on the sidelines. The Sydney stock market had to suspend trading for the day after its stock market suffered technical problems. Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, says: With vaccine hopes on the rise, and central banks signalling globally that monetary policy will remain ultra-easy even if a vaccine does arrive, equity markets will remain either a straight to go, or a buy on the dip. The BBC says Japan's return to growth is is part of a wider global economic recovery across Asia's economics that has been dubbed a "Zoom boom": The global economy as a whole is expected to contract by 4.4% this year, while the US will shrink by 4.3%, according to the International Monetary Fund. However, Asian economies are leading the way when it comes to showing signs of recovery. China remains on track to grow by about 2% this year, the most of any major economy. "We call it the Zoom boom," said Rory Green, an economist at research firm TS Lombard. Also on Monday, China released new economic data that showed its factory output grew 6.9% in October, compared to the same month last year. The Financial Times, though, points out that the 5% growth recorded in July-September certainly hasn't repaired all the damage caused by Covid-19: The partial rebound suggests a full recovery from the pandemic will prove protracted and difficult, especially if a recent rise in coronavirus cases develops into a larger wave. Japan recorded 1,722 new cases of Covid-19 on Saturday, the most recent day for which data was available, compared with 868 a fortnight earlier. "The economy has come back steadily but the recovery is a work in progress," said Yasutoshi Nishimura, Japan's economy minister. "People are still in a defensive mindset." Japan has cheered global investors today by returning to growth, after the pandemic dragged its economy into an unprecedented recession. Japanese GDP grew by 5% in the third quarter of the year -- faster than expected, and the best quarterly growth on record after three quarters of contraction. That follows a record downturn of around 8.2% in April-June, and means that Japan's economy is still almost 6% smaller than it was a year ago. Growth was driven by household spending, and a pick-up in net trade, as Japan benefited from rising demand at home and abroad. However, business expenditure continued to fall (-3.4%), suggesting that firms are still understandably cautious given the health crisis. Tokyo's government warned that the economic situation was still tough, saying: "The Japanese economy for July-September 2020 is still in a severe situation due to the COVID-19, but it is showing movements of picking up later in the quarter." Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. After its best week since April, the UK stock market is beginning the new week on the front foot. European equities have opened higher at the start of trading, as investors continue to grasp onto hopes of successful Covid-19 vaccine rollouts. Chris Weston, head of research at Pepperstone, says investors are increasingly confident: There is certainly elevated chatter that potential shutdowns in the US will weigh more in the near-term and maybe so, but investor sentiment is the most elevated since 2017 - two standard deviations of the mean of past 10 years [according to AAII]. Over the weekend, one of the scientists behind the BioNTech/Pfizer coronavirus vaccine predicted it would result in a "dramatic reduction in cases Ugur Sahin, the chief executive of BioNTech, expressed confidence that the vaccine could halve transmission of the virus, telling the BBC's Andrew Marr show that: "I'm very confident that transmission between people will be reduced by such a highly effective vaccine - maybe not 90% but maybe 50% - but we should not forget that even that could result in a dramatic reduction of the pandemic spread." Professor Sahin cautioned that the full impact of the vaccine would not be felt until next summer, but that life could be "back to normal" by next winter. Another vaccine trial is beginning in the UK today, which will see around 6,000 British volunteers injected with a vaccine developed by a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson. It is the third Covid vaccine to enter large-scale clinical trials in the UK, after Oxford Covid vaccine, and one being developed by the US biotech company Novavax. Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank says: Markets will be on high alert for any further vaccine news, especially efficacy data from Moderna and AstraZeneca even if we don't know the exact timings. We could also hear that the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine will get FDA emergency use approval later in the week. The rally comes despite ever more alarming Covid-19 data out of the US, where a record total of 184,000 new cases were reported on Friday. The agenda 1pm BST: ECB president Christine Lagarde speaks at the World Economic Forum's Pioneers of Change Summit From 1pm BST: Bloomberg's New Economy Forum 38595 false false  Graeme Wearden       The skyline of the City of London.        The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 index over the last year        The FTSE 100 over the last six months        The MSCI World stocks index        A street sign for Wall Street outside the New York Stock Exchange in Manhattan.        The top risers and fallers on the FTSE 100 so far today        An oil rig and pump jack in Midland, Texas.        The FTSE 100 during 2020        European stock markets after Moderna's announcement        The FTSE 100 today         Here are the top risers on the FTSE 100, which is currently up 48 points at 6365         European stock markets, November 16        Pedestrians crossing a street in Tokyo today.