An international team of World Health Organization experts has visited a hospital in Wuhan, China, that saw some of the first cases of Covid in December 2019, as part of an on-the-ground investigation into the origins of the virus that caused the pandemic.

They are also expected to visit a food market linked to one of the first cluster of cases, the Wuhan Institute of Virology , a research facility with a large archive of bat coronaviruses, and the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control.

US officials in the Trump administration had suggested, without offering evidence,  that the virus could have escaped from the institute. Experts have said that was unlikely, and also overwhelmingly agreed that analysis of the new coronavirus's genome ruled out the possibility that it was engineered by humans.

China has strongly opposed an independent investigation it could not fully control, and on Friday the foreign ministry spokesman, Zhao Lijian, insisted that the delegation was not a probe. "It is part of global research, not an investigation," he said in Beijing.

The WHO wrote on Twitter that the team had already requested "detailed underlying data" during online meetings held during a 14-day quarantine, and in their site visits expected to interview "early responders and some of the first Covid-19 patients".

One member of the investigating team, Peter Daszak, said those meetings had begun at the hospital on Friday.

Zhang Jixian, the director of its department of respiratory and critical care, has been cited by Chinese state media as the first to report the novel coronavirus, after treating an elderly couple whose CT scans showed differences from typical pneumonia.

"Extremely important first site visit," Daszak wrote on Twitter. "We are in the hospital that treated some of the first known cases of Covid-19, meeting with the actual clinicians and staff who did this work, having open discussion about the details of their work."

The group are not able to go out freely in Wuhan, and will only be able to meet people on an itinerary set by their hosts.

"The team will go out but they will be bussed to wherever, so they won't have any contact with the community," the WHO spokeswoman, Margaret Harris, told a briefing in Geneva on Friday. "They will only have contact with various individuals that are being organised as part of the study."

Earlier this week relatives of Wuhan's coronavirus victims said  Chinese authorities had deleted their social media group and told them to keep quiet while the WHO team was in the city.

On Thursday, a WHO spokesperson said: "The team is deeply sympathetic to patients who have survived Covid-19 and families of those who lost their lives due to Covid-19. The team will speak with some of early Covid-19 patients and possibly some families of deceased."

The fact-finding mission  has been beset by controversy after the WHO accused China of dragging its heels  over arrangements, in a rare public complaint.

The team arrived more than a year after doctors in the city first raised the alarm  about a mystery new illness. The coronavirus has now killed more than 2 million people and infected at least 100 million globally.

China appears concerned the research could shed light on alleged missteps in its early response  to the virus that could open it up to international criticism - and perhaps even to demands for financial compensation if it is found to have been negligent.

It has stifled domestic reporting about the outbreak, brought in controls on scientific research into the origins of the virus, and officials have also suggested repeatedly that the disease could have come from abroad.

These claims range from suggestions that the search into the origins of Covid-19 should investigate bat habitats in neighbouring south-east Asia, which has been echoed by a WHO expert, to an insinuation - made without evidence - that the US military could have brought the virus to Wuhan.

•Reuters news agency contributed to this report

Reuters news agency contributed to this report