Australia must work to prevent ties with China slipping into permanent hostility as the relationship becomes more vulnerable to frequent flare-ups, a former senior diplomat has warned.

Without careful management, Australia's ties with its top trading partner could descend into a "permanently adversarial" state where parts of the economic relationship are regularly at risk, according to Richard Maude, until recently a deputy secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Canberra.

He warned that it was easier to talk about finding new export markets than actually finding them, and Australia would be poorer and less resilient if competitive relations between China and the west deteriorated to a point where it jeopardised cooperation on major global challenges.

"Managing relations with an assertive China requires Australian patience, consistency and steadfastness on policy over the long term," wrote Maude, the executive director of policy at the Asia Society Australia.

"The task is harder because China increasingly is conducting its diplomacy in a manner it would never accept from others. That diminishes China but is the nature of authoritarian power. Cool determination rather than indignation is the better response."

The call came as Scott Morrison declared Australia would never "trade away our values" and would deal with other countries "fairly and honestly and openly".

Trade tensions have grown over the past few days as Chinese authorities flagged            potential tariffs of 80% on Australian barley imports and suspended permits for beef supplied by three abattoirs in Queensland and one in New South Wales.

China announced on Thursday that it would immediately begin allowing American barley imports, a move that has been framed by state media as a potential problem between Australia and the US.

Beijing insists its decision about Australian imports are all legitimate trade responses and not the "economic coercion" politicians in Canberra were worried about last month.

But the hawkish Chinese media outlet, the Global Times, reported that the decision to allow US barley imports "suggests a delicate situation" for the Morrison government.

"If US agricultural products take over Australia's share in the Chinese market, then who is the antagonist of Australian businesses, China or the US?" it said.

The article then said - simultaneously - that the trade practices are normal and Australia shouldn't be politicising them, but also that the Morrison government should "halt the further decline of its relations with China".

"Moreover, it is likely Australia will face competition from US agricultural products in the future, which may put US-Australia friendship to the test."

Earlier, Morrison said the trade actions showed it was "obviously a difficult time" in the relationship, but the Australian government aimed to resolve the specific complaints from the Chinese authorities "through all the normal channels".

The prime minister pushed back at any suggestion that Australia was doing the bidding of the US in calling for an independent investigation into the origins and handling of Covid-19 - the most recent issue that angered Beijing.

"We have always been independent ... and we will always stand our ground when it comes to the things that we believe in and the values that we uphold," Morrison told reporters in Canberra.

"The great thing about sovereignty is we always respect the sovereignty of other nations and we simply expect the same in return."

China's foreign ministry declined to say whether Beijing was open to ministerial level talks to resolve the issues affecting Australian beef and barley exports.

Zhao Lijian, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, said sound and stable ties were in the interests of both China and Australia, but pointedly added that "it takes efforts from both sides to ensure such a relationship".

"We hope Australia can work with us to uphold mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit and strive to advance bilateral cooperation and mutual trust, as is in keeping with the two sides' comprehensive strategic partnership," he said at a regular press briefing on Wednesday.

While senior members of the Australian government have tried to lower the diplomatic temperature in recent days, numerous Coalition backbenchers have pushed for a tough line against Beijing, prompting Labor to call on Morrison to prevent colleagues from further inflaming tensions.

Andrew Hastie, the chair of parliament's powerful intelligence committee and a China critic, confirmed Morrison and the foreign minister, Marise Payne, had held a "fireside chat" with several backbenchers regarding the China issue this week.

But the government has argued this was a briefing, rather than an attempt to ensure backbenchers moderated their language.

The Queensland Liberal National party senator Matt Canavan said there was no need to "regulate or censor" democratic debate, while the Australian public agreed that "we cannot outsource our foreign policy to another country".

Canavan said Beijing's trade actions this week, combined with rhetoric from some Chinese officials over the past month, were "a continuation of a trend".

"So it is a shame that the relationship is not as strong as it was, but it is also a reality and we must recognise that reality as a country and seek to diversify our risk and to develop our other markets," he told Sky News.

Canavan said this was "one of the principal reasons" why he was such a big supporter of Adani's Carmichael coalmine, as it could help strengthen the relationship between Australia and India.

Ben Lyons, an associate professor from the University of Southern Queensland in Toowoomba, said he was "alert but not alarmed" about the possibility trade tensions could spread from beef and barley to other aspects of Australian exports.

Lyons is the director of the Rural Economies Centre of Excellence, a thinktank backed by four Queensland universities, and has previously lived in China.

"These technicalities - whilst painful - can happen from time to time owing to a legacy of China's administrative structure," he said. Bureaucratic triggers "could happen to any product at any time in China and often for obscure reasons".