block-time published-time 8.27am GMT

Moldova has become the first European country to receive Covid-19 vaccines from the global C OVAX  scheme, according to the nation's president Maia Sandu.

enltr #Moldova  is the first European nation to receive #COVID19vaccines  via the #COVAX  initiative - the first 14,400 doses arrived last night. Thankful to ???? and other ????nations,  ????, ????, ????, @EU_Commission , ???? and others for solidarity, and to @WHO  and @UNICEF

- Maia Sandu (@sandumaiamd) March 5, 2021

block-time published-time 8.13am GMT

France's  health minister has said the country could block overseas exports of Covid vaccines, following a similar move from Italy.

Asked by BFM TV if France could follow Italy's move on this, Olivier Véran replied: "We could."

On Thursday, the EU blocked a shipment of AstraZeneca's vaccine destined for Australia after the drug manufacturer failed to meet its EU contract commitments.

But Scott Morrison insisted the blocked shipment of the AstraZeneca jabs was understandable and would not affect Australia's vaccine programme.

"This particular shipment was not one we'd counted on for the rollout, and so we will continue unabated," Morrison said.

Related:  Italy blocks export of 250,000 AstraZeneca vaccine doses to Australia

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.21am GMT

block-time published-time 7.50am GMT

Prof Andrew Hayward, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at UCL and a member of the UK's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), told Times Radio this morning that "we left things far too late, in terms of taking more restrictive measures".

Hayward also said we will "have to live with" a "substantial" degree of mortality but that we will "get back to normal".

He does not think new variants of Covid-19 will completely evade vaccine immunity as "we have the technology to update the vaccines".

"The vaccines will still take the sting out of it, if you like, and reduce the case fatality rates," he said.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.57am GMT

block-time published-time 7.39am GMT

The  French European affairs minister, Clément Beaune, has said the solidarity of the European Union would be affected if countries in the bloc chose Chinese or Russian  Covid-19 vaccines which have not yet been approved, Reuters reports.

Beaune told RTL radio:

"If they went to choose the Chinese and/or Russian vaccine, I think it would be quite serious,"

"It would pose a problem in terms of our solidarity, and it also poses a health risk problem, because the Russian vaccine is not yet authorised in Europe. A demand for approval has been made but it is not yet authorised in Europe, and no demand has even been made yet for the Chinese vaccine," added Beaune.

French junior minister for European affairs Clément Beaune arrives at the Élysée Palace prior to the weekly cabinet meeting of the government in Paris. Photograph: Christophe Petit-Tesson/EPA

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.49am GMT

block-time published-time 7.22am GMT

Covid vaccine ads aim to influence without alienating people

Government attempts to drive up vaccine acceptance will come under increasing scrutiny in the coming months as more jabs are made available. Public health experts say they have to walk a fine line between boosting trust and not being seen to force the jab on the public, reports Philip Olterman, Jon Henley and Tom Phillips.

Germany's campaign, called "Germany Pulls Up Its Sleeves:", has run across radio, regional newspapers and billboard posters. At a time when the public is being urged to stay at home and avoid commuting, the health ministry chose to spend more than half of its 25m campaign budget on outdoor advertising.

A new campaign aimed at spreading confidence among younger people is due to launch when the vaccine becomes more widely available.

In France, there has been no major mass information campaign. Instead, the prime minister, Jean Castex, the health minister, Olivier Véran, and the country's " Monsieur Vaccin ", Prof Alain Fischer, who is overseeing the programme, give weekly televised press conferences to update on progress and announce when different groups will be eligible for a shot.

Related:  Covid vaccine ads aim to influence without alienating people

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.36am GMT

block-time published-time 7.14am GMT

Morning, this is Alex Mistlin taking over the coronavirus live blog in London. First up this morning, Reuters report that Sinovac Biotech's Covid-19 vaccine may not trigger sufficient antibody responses against a new variant identified in Brazil.

Reuters reports:

The emergence of variants of the new coronavirus has raised concern that vaccines and treatments that were developed based on previous strains may not work as robustly.

Plasma samples taken from eight people vaccinated with Sinovac's CoronaVac failed to efficiently neutralize the P.1 lineage variant, or 20J/501Y.V3, researchers said in a paper published on Monday ahead of peer-review.

"These results suggest that P.1 virus might escape from neutralizing antibodies induced by ... CoronaVac," researchers at the University of São Paulo in Brazil, Washington University School of Medicine in the US, and a few other institutions said in the paper.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.36am GMT

block-time published-time 6.55am GMT

That's it from me, Helen Sullivan , from Sydney:

enltrI will break these in half and cook them in a cream-based sauce that I will call a "carbonara", unless Italy agrees to release the 250,000 doses of AstraZeneca back to Australia pic.twitter.com/EJuOb8kX4X

- Naaman Zhou (@naamanzhou) March 4, 2021

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.56am GMT

block-time published-time 6.43am GMT

The Australian government has played down fears the vaccine rollout could be disrupted by Italy's move to block exports  to Australia, and has flagged plans to expand the Howard Springs quarantine facility for returning travellers by May.

The progress of Australia's vaccination rollout - including the impact of the sudden block on a shipment of 250,000 AstraZeneca doses to Australia - was high on the agenda for Scott Morrison's meeting with state and territory leaders on Friday:

Related:  Coalition to expand quarantine facility amid fears of Covid vaccine disruption

block-time published-time 6.35am GMT

Summary

Here are the key developments from the last few hours:

•WHO to scrap interim report on virus origins - report. The Wall Street Journal reported that a World Health Organization team investigating Covid's origins is planning to scrap an interim report on its recent mission to China amid mounting tensions between Beijing and Washington over the investigation and an appeal from one international group of scientists for a new inquiry.•Japan to extend Tokyo state of emergency. The Japanese government plans to extend a state of emergency for Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures to combat Covid until March 21, two weeks longer than originally scheduled, Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura said on Friday.•New coronavirus variant under investigation in UK. Scientists have identified 16 cases of a new coronavirus variant in the UK, Public Health England announced. Cases of the variant, referred to as VUI-202102/04, were first identified on 15 February. The variant, which is understood to have originated in the UK, was designated a "variant under investigation" on 24 February.•Survey shows UK parents' concern over Covid effect on children's activity. More than two-thirds of UK parents believe their children have become less active during the pandemic, new research has found, placing more pressure on schools before their reopening next week.•Calls grow to prioritise Italy's priests for Covid vaccination. Calls are growing in Italy to prioritise the vaccination of priests against Covid-19 as the death toll among members of the clergy, many of whom have assisted and comforted the sick since the beginning of the pandemic, approaches 270.•Australia says Italy's block on AstraZeneca vaccine frustrating but not crucial. The Australian government on Friday expressed frustration at Italy's decision to block a shipment of AstraZeneca's Covid vaccine, but stressed it would not affect the rollout of Australia's inoculation program.•China to develop vaccines against major infectious diseases. China pledges to develop vaccines to cope with major infectious disease, part of its flurry of efforts to boost the competitiveness of its manufacturing sector, the government said on Friday in its development plan for 2021-2025.•Vietnam to launch vaccinations on Monday. Vietnam will launch its Covid vaccination campaign on Monday, the country's health minister said, after the country received the first batch of 117,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine last month.•Papua New Guinea hospitals run out of funding as Covid cases surge. Papua New Guinea is battling to control a surge in coronavirus cases across the archipelago, just as hospitals are shutting their doors because they have run out of money.The country's crowded capital, Port Moresby, is the epicentre of the latest outbreak.•Australian experts warn Covid vaccines being sold on darknet likely to be scams. Three major Covid-19 vaccines are being advertised for sale on the darknet - the part of the internet not visible to search engines and which requires specialised software to access, an analysis of 15 marketplaces has found.•Jacinda Ardern announces Auckland's Covid lockdown will lift on Sunday. Auckland's seven-day lockdown is due to lift on Sunday morning after no new cases of coronavirus were recorded in the community on Friday.•'Fear of missing out' boosting global acceptance of Covid jab. An international survey shows vaccine confidence is already on the rise even though relatively few countries have launched public awareness campaigns, with the fear of missing out on a jab suggested as one driver.•South Korea approved the Pfizer vaccine. South Korea's drug safety ministry said on Friday it has granted final approval for the use of Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine.

WHO to scrap interim report on virus origins - report. The Wall Street Journal reported that a World Health Organization team investigating Covid's origins is planning to scrap an interim report on its recent mission to China amid mounting tensions between Beijing and Washington over the investigation and an appeal from one international group of scientists for a new inquiry.

Japan to extend Tokyo state of emergency. The Japanese government plans to extend a state of emergency for Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures to combat Covid until March 21, two weeks longer than originally scheduled, Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura said on Friday.

New coronavirus variant under investigation in UK. Scientists have identified 16 cases of a new coronavirus variant in the UK, Public Health England announced. Cases of the variant, referred to as VUI-202102/04, were first identified on 15 February. The variant, which is understood to have originated in the UK, was designated a "variant under investigation" on 24 February.

Survey shows UK parents' concern over Covid effect on children's activity. More than two-thirds of UK parents believe their children have become less active during the pandemic, new research has found, placing more pressure on schools before their reopening next week.

Calls grow to prioritise Italy's priests for Covid vaccination. Calls are growing in Italy to prioritise the vaccination of priests against Covid-19 as the death toll among members of the clergy, many of whom have assisted and comforted the sick since the beginning of the pandemic, approaches 270.

Australia says Italy's block on AstraZeneca vaccine frustrating but not crucial. The Australian government on Friday expressed frustration at Italy's decision to block a shipment of AstraZeneca's Covid vaccine, but stressed it would not affect the rollout of Australia's inoculation program.

China to develop vaccines against major infectious diseases. China pledges to develop vaccines to cope with major infectious disease, part of its flurry of efforts to boost the competitiveness of its manufacturing sector, the government said on Friday in its development plan for 2021-2025.

Vietnam to launch vaccinations on Monday. Vietnam will launch its Covid vaccination campaign on Monday, the country's health minister said, after the country received the first batch of 117,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine last month.

Papua New Guinea hospitals run out of funding as Covid cases surge. Papua New Guinea is battling to control a surge in coronavirus cases across the archipelago, just as hospitals are shutting their doors because they have run out of money.The country's crowded capital, Port Moresby, is the epicentre of the latest outbreak.

Australian experts warn Covid vaccines being sold on darknet likely to be scams. Three major Covid-19 vaccines are being advertised for sale on the darknet - the part of the internet not visible to search engines and which requires specialised software to access, an analysis of 15 marketplaces has found.

Jacinda Ardern announces Auckland's Covid lockdown will lift on Sunday. Auckland's seven-day lockdown is due to lift on Sunday morning after no new cases of coronavirus were recorded in the community on Friday.

'Fear of missing out' boosting global acceptance of Covid jab. An international survey shows vaccine confidence is already on the rise even though relatively few countries have launched public awareness campaigns, with the fear of missing out on a jab suggested as one driver.

South Korea approved the Pfizer vaccine. South Korea's drug safety ministry said on Friday it has granted final approval for the use of Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine.

block-time published-time 6.08am GMT

South Korea approves Pfizer vaccine

South Korea's drug safety ministry said on Friday it has granted final approval for the use of Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine. The announcement came after the ministry approved a separate batch of Pfizer vaccines sent last month via the Cobax global vaccine sharing scheme, which are being used in the ongoing vaccination campaign. The ministry has also approved AstraZeneca's vaccine.

block-time published-time 5.53am GMT

Vietnam to launch vaccinations on Monday

Vietnam will launch its Covid vaccination campaign on Monday, the country's health minister said, after the country received the first batch of 117,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine last month. The vaccinations will initially be conducted in 18 hospitals treating coronavirus patients and areas with higher infection numbers, Minister Nguyen Thanh Long said in a statement on Friday.

block-time published-time 5.35am GMT

Calls grow to prioritise Italy's priests for Covid vaccination

Calls are growing in Italy  to prioritise the vaccination of priests against Covid-19 as the death toll among members of the clergy, many of whom have assisted and comforted the sick since the beginning of the pandemic, approaches 270.

Dozens of dioceses, religious groups and priests have in recent weeks expressed support for a call for priests to be prioritise from the archbishop of Reggio Calabria, Giuseppe Fiorini Morosini, who in January told an interviewer that the church was continuing to lose clergy to the disease:

Related:  Calls grow to prioritise Italy's priests for Covid vaccination

block-time published-time 5.16am GMT

'Fear of missing out' boosting global acceptance of Covid jab

Across the globe, governments are weighing up how they can convince sufficiently large numbers of people to take a Covid-19 vaccine in order to reach herd immunity.

But an international survey shows vaccine confidence is already on the rise even though relatively few countries have launched public awareness campaigns, with the fear of missing out on a jab suggested as one driver.

In the survey by Imperial College London, the share of respondents who "strongly agreed" to take a vaccine if it was offered to them has increased by eight percentage points or more in nine of the 14 countries surveyed between November and mid-February.

Vaccine confidence is exceptionally high in the UK, which has not just seen one of the globe's smoothest-run immunisation rollouts but also a more proactive public information campaign than in other countries. As many as 70% of those surveyed expressed their eagerness to get a jab in the most emphatic way possible:

Related:  Fear of missing out boosting global acceptance of Covid jab, survey suggests

block-time published-time 4.49am GMT

Ardern announces Auckland's Covid lockdown will lift on Sunday

Auckland's seven-day lockdown is due to lift on Sunday morning after no new cases of coronavirus were recorded in the community on Friday.

The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern , said Auckland would go from alert level three to level two at 6am on Sunday, while the rest of the country would move down to level one.

A decision made to downgrade Auckland to level one would be made before the following weekend:

Related:  Ardern announces Auckland's Covid lockdown will lift on Sunday

block-time published-time 4.38am GMT

Mardi Gras protest march to go ahead in Sydney after last-minute Covid exemption

Sydney  LGBTIQ+ rights protestors will march along Oxford Street while the city's Mardi Gras is held elsewhere after New South Wales Health granted organisers an exemption from gathering restrictions.

The exemption means a court fight between NSW police, which sought to stop Saturday's march, and the protesters will no longer go ahead.

Activist group Pride in Protest  decided at the last minute to apply for an exemption to public health orders, approaching the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, on Thursday afternoon.

Shortly before the court hearing was due to begin at midday on Friday, the group announced it had secured the exemption after agreeing on better contact-tracing processes.

"This is a massive win for not only the right to protest but for the queer community to say that the fight against transphobia and homophobia cannot wait," the group said in a statement:

Related:  Mardi Gras protest march to go ahead in Sydney after last-minute Covid exemption granted

block-time published-time 4.12am GMT

Australian experts warn Covid vaccines being sold on darknet likely to be scams

Three major Covid-19 vaccines are being advertised for sale on the darknet - the part of the internet not visible to search engines and which requires specialised software to access, an analysis of 15 marketplaces has found.

Researchers at the global security company Kaspersky found advertisements for the Pfizer, AstraZeneca and Moderna vaccines, as well as sellers advertising unverified vaccines:

Related:  Experts warn Covid vaccines being sold on darknet likely to be scams

block-time published-time 3.33am GMT

Papua New Guinea hospitals run out of funding as Covid cases surge

Papua New Guinea  is battling to control a surge in coronavirus cases across the archipelago, just as hospitals are shutting their doors because they have run out of money.

The country's crowded capital, Port Moresby, is the epicentre of the latest outbreak.

The city recorded just five cases for all of January, and 124 for February. But 108 cases have been confirmed in the first four days of March as community transmission accelerates.

PNG has reported only 1,492 confirmed cases for the entire pandemic, but the actual caseload  is believed to be many times higher.

Fewer than 48,000 tests  have been conducted across the country of nearly 9 million people since the beginning of the pandemic, and, in many remote parts of the country, there is no testing capacity at all. PNG has not yet begun a vaccination program.

Health authorities are also concerned about a spike in cases in PNG's huge western province, which links the country to Indonesia, and has a sea border with Australia.

Travel between PNG and Australian islands in the Torres Strait is usually unrestricted but has been suspended for the pandemic:

Related:  Papua New Guinea hospitals run out of funding as Covid cases surge

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.23am GMT

block-time published-time 3.08am GMT

California will begin sending 40% of all vaccine doses to the most vulnerable neighborhoods in the state to try to inoculate people most at risk from the coronavirus and get the state's economy open more quickly, Governor Gavin Newsom said Thursday in the latest shake-up to the state's rules. AP: The doses will be spread among 400 ZIP codes where there are about 8 million people eligible for shots, said Dr Mark Ghaly, the state's health and human services secretary. Many of the neighbourhoods are in Los Angeles County and the central valley, which have had among the highest rates of infection. The areas are considered most vulnerable based on metrics such as household income, education level and access to health care. Newsom said that not only is this the right thing to do, it's critical to opening up more of the state's economy.

block-time published-time 2.54am GMT

China to develop vaccines against major infectious diseases

China pledges to develop vaccines to cope with major infectious disease, part of its flurry of efforts to boost the competitiveness of its manufacturing sector, the government said on Friday in its development plan for 2021-2025, Reuters reports. The country will concentrate resources to prevent emerging infectious diseases and biosafety risks, according to the plan.

block-time published-time 2.21am GMT

Senate Democrats on Thursday came out with their version of the $1.9 trillion Covid relief bill. A look at some of the major changes in the bill now being considered by the Senate versus what passed the House last week, AP reports.

Here is what has changed: Who gets a check

•President Joe Biden and Senate Democrats have agreed to tighten eligibility for the $1,400 payments.•Most Americans will still be getting the full amount under either bill. The median household income was $68,703 in 2019, according to the US Census Bureau.Roughly 8 million fewer households will get a check under the Senate bill compared with what the House passed, according to an analysis from the Tax Policy Center.

President Joe Biden and Senate Democrats have agreed to tighten eligibility for the $1,400 payments.

Most Americans will still be getting the full amount under either bill. The median household income was $68,703 in 2019, according to the US Census Bureau.Roughly 8 million fewer households will get a check under the Senate bill compared with what the House passed, according to an analysis from the Tax Policy Center.

$15 minimum wage removed

•The Senate bill does not include an increase in the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2025.•The Senate parliamentarian ruled that the minimum wage increase violated strict budget rules limiting what can be included in a package that can be passed with 51 votes rather than the 60 needed to overcome a filibuster.

The Senate bill does not include an increase in the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2025.

The Senate parliamentarian ruled that the minimum wage increase violated strict budget rules limiting what can be included in a package that can be passed with 51 votes rather than the 60 needed to overcome a filibuster.

Money for state and local governments

•The Senate bill also provides $350 billion for state and local governments but adds the stipulation that the money can only cover costs incurred by the end of 2024. The Senate bill also prohibits states from using the money to offset tax cuts, nor can it be used to shore up a pension fund.

The Senate bill also provides $350 billion for state and local governments but adds the stipulation that the money can only cover costs incurred by the end of 2024. The Senate bill also prohibits states from using the money to offset tax cuts, nor can it be used to shore up a pension fund.

Health insurance help

•Workers who lose their job can remain on their company's health plan for up to 18 months under a law known as Cobra, but they typically must pay the full monthly premium.

Workers who lose their job can remain on their company's health plan for up to 18 months under a law known as Cobra, but they typically must pay the full monthly premium.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.25am GMT

block-time published-time 1.55am GMT

Australia began its inoculation programme two weeks ago, vaccinating frontline health staff and senior citizens with Pfizer's Covid vaccine though doses of that vaccine are limited amid tight global supplies. Reuters: Officials on Friday administered the first AstraZeneca vaccine to a doctor in South Australia state. Australia has ordered 53.8 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine, which was developed in conjunction with the University of Oxford. Local pharmaceutical company CSL Ltd has secured the rights to manufacture 50 million of those doses in Australia. Those doses will provide the backbone of Australia's inoculation programme, which it hopes to complete by October. Australia is under less pressure than many other countries, having recorded just under 29,000 Covid cases and 909 deaths. The lower infection and death tallies have been helped by strict lockdowns, speedy tracking systems and border closures

block-time published-time 1.37am GMT

Australia says Italy's block on AstraZeneca vaccine frustrating but not crucial

The Australian government on Friday expressed frustration at Italy's decision to block a shipment of AstraZeneca's Covid vaccine, but stressed it would not affect the rollout of Australia's inoculation program, Reuters reports. Italy, supported by the European Commission, blocked the planned export of around 250,000 doses of AstraZeneca's vaccine after the drug manufacturer failed to meet its European Union contract commitments. "The world is in unchartered territory at present, it's unsurprising that some countries would tear up the rule book," Australian Finance Minister Simon Birmingham told Sky News. "This is a demonstration of really how well Australia continues to do compared to the desperation of other countries." Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia had already received 300,000 doses of AstraZeneca's Covid vaccine, which would last until local production of the vaccine ramps up. "This is one shipment from one country," Hunt said in an emailed statement. "This shipment was not factored into our distribution plan for coming weeks." AstraZeneca did not immediately reply to a request for comment.

block-time published-time 1.10am GMT

China reported 9 new coronavirus cases in the mainland for 4 March, compared with 10 cases a day earlier, the country's health commission said on Friday. All of the new infections were imported cases originating from abroad, according to a statement by the National Health Commission. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to 12 from 14 cases a day earlier. The total number of confirmed Covid cases in mainland China now stands at 89,952, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

block-time published-time 12.50am GMT

Survey shows UK parents' concern over Covid effect on children's activity

More than two-thirds of UK parents believe their children have become less active during the pandemic, new research has found, placing more pressure on schools before their reopening next week.

A survey by the leading charity the Youth Sport Trust found 78% of parents said their children were doing less than the government's recommended 60 minutes of activity a day, while 11% of parents said their children are doing no physical activity at all. The total who said the amount had decreased in the past year was 68%, while only 15% said it had stayed the same:

Related:  Survey shows UK parents' concern over Covid effect on children's activity

block-time published-time 12.42am GMT

Japan to extend Tokyo state of emergency

The Japanese government plans to extend a state of emergency for Tokyo and three neighbouring prefectures to combat Covid until March 21, two weeks longer than originally scheduled, Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura said on Friday. Reuters: Nishimura, who is in charge of the government's coronavirus response, made the comment at the start of an early-morning meeting with advisers to seek approval for the move. Tokyo, Chiba, Kanagawa and Saitama prefectures, which make up 30% of the country's population, sought the extension past the originally scheduled end date of 7 March as new coronavirus cases had not fallen enough to meet targets. Still, new case numbers are at a fraction of their peak in early January, when the state of emergency took effect. Tokyo reported 279 cases on Thursday, compared with a record high 2,520 on 7 January. Nationwide, Japan has recorded some 433,000 cases and 8,050 deaths from Covid as of Wednesday.

block-time published-time 12.22am GMT

New coronavirus variant under investigation in UK

Scientists have identified 16 cases of a new coronavirus variant in the UK, Public Health England (PHE) has announced.

Cases of the variant, referred to as VUI-202102/04, were first identified on 15 February through genomic horizon scanning. PHE said on Thursday that all individuals who tested positive and their contacts have been traced and advised to isolate. The variant, which is understood to have originated in the UK, was designated a "variant under investigation" (VUI) on 24 February.

Variants of Covid-19 can be identified as VUIs or "variants of concern" (VOCs). New variants emerge regularly and experts are conducting frequent analysis to see which are of concern, and which are not.

The latest identified variant, also known as B.1.1.318, contains the E484K mutation, which is found in two other VUIs present in the UK, but it does not feature the N501Y mutation that is present in all VOCs, PHE said.

The findings mean there are now four VUIs and four VOCs being tracked by scientists in the UK. Other VUIs include one from Brazil, known as P2, which has had 43 probable or confirmed cases identified in the UK, but is not causing scientists serious concern. PHE said that, as of Wednesday, a total of 26 cases of P2 had been found in England where no travel links could be established.

Two further VUIs - dubbed A.23.1 with E484K and B.1.525 - have seen 78 and 86 probable or confirmed UK cases detected respectively. Both were first detected in the UK in December.

block-time published-time 12.19am GMT

WHO to scrap interim report on virus origins - report

The Wall Street Journal  is reporting that a World Health Organization team investigating Covid's origins is planning to scrap an interim report on its recent mission to China amid mounting tensions between Beijing and Washington over the investigation and an appeal from one international group of scientists for a new inquiry.

It reports that a group of two dozen scientists have written an open letter  calling for a new international inquiry, claiming that the WHO team that was in Wuhan last month had insufficient access to investigate conceivable sources of the virus, including a possible laboratory leak.

In Geneva, WHO spokesman Tarik Jasarevic said in via email: "The full report is expected in coming weeks".

No further information was immediately available about the reasons for the delay in publishing the findings of the WHO-led mission. China refused to give raw data on early Covid-19 cases to a WHO-led team probing the origins of the pandemic, Dominic Dwyer, one of the team's investigators said last month, potentially complicating efforts to understand how the outbreak began.

The WHO team all but dismissed the suggestions that the virus may have leaked from a laboratory in a press conference after their mission. But later that week the WHO director-general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said "all hypotheses remain open and require further analysis and studies".

block-time published-time 12.12am GMT

Summary

Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Sullivan.

The World Health Organization is planning to scrap an interim report on the investigation into the virus origins in Wuhan, China, the Wall Street Journal reports, amid a call from scientists to begin a fresh inquiry. More on this shortly.

Meanwhile in the UK, scientists have identified 16 cases of a new coronavirus variant, Public Health England (PHE) has announced.

The variant, which is understood to have originated in the UK, was designated a "variant under investigation" (VUI) on 24 February.

Here are the other key developments from the last few hours:

•Sweden and Germany extended their recommendation for the AstraZeneca/Oxford vaccine to cover people aged over 65 after previously said lacked sufficient data, until recent studies.•Russia expects several EU countries to approve the use of its Sputnik V vaccine this month and Moscow could provide vaccines for 50 million Europeans starting from June if the shot wins EU-wide approval, Russia's RDIF fund said.•Italy halted a shipment of the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine due for Australia. It came after the EU introduced new rules governing the shipment of vaccines outside the bloc, although this is the first intervention of its kind.•Cuba has begun late-stage trials of its most advanced experimental Covid-19 vaccine, edging closer to a potential home-grown inoculation campaign after shunning foreign jabs.•Brazil's second biggest city of Rio de Janeiro will be the latest to adopt new Covid restrictions from tomorrow, including a night curfew, in a bid to stall a second wave of the virus.•Italy and Germany will administer just a single coronavirus vaccine dose to people who have been infected with the virus up to six months beforehand, amid a scramble to save shots.•More than four in 10 over-80s in England may have met with someone outside of their support bubble within three weeks of receiving the first jab, an official survey suggested.•France criticised a push by Austria and Denmark to coordinate with Israel on developing new Covid-19 jabs, as EU unity frays even further over its troubled vaccine rollout.•The San Diego zoo gave nine orangutans and bonobos an experimental coronavirus vaccine, the first known non-human primates to receive a Covid-19 vaccine in the US.

Sweden and Germany extended their recommendation for the AstraZeneca/Oxford vaccine to cover people aged over 65 after previously said lacked sufficient data, until recent studies.

Russia expects several EU countries to approve the use of its Sputnik V vaccine this month and Moscow could provide vaccines for 50 million Europeans starting from June if the shot wins EU-wide approval, Russia's RDIF fund said.

Italy halted a shipment of the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine due for Australia. It came after the EU introduced new rules governing the shipment of vaccines outside the bloc, although this is the first intervention of its kind.

Cuba has begun late-stage trials of its most advanced experimental Covid-19 vaccine, edging closer to a potential home-grown inoculation campaign after shunning foreign jabs.

Brazil's second biggest city of Rio de Janeiro will be the latest to adopt new Covid restrictions from tomorrow, including a night curfew, in a bid to stall a second wave of the virus.

Italy and Germany will administer just a single coronavirus vaccine dose to people who have been infected with the virus up to six months beforehand, amid a scramble to save shots.

More than four in 10 over-80s in England may have met with someone outside of their support bubble within three weeks of receiving the first jab, an official survey suggested.

France criticised a push by Austria and Denmark to coordinate with Israel on developing new Covid-19 jabs, as EU unity frays even further over its troubled vaccine rollout.

The San Diego zoo gave nine orangutans and bonobos an experimental coronavirus vaccine, the first known non-human primates to receive a Covid-19 vaccine in the US.