At a press conference last week, the chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, introduced the latest in a slew of national metaphors. After "Team Australia" and "Fortress Australia", we now have "Lifeboat Australia".

"We have put ourselves on a life raft," Murphy said of the effectiveness of current coronavirus containment measures. Now "we have to chart the course of where we take that life raft".

One direction receiving growing support is to direct the raft towards a return to life as we knew it. No sooner had we gotten our heads around the new distancing rules had some begun to suggest that it was time to think about winding them back - or winding them up.

Even the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been clear in saying these measures cannot last forever. Economically, something must give or we're going to set ourselves and future generations up for a whole lot of suffering down the line - at least, that's the argument, though whether it's true is a matter of some debate.

But setting aside the economic questions, it seems as though the real question for Lifeboat Australia may not be what direction it heads in, but how long we're willing to float before we start to kick people out and leave them at sea. What brings the moral and ethical nature of the choices before our leaders isn't the question of where we go, but the brutal, indigestible fact that not everyone is getting out of this alive.

Indeed, Lifeboat Australia isn't the first ship to have to consider these questions. In 1884 there was another yacht - the Mignonette - making its way to our shores. It shipwrecked with a crew of four. More than a week passed and rations ran out. It was becoming clear that not all of the crew were going to make it out alive. They discussed drawing lots to see who would be sacrificed so the others might live.

Situations like these are known in ethics circles as "lifeboat dilemmas". In these cases, there are no good options: either everyone suffers, or the group will try to find defensible reasons for sacrificing some people for the good of others. The question is, who most deserves to survive or - to put it another way - who do we have the best reasons to let die?

In the past, philosophers have relied too heavily on neutral, abstract assessment to resolve ethical trade-offs

As tempting as it is to reduce the discussion around exit strategies for our current containment measures as a simple ethical dilemma, the truth is far more complicated. The lifeboat dilemma assumes we're trading lives for lives - that is, things of equivalent value. The approach to rolling back distancing rules is far more complex. This choice pits life against life, quality of life against quantity, wellbeing against survival.

As the Australian philosopher Peter Singer argued : "I think the assumption, and it has been an assumption in this discussion, that we have to do everything to reduce the number of deaths, is not really the right assumption ... How do we assess the overall cost to everybody in terms of loss of quality of life, loss of well-being, as well as the fact that lives are being lost?"

Singer rightly makes the point that we are willing to trade loss of life for quality of life in a range of different social contexts. For example, we permit the sale of alcohol, knowing it will be implicated in a range of deaths from overuse, drunk driving, domestic violence and other causes.

We should take a moment to confront this reality head-on. We frequently trade lives for social or economic comfort. The seemingly impossible trade-offs involved in rolling back distancing rules is actually quite familiar. What's less familiar is that we're aware of the victims of this trade-off - they usually remain invisible or abstract to us. For example, in New South Walesrates of family violence increase on State of Origin day but few are aware of these victims.

It's much harder to claim that we're OK with a few more people dying if it means we get our NRL fix when it comes to Covid-19. It's not possible to be ignorant of the risks. We've spent the last months desperately upending our way of life to keep people safe. And now, as the costs for us increasingly pile up and we consider when we're being asked to pay too high a price for that safety, we can't easily put the vulnerable Australians with whom we've stood in solidarity out of our minds.

That's a good thing. At whatever point we decide to ease social distancing, we need to remember there will be a significant group of people who will bear the consequences of that choice. Whether though illness, death and the grief of losing loved ones or through loss of work and income, mental health crises, loneliness and isolation, increased exposure to domestic violence, self-harm or death, not everyone is going to be staying on Lifeboat Australia.

When we steer through this - eventually - we will owe it to those victims. And we will owe it to them that we do whatever we can to minimise their suffering, and bear witness to the inescapable remainder. Theirs will be a sacrifice in which they have no say, nor deserve to have to pay. Moreover, we should be ashamed that in "ordinary times" we remain blissfully unaware of those who suffer so that we might flourish.

It's easy to turn our mind away from those whose lands were stolen from them by colonialism, who were enslaved to build a legacy we enjoy, whose unacknowledged domestic labour props up our entire system, whose habitats and species have been destroyed or pushed to the verge of collapse. And yet, as Singer notes, we make those choices comfortably every day without hearing from the victims.

This should worry us deeply. Silence is an excellent way of ensuring victims remain that way. Without hearing their objections, their perspectives and their testimony, it's easy to convince ourselves that we've made a clear-headed assessment of how to manage a tricky trade-off.

Many of those calling for a fast end to distancing measures don't talk in much detail about the costs paid in human lives. We can't pretend this is a thought experiment: the people who are sacrificed here aren't abstractions. They're the grandparents who won't see their grandkids' next birthday, the chronically ill woman who won't get to walk down the aisle, the chemotherapy patient who won't get to hear that his cancer is in recession.

These people deserve a voice in and a vote on what is to come. In the past, philosophers have relied too heavily on neutral, abstract assessment to resolve ethical trade-offs. We've convinced ourselves that cool, detached reason can help us determine how to balance loss of life and quality of life, to determine whose lives matter most and what kinds of lives are worth living.

We should know better today how quickly that kind of thinking becomes self-serving. When I've presented lifeboat dilemmas to students, few have considered the possibility that they'd be the ones to die. It's elderly, disabled and infirm people who tend to be first in line - and they're usually not part of the discussion.

It's perhaps not a coincidence that the person who ended up being sacrificed on the Mignonette was the cabin boy, Richard Parker, who had drunk seawater and fallen ill. He was murdered after the captain and first mate decided he didn't stand a chance at survival and that he was therefore the best candidate to be sacrificed.

Nobody asked Parker what he thought.

Matt Beard is an Australian moral philosopher, fellow at the Ethics Centre and a regular writer on philosophy and ethics