Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:

US deaths overtake Italy

The number of deaths in the US has overtaken Italy, surpassing 19,600 on Saturday. The US has seen roughly 2,000 deaths reported each day for the last four days in a row. Italy has the second highest number of deaths, and Spain third.

Boris Johnson 'making very good progress'

The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, is making "very good progress" in his recovery from coronavirus, after being moved out of intensive care on Thursday. Downing Street said that he began walking again on Friday, but his recovery is at an early stage.

New York victims buried in mass graves

Unclaimed victims of coronavirus are being buried in unmarked mass graves on Hart Island in New York, officials in the state have confirmed. The site has been used as a burial ground for unclaimed bodies, and in those cases where the families could not afford a private burial, for more than 150 years.

NYC schools to remain closed for the rest of the year

Public schools in New York will remain closed for the rest of the year, mayor Bill de Blasio has said. However, state governor Andrew Cuomo said a decision on the reopening of schools across the state had not been reached.

China cracking down on Covid-19 research

China is clamping down on academic papers examining the origins of coronavirus, documents published online by Chinese universities appear to show. Pages referencing a new policy, which requires academic papers written on Covid-19 to undergo extra vetting before publication, have been recently published and then removed on two Chinese university websites.

UK government pledges £2m to domestic abuse charities

British home secretary, Priti Patel, has pledged to give £2m to improve online support services and helplines for victims of domestic abuse, after charities worldwide reported an increase in domestic abuse during coronavirus lockdown. The government also launched a national communications campaign to signpost help.

Iran reopens some government offices

Iran has started reopening government offices after a national lockdown to contain the coronavirus outbreak. The majority of government agencies and all non-essential businesses had been ordered to close for a week after the end of Nowruz holiday on 4 April.