This article is being updated daily. It was last updated on 13 March at 5pm. Further details of all destinations can be found on the IATA website.

International travellers are facing tighter restrictions at airports as the number of countries denying entry to passengers who have recently visited China, Italy and other regions with reported cases of coronavirus increases.

People who have Covid-19 have now been confirmed in 125 countries and territories. Restrictions are becoming more widespread, and major airports are putting preventive measures in place. A document featured on the International Air Transport Association (IATA) website, lists countries where restrictions are in place and is updated daily.

Passengers travelling from the UK (in the last 21 days)

If travellers have recently been on another trip abroad, they may be subject to additional restrictions or banned from entering some countries (detailed in the sections below). For travellers who have not recently been on other trips abroad, the locations with a ban on people coming from the UK are India (until 15 April), Benin, Cyprus, Gabon, El Salvador, the Federated States of Micronesia in the Pacific, Kuwait, North Korea, Philippines, Slovakia (all of which have a ban on travellers from all countries with confirmed cases of coronavirus), Vietnam (from 15 March and a ban on travellers who have recently been in any Schengen country) and the Pacific island of Kiribati. There is a high risk that British nationals may be put into a 14-day quarantine while the authorities impose travel restrictions. Those coming from the UK may face immediate quarantine in the Solomon Islands.

Due to coronavirus, the FCO is currently advising against all but essential travel to Czech Republic; Italy; mainland China (not including Hong Kong and Macao); Slovakia; Madrid, La Rioja, La Bastida Vitoria and Miranda de Ebro in Spain; and the cities of Daegu, Cheongdo and Gyeongsan in South Korea.

Nepal and Sri Lanka have suspended visas on arrival until further notice, although UK passport holders can still apply online or at the embassy in advance.

All tourists arriving in Croatia, Cyprus, Israel, Lebanon (from 15 March) and Uganda must self-isolate for 14 days, regardless of where they have recently visited. Tourists arriving in Czech Republic, must self-isolate fo 14 days, if they have recently been in Austria, Belgium, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Iran, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, and the US. All tourists arriving in French Polynesia require a health certificate stating that they are free from respiratory disease. Tourists arriving in the the Comoro Islands (near Mozambique), who have been in any country with confirmed cases of coronavirus, must have been quarantined in a country without any cases for 14 days prior to entry.

Many airlines began adjusting schedules in February, with fewer flights to Italy, due to a drop in demand. Following the entire country being placed on lockdown, as of 9 March, some carriers have cancelled all flights to and from Italy, including BA (until 4 April), Ryanair (until 8 April) and Wizz Air (until 3 April). Easyjet and Norwegian are running reduced schedules. Argentina will have a 30-day suspension of all international flights from the UK (as well as the whole of Europe, the US, China, Japan, South Korea and Iran), from the 16 March. Bolivia has a ban on all European flights from 14 March.

As of 12 March, FCO now advises against all travel on cruise ships for passengers aged 70 years and over and those with high-risk conditions.

Anyone who has visited Italy (usually within the last 14-28 days)

Complete ban on entry to Bahamas, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Guatemala, India, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Maldives, Malaysia, Mauritius, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Norway, Oman, Romania, Serbia, Saudi Arabia, St Lucia, Seychelles, Turkey, and the Turks and Caicos islands, among others. (All of these countries also have a ban on entry to anyone who has visited China, and some have restrictions for people who have visited Iran, South Korea, and some European destinations).

From the 13 March, the US will have a ban on entry to anyone who has recently been in any of the 26 countries of the Schengen Area of the EU (in the last 14 days). The countries affected are: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. The ban is in place for the next 30 days.

Austria has imposed restrictions on the border with Italy, as of 10 March, since Italy extended its lockdown to the entire country on 9 March. The Austrian tourist board has confirmed there are currently no passenger trains or planes between Austria and Italy. Any travellers coming from Italy by road will be stopped at the border and must present a health certificate. There are currently no travel warnings in place for Austria. As of 11 March, Switzerland has closed nine secondary border crossings between Ticino in Switzerland and Italy and traffic is being redirected to major crossings.

Some other countries may require a health certificate if someone has recently been in Italy. Currently this includes Slovenia, Poland, Egypt, Indonesia, Kenya, Thailand and Georgia and Nepal (Nepal also requires a health certificate from anyone who has recently been in France, Germany, Iran, Japan, South Korea or Spain). Jordan requires a certificate for anyone who has recently been in France, Germany or Spain.

Sri Lanka, New Zealand, Tunisia and China have imposed a 14-day quarantine on anyone who has recently visited Italy, South Korea or Iran. For Malta this applies to anyone who has recently been in Italy, Spain, Germany, Switzerland or Germany. For Chile this applies to anyone who has recently been in Italy or Spain. For Bermuda, this applies to anyone who has been in China, Iran, Italy (northern regions), Japan, South Korea, Macao, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand or Vietnam. For Uzbekistan, this applies to anyone who has been in China, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Japan, South Korea and Spain. For Peru, this applies to anyone who has been in Spain, France, Italy and China.

As of 9 March, the UK government advice for anyone who has returning to the UK from Italy, is to self-isolate, stay indoors and avoid contact with other people for at least 7 days, even if they do not have symptoms of the coronavirus.

Anyone who has recently travelled to or transited through China (usually within the last 14-28 days)

Complete ban on entry to the countries listed above, along with Australia, Belize many Caribbean islands, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mongolia New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, US and Vietnam, among others. Passengers from China are likely to face health screenings on arrival in other destinations.

Many major airlines have been adjusting flight schedules on routes globally and some of the world's largest and busiest international airports have announced preventive safety measures, including and health screenings, which are becoming more widespread. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the US has increased screenings, including travellers having their temperature taken and filling out a questionnaire. Anyone with symptoms, such as fever, cough or difficulty breathing has to undergo an additional health assessment. Passengers arriving in the Albania, British virgin Islands, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Moldova, Singapore, South Korea, Serbia, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, UAE, Uganda, among others, will also face screenings, with each country varying in terms of flight origin.

In the UK, airports are acting on the advice of Public Health England (PHE) and have introduced advanced monitoring at airports with direct flights from China. There are also health experts at Heathrow ready to support anyone arriving from China who feels unwell. The current advice from PHE also notes that as "most people who develop symptoms will get them after leaving the airport" the priority is now focused on making sure UK residents and travellers know what to do if they experience symptoms.