Paramedics take a patient into the emergency center at Maimonides Medical Center during the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in the Brooklyn borough of New York, US, April 14, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

Beijing said on Monday that China is a victim of coronavirus instead of a culprit or an accomplice of the pathogen and urged certain people in the United States to stop groundless accusations against the country.

Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang made the remark amid rising criticism of China in recent weeks from the US, including by US President Donald Trump, who said on Saturday that China should face consequences if it was "knowingly responsible" for the pandemic.

"Some people in the US must have a clear understanding that their enemy is the virus not China," Geng said at a daily news briefing, urging such people to respect the facts, science and the international consensus.

Attacks and smears on other countries will not bring back the lost time and lives, he said, asking that certain US officials stop making irresponsible remarks and focus on curbing the pandemic at the domestic level and promote international cooperation.

Geng called upon the international community to show solidarity and cooperate to deal with the pandemic instead of pointing fingers at each other and claiming so-called accountability and compensation.

In an earlier interview with an Australian think tank ADC forum, Kishore Mahbubani, a professor at the National University of Singapore, said that the 2008-09 financial crisis began with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the US and caused damage to many economies, but nobody asked the US for compensation.

In terms of repeated claims by US officials that the virus leaked from a laboratory in the Chinese city of Wuhan, Geng reiterated that the origin of the virus should be determined by scientists and experts, and cannot be politicized.

Also on Monday, Geng refuted White House Trade Adviser Peter Navarro's criticism that China hoarded personal protective equipment and is profiteering from it, saying such a remark distorts the truth.

According to the General Administration of Customs, from March 1 to April 17, China provided the US with 1.86 billion masks, 258 million pairs of gloves, 29.19 million sets of protective clothing, 3.13 million pairs of goggles, and 156 invasive ventilators and 4,254 non-invasive ventilators, Geng said.
---
A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

The US right-wing media and supporters of US President Donald Trump have fanned the latest round of speculation that the novel coronavirus of COVID-19 came from a laboratory in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, according to a recent news report on BuzzFeed News.

The claim that the Wuhan Institute of Virology could have been the origin of the novel coronavirus seems to be emanating from a misleading video, according to Wilson Center disinformation researcher Nina Jankowicz.

On April 14, Washington Post columnist Josh Rogin published excerpts from two-year-old US State Department communications in which US diplomats described what they saw as safety issues at the Wuhan lab.

On April 15, Fox News published a story claiming COVID-19 "likely" originated in the Wuhan lab.

Following the reports, the right-wing media machine began to roll out unproven articles or supportive pieces for the claim, such as in the Washington Examiner and the American Conservative.

Jankowicz said that putting the blame on a Wuhan lab helps the Trump administration find a scapegoat.

It becomes more politically convenient for Trump and his administration, she said.

Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, commented on Twitter about how the Trump administration has groped to find a direct link between the coronavirus and Chinese labs.

Konyndyk is also critical of the Washington Post's Rogin for publishing excerpts of a two-year-old cable, rather than the cable in its entirety.

"It's irresponsible for political reporters like Rogin [to] uncritically regurgitate a secret 'cable' without asking a single virologist or ecologist or making any attempt to understand the scientific context," tweeted Columbia University virologist Angela Rasmussen.

Vincent Racaniello, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Columbia University, said that there was no way this could escape a lab and if this escaped a Wuhan lab, [the researchers] would have all gotten sick.

Racaniello said the two claims — that the virus could be human-made and that it could have escaped from a laboratory — had no scientific backing. "No human could ever design this virus."

"All available evidence suggests the virus has an animal origin and is not [a] manipulated or constructed virus in a lab or somewhere else," WHO spokesperson Fadela Chaib said on April 21, echoing the results of a study published in March.
---
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks about the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) during a media briefing at the State Department in Washington, US, May 6, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo made incoherent remarks in an interview because he was "making up stories", a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said on Thursday.

He was "using lies to cover up lies" and it is no secret, Hua Chunying said at a daily news conference.

Pompeo said in the interview on Sunday with Martha Raddatz of US-based ABC News that "the best experts so far seem to think" the virus was man-made, and that he has no reason to disbelieve it.

Raddatz cited a statement from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence on April 30 that says the US Intelligence Community "concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified".

Pompeo then said he agreed with the statement, and that he had no reason to believe that the intelligence community got it wrong.

Without evidence, Pompeo has claimed that the virus originated in a laboratory of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Hua said on Thursday.

The lab is a cooperative project between the Chinese and French governments, she said, adding the lab's design, construction and management has strictly followed international standards, and its equipment undergoes third-party testing every year.

It's the virus that is the enemy of the US, and China and the US should work together to fight the pandemic, Hua said. She confirmed that the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region has donated medical supplies to the Flying Tiger Historical Organization.

The donation, made by the region's People's Association for Friendship With Foreign Countries, included 6,000 surgical masks and 4,000 pairs of surgical gloves, Hua said.

The donation helps carry on the friendship between the Chinese and US people, and comes as a positive response to the support US society has shown in China's fight against COVID-19, Hua said.

Hua said Chinese customs figures show that China has supplied more than 6.6 billion masks, 344 million pairs of surgical gloves, 44.09 million protective clothing items, 6.75 million pairs of goggles and about 7,500 ventilators to the US from March 1 to Tuesday.

China hopes the American people will overcome the outbreak soon, and it will continue to do all it can to provide support to countries around the world in tackling the virus, she said.
---
US President Donald Trump. [Photo/Agencies]

Experts from both the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United States, including intelligence analysts, have contested US President Donald Trump's claim that the novel coronavirus originated in a Chinese research laboratory.

Trump last week claimed that he had proof that the virus came from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told media Sunday that they have "tremendous" evidence that the Chinese lab was the source.

In response to their claims, Michael Ryan, WHO health emergencies executive director, told a virtual briefing Monday that Washington had provided no evidence to support the claims.

"We have not received any data or specific evidence from the United States government relating to the purported origin of the virus, so from our perspective this remains speculative," said Ryan.

US Congresswoman Judy Chu accused Trump of blaming China for the pandemic as a strategy to deflect criticism from his administration's handling of the outbreak in the US, which now has more COVID-19 cases than any other country in the world.

"It's clear that President Trump is trying to continue to use this anti-China focus (for) his election campaign," Chu said during a webinar Friday. "Right now, this president is actually trying to get votes by being anti-Chinese. He thinks that's the best way for him to stay in office."

Trump and some of his allies have been promoting the lab-leak theory since the pandemic first emerged. US intelligence agencies are reportedly facing pressure from senior administration officials to explicitly link COVID-19 to the Wuhan lab.

Matthew Pottinger, Trump's deputy national security adviser, has asked intelligence agencies since January to look into the lab theory, according to The New York Times. But intelligence officers didn't find any evidence.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence said in an April 30 statement that "the Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not manmade or genetically modified".

Scientists have largely agreed that the virus most likely jumped from infected animals to humans, and that chances are low that a lab accident sparked the outbreak.

Researchers in the US, UK and Australia published a paper in the journal Nature Medicine in mid-March that concluded: "Our analyses clearly show that SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus."

The odds were extremely high against a lab release as opposed to a natural event, said Kristian Andersen, the lead author of the paper and a specialist in infectious diseases at the Scripps Research Translational Institute in California, The New York Times reported.

Jonna Mazet, an epidemiologist at the University of California, Davis, who has worked with and trained researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology in the past, said a lab accident was "highly unlikely".

Some researchers at the Wuhan lab, including virologist Shi Zhengli, have collected, sampled and studied bats as part of a coordinated global effort to monitor viruses, said Mazet, who knows Shi from when they worked together on a pandemic early-warning program.

The Wuhan lab's samples don't match the new coronavirus, Mazet told Business Insider in a report published Saturday, adding that the lab implements rigorous safety protocols.

"Samples collected from bats get immediately split between some vials that contain chemicals that deactivate the virus and other containers that leave the virus alive," said Mazet, who worked with the lab to develop "very stringent" safety protocols.

All samples are then dunked into liquid nitrogen on the spot, which freezes them. Then the vials are disinfected and transported to the lab. There, scientists wearing personal protective equipment load them into a freezer set to -80 C.

When the samples are studied later, researchers use only the deactivated, noninfectious ones, Mazet said, adding that the vials with viable viruses are locked down in a special area.

Shi's work in the lab was above reproach, said Mazet.

Mazet said she's concerned that Trump's persistent discussion of the lab release theory could affect scientific cooperation and information-sharing between the US and China.

The Trump administration recently terminated a grant to a New York-based nonprofit called the EcoHealth Alliance because its research involved the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
---
[Photo/Agencies]

The United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, or USAMRIID, at Fort Detrick, Maryland, has resumed full operations after an over 8-month shutdown, but the cloud over it hasn't gone away.

With more than a quarter of the world's COVID-19 cases coming from the country, a petition on the White House website has been demanding information about the institute, and said that after its closure, "a large-scale 'influenza' killed more than 10,000 people" and following that the whole world is now struggling with the pandemic.

"Now we have reasons to ask the US government to publish the real reason for the closure of Fort Detrick, to clarify whether the laboratory is the research unit for the new coronavirus and whether there was a virus leak," the petition said in March.

Last June, inspectors from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC, found mechanical problems with the chemical-based decontamination system, as well as leaks, in the laboratory, Caree Vander Linden, the spokeswoman of the institute told The New York Times last August.

"A combination of things" led to the shutdown, she said.

Select agents

While she said there had been no leaks of dangerous material from the lab, research on certain dangerous toxins and germs, which are also known as "select agents", had been suspended since then.

Meanwhile, The New York Times, quoting a statement from the USAMRIID, said the CDC cited "national security reasons" as the rationale for not disclosing information with regard to its suspension of research.

On the government's website, there are 67 select agents and toxins under the Federal Select Agent Program research list, which the government has determined have "the potential to pose a severe threat to public, animal or plant health or to animal or plant products".

And on the list are not only the "Ebola virus" and "smallpox virus", but the "SARS-associated coronavirus", or the SARS-CoV.

It is known that the virus that causes the COVID-19 pandemic was named SARS-CoV-2, which stands for "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2", by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, or ICTV, on Feb 11.

The World Health Organization explained that this name was chosen because the virus is genetically related to SARS-CoV, which was responsible for the SARS outbreak of 2003.

According to a USA Today report on the US' "secretive bio labs" in 2015, "hundreds of lab mistakes, safety violations and near-miss incidents have occurred in biological laboratories coast to coast in recent years, putting scientists, their colleagues and sometimes even the public at risk".

The New York Times reported that research at the institute in Fort Detrick was suspended once in 2009 because it was storing pathogens not listed in its database.

Since the outbreak began, some US officials have kept blaming China for the pandemic and accused China of "not being transparent with data". The US administration even called for an international investigation into China's handling of the outbreak.

But China has said that its stance is to keep cooperating with the WHO with openness, transparency and responsibility, including on the issue of tracing the virus origin.
---
Peter Daszak, a member of the World Health Organisation (WHO) team tasked with investigating the origins of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), walks at a lakeside at a hotel in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, February 3, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]

Members of a World Health Organization team who were part of a COVID-19 origin-tracing mission in China have denounced The New York Times for a controversial report, including one member who said they were "selectively misquoted" and another who said their remarks were "twisted".

"This was NOT my experience on@WHO  mission. As lead of animal/environment working group I found trust & openness w/my China counterparts. We DID get access to critical new data throughout. We DID increase our understanding of likely spillover pathways," Peter Daszak, a member of the WHO team, wrote on Twitter after he was quoted by The New York Times.

The report accused Chinese scientists of refusing to share important data about the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic, citing independent investigators for the WHO.

The international team that recently finished its work in Wuhan is comprised of experts from Australia, Denmark, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Qatar, Russia, Britain, the United States and Vietnam.

The team also includes experts from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organization for Animal Health.

In the report, Daszak said their trip was emotionally draining as they came to terms with the trauma of the early days of the pandemic.

Thea K. Fischer, a Danish epidemiologist on the team, also immediately rebutted the report, which she said "intendedly twisted" the interviewees' remarks and cast "shadows over important scientific work".

"This was NOT my experience either on the Epi-side. We DID build up a good relationship in the Chinese/Int Epi-team! Allowing for heated arguments reflects a deep level of engagement in the room," she wrote on Twitter.

Daszak tweeted in a reply note: "Hear! Hear! It's disappointing to spend time w/journalists explaining key findings of our exhausting monthlong work in China, to see our colleagues selectively misquoted to fit a narrative that was prescribed before the work began. Shame on you @nytimes!"

Other health experts also voiced their opinion on the incident, calling for mutual trust and respect for international cooperation on COVID-19 research.

"Collaboration is all about mutual trust and respect. If you don't have that, no one is going to share data with you. As EID scientists, we urgently need to jettison the political crap. Hopefully there is enough enduring personal goodwill for us to effectively proceed ..." tweeted Hume Field, a science and policy adviser of EcoHealth Alliance in New York. EID stands for emerging infectious diseases.

There was no widespread or large cluster of COVID-19 in or around Wuhan in the months prior to December 2019, said Peter Ben Embarek, head of a WHO expert team, at a virtual news conference from Geneva on Friday, saying the mission was "successful in many ways."

Experts will still continue to look for answers on this point as "there's not a clear candidate for intermediates or hosts yet," said virologist Marion Koopmans, a member of the team, at the WHO news conference on Friday.

Earlier, the international team presented their initial findings at a news conference in China, discounting the hypothesis that the virus escaped from a laboratory.

The team has been working on a summary report expected to be published soon, and a full final report will be published in the coming weeks, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the WHO, said on Friday.

The WHO chief explained that the mission achieved a better understanding of the early days of the pandemic and identified areas for further analysis and research.

"We have always said that this mission would not find all the answers, but it has added important information that takes us closer to understanding the origins of the virus," he added.

COVID-19 origin-tracing is "a complex scientific issue involving many countries and regions," and should be carried out by global scientists in collaboration, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin said on Feb 5.

"The Chinese government has provided strong support and assistance for the WHO mission's visit to China as part of the global origin-tracing study cooperation," he said, adding that China will maintain openness, transparency, close communication and cooperation with the WHO.
---
By XU WEI | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-04-21 14:30
FILE PHOTO: World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus attends a news conference organized by Geneva Association of United Nations Correspondents (ACANU) amid the COVID-19 outbreak, caused by the novel coronavirus, at the WHO headquarters in Geneva Switzerland July 3, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
A scientist who took part in the international team studying the origins of COVID-19 has expressed surprise and dissatisfaction at remarks made by WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom over the hypothesis the virus leaked from a laboratory in China.
If the next phase of global source tracing for the virus comes to a deadlock, the WHO must assume its due responsibility, said the scientist, who requested anonymity.
The response from the scientist came after Tedros said in a briefing on March 30 that although the team has concluded a laboratory leak is the least likely hypothesis, "this requires further investigation, potentially with additional missions involving specialist experts".
He added he is ready to deploy an additional mission, and "all hypotheses remain on the table" as far as WHO is concerned.
The WHO director-general has disregarded the hard-won research outcomes and consensuses among the international science community in his remarks, the scientist said.
"It should not be a position held by the WHO," he said, adding pressure from the United States and the WHO hierarchy was palpable during the communication process with international colleagues.
He added there are some forces harboring ulterior motives using Tedros' remarks to question the authority and scientific nature of the report from the international team. "Experts from the joint team are all very worried and dissatisfied."
An international team of scientists visited Wuhan between Jan 14 and Feb 10 to conduct a COVID-19 origin-tracing study, before releasing a 120-page report on March 30 saying the virus most probably jumped from an animal, potentially a bat or pangolin, to an unknown intermediate animal host and then to humans.
The scientist said he does not understand why the WHO chief would make such a statement in spite of the research and consensus among experts.
He explained the hypothesis the virus emerged from a lab leak was without any scientific basis in the first place, and this was a virtually a consensus among the international scientific community.
However, in the spirit of upholding respect to science and with an attitude of staying highly responsible to the source-tracing work, the joint expert team conducted careful research over all relevant hypotheses, the scientist said.
There could only be two hypotheses over the laboratory theory, one being the virus was artificially synthesized and the other being it was leaked. The hypotheses the virus was artificially synthesized has already been proven to be impossible under current technological conditions, while the hypotheses about a lab leak can only exist if Chinese labs have the virus in storage.
"If the virus cannot be synthesized within a lab, then how can it be leaked?" he said.
He noted the international expert team visited the Wuhan Institute of Virology with the Chinese Academy of Sciences and centers for disease control and prevention in Hubei and Wuhan to learn about the protocols of the lab management and operations and to hold discussions with relevant experts.
The team even conducted antibody tests on the lab workers, and all samples were negative, he said, adding this is more than adequate evidence to prove such speculations are groundless.
He also refuted Tedros' remarks that members of the international team expressed the difficulties they encountered in accessing raw data, saying Chinese and WHO experts have been conducting joint research and analysis on data in Wuhan.
"There is no difference for Chinese and foreign experts in access to data. The international expert team has expressed their full understanding, and the two sides have conducted frank exchanges. There were no difficulties over the issue as the director-general has described."
---
CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-06-08 07:48  Firefighters gather to prepare for disinfection works at the Wuhan Railway Station in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, March 24, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Editor's note: China's State Council Information Office on Sunday issued a white paper titled "Fighting COVID-19: China in Action". Full text below:
Contents
Foreword
I. China's Fight against the Epidemic: A Test of Fire
Stage I: Swift Response to the Public Health Emergency
(December 27, 2019-January 19, 2020)
Stage II: Initial Progress in Containing the Virus
(January 20-February 20, 2020)
Stage III: Newly Confirmed Domestic Cases on the Chinese Mainland Drop to Single Digits
(February 21-March 17, 2020)
Stage IV: Wuhan and HubeiÔºçAn Initial Victory in a Critical Battle
(March 18-April 28, 2020)
Stage V: Ongoing Prevention and Control
(Since April 29, 2020)
II. Well-Coordinated Prevention, Control and Treatment
1. Centralized and Efficient Command
2. A Tight Prevention and Control System Involving All Sectors of Society
3. An All-Out Effort to Treat Patients and Save Lives
4. China Has Released Information in an Open and Transparent Manner as Required by Law
5. Science and Technology Underpin China's Efforts
III. Assembling a Powerful Force to Beat the Virus
1. Lives Are Precious
2. Mobilizing the Whole Country to Fight the Epidemic
3. Coordinating Prevention and Control with Social and Economic Development
4. Uniting as OneÔºçChina's Billion People
IV. Building a Global Community of Health for All
1. China Appreciates Support from the International Community
2. China Conducts Active International Exchanges and Cooperation
3. International Solidarity and Cooperation in Fighting the Pandemic
Afterword
Foreword
The Covid-19 global pandemic is the most extensive to afflict humanity in a century. A serious crisis for the entire world, and a daunting challenge, it poses a grave threat to human life and health.
This is a war that humanity has to fight and win. Facing this unknown, unexpected, and devastating disease, China launched a resolute battle to prevent and control its spread. Making people's lives and health its first priority, China adopted extensive, stringent, and thorough containment measures, and has for now succeeded in cutting all channels for the transmission of the virus. 1.4 billion Chinese people have exhibited enormous tenacity and solidarity in erecting a defensive rampart that demonstrates their power in the face of such natural disasters.
Having forged the idea that the world is a global community of shared future, and believing that it must act as a responsible member, China has fought shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the world. In an open, transparent, and responsible manner and in accordance with the law, China gave timely notification to the international community of the onset of a new coronavirus, and shared without reserve its experience in containing the spread of the virus and treating the infected. China has great empathy with victims all over the world, and has done all it can to provide humanitarian aid in support of the international community's endeavors to stem the pandemic.
The virus is currently wreaking havoc throughout the world. China grieves for those who have been killed and those who have sacrificed their lives in the fight, extends the greatest respect to those who are struggling to save lives, and offers true moral support to those who are infected and receiving treatment. China firmly believes that as long as all countries unite and cooperate to mount a collective response, the international community will succeed in overcoming the pandemic, and will emerge from this dark moment in human history into a brighter future.
To keep a record of China's efforts in its own fight against the virus, to share its experience with the rest of the world, and to clarify its ideas on the global battle, the Chinese government now releases this white paper.
I. China's Fight against the Epidemic:
A Test of Fire
The Covid-19 epidemic is a major public health emergency. The virus has spread faster and wider than any other since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, and has proven to be the most difficult to contain. It is both a crisis and a major test for China. The Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Chinese government have addressed the epidemic as a top priority, and taken swift action. General Secretary Xi Jinping has taken personal command, planned the response, overseen the general situation and acted decisively, pointing the way forward in the fight against the epidemic. This has bolstered the Chinese people's confidence and rallied their strength. Under the leadership of the CPC, the whole nation has followed the general principle of "remaining confident, coming together in solidarity, adopting a science-based approach, and taking targeted measures", and waged an all-out people's war on the virus.
Through painstaking efforts and tremendous sacrifice, and having paid a heavy price, China has succeeded in turning the situation around. In little more than a single month, the rising spread of the virus was contained; in around two months, the daily increase in domestic coronavirus cases had fallen to single digits; and in approximately three months, a decisive victory was secured in the battle to defend Hubei Province and its capital city of Wuhan. With these strategic achievements, China has protected its people's lives, safety and health, and made a significant contribution to safeguarding regional and global public health.
As of 24:00 of May 31, 2020, a cumulative total of 83,017 confirmed cases had been reported on the Chinese mainland, 78,307 infected had been cured and discharged from hospital, and 4,634 people had died. This demonstrates a cure rate of 94.3 percent and a fatality rate of 5.6 percent (see charts 1, 2, 3 and 4).
China's fight against the epidemic can be divided into five stages.
Stage I: Swift Response to the Public Health Emergency
(December 27, 2019-January 19, 2020)
As soon as cases of pneumonia of unknown cause were identified in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China acted immediately to conduct etiological and epidemiological investigations and to stop the spread of the disease, and promptly reported the situation. In a timely manner, China informed the WHO and other countries, including the US, of the developing situation, and released the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus. After community spread and clusters of cases emerged in Wuhan, and confirmed cases were reported in other Chinese regions, which were due to virus carriers traveling from the city, a nationwide program of epidemic prevention and control was launched.
(1) December 27, 2019: Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine reported cases of pneumonia of unknown cause to the Wuhan Jianghan Center for Disease Prevention and Control. The Wuhan city government arranged for experts to look into these cases through an analysis of the patients' condition and clinical outcome, the findings of epidemiological investigations, and preliminary laboratory testing results. The conclusion was that they were cases of a viral pneumonia.
(2) December 30: The Wuhan City Health Commission (WCHC) issued Urgent Notice on Treatment of Patients with Pneumonia of Unknown Cause. Upon learning of developments, the National Health Commission (NHC) acted immediately to organize research into the disease.
(3) December 31: The NHC made arrangements in the small hours to send a working group and an expert team to Wuhan to guide its response to the situation and conduct on-site investigations.
The WCHC website carried its Information Circular on the Pneumonia Cases in Wuhan, confirming 27 cases and urging the public to stay away from enclosed public places with poor ventilation and venues where large crowds gathered. The commission also suggested the use of face masks when going out. From that day on, the WCHC began to release updates on the disease in accordance with the law.
(4) January 1, 2020: The NHC set up a leading group on the disease response. The next day, it formulated Guidelines on Early Detection, Early Diagnosis and Early Quarantine for Prevention and Control of Viral Pneumonia of Unknown Cause. The Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) and the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) received the first batch of samples of four cases discovered in Hubei and began the pathogen identification process.
(5) January 3: The WCHC issued Information Circular on Viral Pneumonia of Unknown Cause, reporting a total of 44 cases.
Under the direction of the NHC, China CDC and three other institutions carried out parallel laboratory testing of the samples to identify the pathogen. The NHC and the Health Commission of Hubei Province jointly formulated nine documents, including Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Viral Pneumonia of Unknown Cause (for Trial Implementation).
From that day on, on a regular basis, China began to update the WHO, relevant countries, and regional organizations, as well as its own regions of Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, on the development of the disease.
(6) January 4: The head of China CDC held a telephone conversation with the director of the US CDC, briefing him about the new pneumonia. The two sides agreed to keep in close contact on information sharing and cooperation on technical matters.
The NHC and related health departments in Hubei Province produced Treatment Manual for Viral Pneumonia of Unknown Cause.
(7) January 5: The WCHC updated information on its website, reporting a total of 59 cases of the viral pneumonia of unknown cause. Laboratory tests ruled out respiratory pathogens as the cause, such as influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus, and the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus.
China sent a situation update to the WHO. The WHO released its first briefing on cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan.
(8) January 6: The NHC gave a briefing on cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan at a national health conference, calling for greater efforts to monitor, analyze and study them, and prepare for a timely response.
(9) January 7: Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, presided over a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and issued instructions on the prevention and control of a possible epidemic of the pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan.
(10) January 7: China CDC succeeded in isolating the first novel coronavirus strain.
(11) January 8: An expert evaluation team designated by the NHC initially identified a new coronavirus as the cause of the disease. The heads of the China and US CDCs held a telephone discussion on technical exchanges and cooperation.
(12) January 9: The NHC expert evaluation team released information on the pathogen of the viral pneumonia of unknown cause, and made a preliminary judgment that a new coronavirus was the cause.
China informed the WHO of developments and the initial progress that had been made in determining the cause of the viral pneumonia. The WHO released on its website a statement regarding a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, indicating that the preliminary identification of a novel coronavirus in such a short period of time was a notable achievement.
(13) January 10: Research institutions including China CDC and the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) under the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) came up with an initial version of test kits. Wuhan immediately began to test all relevant cases admitted to local hospitals to screen for the new coronavirus.
The heads of the NHC and China CDC held separate telephone conversations with the head of the WHO about China's response to the disease, and exchanged information.
(14) January 11: China started to update the WHO and other parties concerned on a daily basis.
(15) January 12: The WCHC changed "viral pneumonia of unknown cause" to "pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus" in an information circular on its website.
China CDC, the CAMS and the WIV, as designated agencies of the NHC, submitted to the WHO the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), which was published by the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data to be shared globally.
(16) January 13: Premier Li Keqiang chaired a State Council meeting and announced requirements for epidemic prevention and control.
(17) January 13: The NHC held a meeting to provide guidance to Hubei and Wuhan authorities, advising them to further strengthen management, step up body temperature monitoring at ports and stations, and reduce crowded gatherings.
The WHO issued on its website a statement on the discovery of novel coronavirus cases in Thailand, recognizing that China's sharing of the genome sequence of the virus had enabled more countries to rapidly diagnose cases.
An inspection team from Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan visited Wuhan to learn about the prevention and control of the disease.
(18) January 14: The NHC held a national teleconference, specifying arrangements for epidemic prevention and control in Hubei and Wuhan, and for emergency preparations and response across the country. The NHC cautioned that there was great uncertainty about the new disease, and that more research was needed to understand its mode of transmission and the risk of human-to-human transmissibility. Further spread could not be ruled out.
(19) January 15: The NHC unveiled the first versions of Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia, and Protocol on Prevention and Control of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia.
(20) January 16: As the optimization of the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) diagnostic reagents was completed, Wuhan began to screen all patients treated in fever clinics or under medical observation in the 69 hospitals at or above the level of grade two in the city.
(21) January 17: The NHC sent seven inspection teams to different provincial-level health agencies to guide local epidemic prevention and control.
(22) January 18: The NHC released the second version of Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia.
(23) January 18 and 19: The NHC assembled a high-level national team of senior medical and disease control experts and sent them to Wuhan to study the local response to the epidemic. In the middle of the night of January 19, after careful examination and deliberation, the team determined that the new coronavirus was spreading between humans.
Stage II: Initial Progress in Containing the Virus
(January 20-February 20, 2020)
The situation became most pressing with the rapid increase in newly confirmed cases in China. As a crucial step to stem the spread of the virus, the Chinese government took the decisive measure to close outbound traffic from Wuhan. This marked the beginning of an all-out battle to protect Wuhan and Hubei from the epidemic.
The CPC Central Committee set up a leading group for novel coronavirus prevention and control and sent the Central Steering Group to Hubei. A joint epidemic prevention and control mechanism and in due course a mechanism to facilitate resumption of work were set up under the State Council. Resources were mobilized nationwide to assist Hubei and Wuhan. Major public health emergency responses were activated across China.
The most comprehensive, stringent and thorough epidemic prevention and control campaign was launched nationwide, and initial progress was made in curbing the spread of the virus (see Chart 5).
(1) January 20: President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, gave important instructions on fighting the novel coronavirus. He emphasized that people's lives and health must come first and resolute efforts should be taken to stem the spread of the virus. He called for prompt release of information on the epidemic and enhanced international cooperation.
(2) January 20: During an executive meeting of the State Council, Premier Li Keqiang decided to take more steps for epidemic prevention and control. A decision was taken to classify the novel coronavirus pneumonia as a Class B infectious disease in compliance with the Law of the People's Republic of China on Prevention and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, but to apply to it the preventive and control measures for a Class A infectious disease.
(3) January 20: The State Council convened a teleconference to plan for nationwide prevention and control of the disease.
(4) January 20: The NHC held a press conference for the high-level expert team, at which it was confirmed that the virus could transmit from human to human.
(5) January 20: The NHC made a statement on implementing the above State Council decision and bringing the pneumonia under quarantinable infectious disease management in accordance with the Frontier Health and Quarantine Law of the People's Republic of China. The NHC also released Protocol on Prevention and Control of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Edition 2).
(6) January 22: Xi Jinping ordered the immediate imposition of tight restrictions on the movement of people and channels of exit in Hubei and Wuhan.
(7) January 22: The NHC issued Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Trial Version 3). The State Council Information Office held its first press conference on the novel coronavirus.
The NHC was notified by the United States about its first confirmed case.
The 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource database was officially launched by the China National Center for Bioinformation, which released the novel coronavirus genome and provided information on variation analysis to the international community.
(8) January 23: At around 2 a.m. Wuhan City Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control Command Center issued the No. 1 public notice declaring temporary closure of the city's outbound routes at its airports and railway stations at 10 a.m. the same day. The Ministry of Transport issued an emergency circular suspending passenger traffic into Wuhan from other parts of the country by road or waterway. The NHC and five other government departments also issued Notice on Preventing the Transmission of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia via Means of Transport. From January 23 to January 29, all provinces and equivalent administrative units on the Chinese mainland (hereafter all provinces) activated Level 1 public health emergency response.
(9) January 23: Researchers of the WIV, Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital and the Hubei Provincial CDC discovered that the whole genome sequence of the 2019-nCoV shares 79.5 percent of the SARS-CoV sequence.
The Novel Coronavirus National Science and Technology Resource Service System, jointly set up by the National Microbiology Data Center and the National Pathogen Resource Collection Center, released the first electron microscope image of the virus and its strain information.
(10) January 24: Dispatch of national medical teams to Hubei and Wuhan began. In the ensuing period, a total of 346 medical teams composed of 42,600 medical workers and 965 public health workers from across the country and the armed forces were dispatched.
(11) January 25: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He called for resolute efforts to win the battle to contain the virus with "confidence and solidarity, a science-based approach and targeted measures". He urged Hubei to make epidemic control its top priority and apply more rigorous measures to stem the spread of the virus within the province and beyond. All confirmed patients, he said, must be hospitalized without delay, and severe cases must be sent to designated hospitals with sufficient medical resources so that they could be treated by medical experts. A decision was taken at the meeting that the central Party leadership would set up a leading group for novel coronavirus prevention and control under the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau. It was also decided that the central Party leadership would send a steering group to Hubei to oversee epidemic control on the ground.
(12) January 25: The NHC released six sets of guidelines on disease prevention: for general use, tourism, households, public places, public transport and home observation.
(13) January 26: Premier Li Keqiang, also a member of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and head of the Central Leading Group for Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control, chaired the group's first meeting.
The General Office of the State Council issued the decision to extend the Chinese New Year holiday of 2020 and postpone the opening of all universities, colleges, secondary schools, elementary schools and kindergartens.
The National Medical Products Administration fast-tracked approval of four novel coronavirus test kits made by four companies to boost capacity for producing virus nucleic acid test kits.
(14) January 27: Xi Jinping issued an instruction calling on all CPC organizations and members to bear in mind the supremacy of the people's interests and the Party's founding mission, strengthen confidence and solidarity, take a science-based approach and targeted measures, and lead the people in implementing the decisions made by the central Party leadership.
(15) January 27: Li Keqiang paid an inspection visit to Wuhan on behalf of Xi Jinping, where he gave guidance on virus control and expressed appreciation to frontline health workers. The Central Steering Group arrived in Wuhan on the same day to strengthen overall guidance of and supervision over the prevention and control of the disease at the front line.
(16) January 27: The NHC released Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Trial Version 4).
The head of the NHC discussed epidemic prevention and control with the head of the US Department of Health and Human Services (US HHS) in a telephone call.
(17) January 28: Xi Jinping met with WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in Beijing. He said, "The virus is a devil, and we must hunt it down. The Chinese government has been providing timely updates on the epidemic in an open, transparent and responsible way. We have responded to the concerns of various parties and enhanced cooperation with the international community." He expressed China's readiness to work with the WHO and the international community to safeguard public health both in the region and globally.
(18) January 28: The NHC released Protocol on Prevention and Control of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Edition 3).
(19) January 30: The NHC notified the US through the official channel that American experts were welcome to join the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease. The US replied and expressed its appreciation on the same day.
(20) January 31: The WHO declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. The NHC released Guidelines on Treating Novel Coronavirus Patients with Severe Symptoms in Designated Hospitals.
(21) February 2: Under the guidance of the Central Steering Group, Wuhan began to adopt measures to put four categories of people confirmed cases, suspected cases, febrile patients who might be carriers, and close contactsÔºçunder classified management in designated facilities. The policy of ensuring that all those in need are tested, isolated, hospitalized or treated was implemented. Actions were taken to conduct mass screenings to identify people with infections, hospitalize them, and collect accurate data on case numbers.
(22) February 2: The head of the NHC sent a letter to the head of the US HHS to further exchange views on bilateral cooperation on public health and epidemic prevention and control.
(23) February 3: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He required that epidemic control measures be improved and strengthened and that the principle of early detection, reporting, quarantine and treatment be strictly observed. He called for saving lives by raising admission and cure rates and lowering infection and fatality rates.
(24) February 3: The Central Steering Group sent to Wuhan 22 national emergency medical teams from all over China, and gave the order to construct temporary treatment centers.
(25) February 4: The head of China CDC took a telephone call from the head of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in which they exchanged views on the novel coronavirus.
(26) February 5: Xi Jinping chaired the third meeting of the Commission for Law-based Governance under the CPC Central Committee. He stressed the importance of putting the people's lives and health first, and the need to raise China's overall capacity of law-based disease prevention and control through the joint efforts of the legislature, law enforcement agencies, the judiciary and the public. This would ensure that epidemic prevention and control is conducted in compliance with the law.
(27) February 5: The State Council through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism strengthened coordination, which made it possible for the supply of medical N95 masks to exceed Hubei's requirement.
(28) February 5: The NHC released Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Trial Version 5).
(29) February 7: Through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council issued Notice on Delivery of Duties for Effective Prevention and Control of the Disease.
The NHC released Protocol on Prevention and Control of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Edition 4).
(30) February 8: The NHC gave briefings on China's epidemic control efforts and measures at a meeting of the APEC health working group. It also gave briefings to Chinese diplomatic missions overseas on the guidelines for prevention and control, diagnosis and treatment, monitoring, epidemiological investigation and laboratory testing of the novel coronavirus.
Heads of Chinese and US health authorities further exchanged views on arrangements for American experts to join the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease.
(31) February 10: Xi Jinping inspected prevention and control work in Beijing. He also talked by video link to doctors from Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital, Wuhan Union Hospital and Huoshenshan Hospital where novel coronavirus patients were being treated. He called for strengthening confidence and taking more decisive measures to stem the spread of and win the people's all-out war against the virus. He emphasized that top priority must be given to Hubei and Wuhan, as they were the decisive battlegrounds. Victory in Wuhan would ensure victory in Hubei, and ultimately victory across the country. No effort would be spared in saving lives. The infected should be treated in designated hospitals by top-level doctors and with all necessary resources guaranteed. Strict measures must be taken to forestall inbound and intra-city transmissions, neutralize all sources of infection and stem the spread of the virus to the greatest extent possible.
(32) February 10: A mechanism was established to organize pairing assistance from other provinces to Hubei's cities other than Wuhan for treatment of the infected. Assistance from 19 provinces was rendered to 16 cities in Hubei.
(33) February 11: Thanks to strengthened coordination under the State Council Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the supply of medical protective suits to Hubei exceeded its needs.
(34) February 11: China CDC experts had a teleconference at the request of flu experts from the US CDC, during which they shared information on novel coronavirus prevention and control.
(35) February 12: At a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, Xi Jinping noted that China's novel coronavirus prevention and control had reached the most crucial stage. Key epidemic control tasks must be fulfilled, and greater attention must be given to the hardest-hit and high-risk areas. He called for improvements in key links in disease control to raise the admission and cure rates and lower the infection and fatality rates. Hospital capacity must be boosted to ensure admission and treatment for all patients. The best medical resources and technologies should be pooled to treat all infections, particularly the most severe cases. He urged those provinces and cities with large population inflows to strengthen cross-region joint prevention and control and society-wide efforts to contain the virus.
(36) February 13: The head of the NHC received a letter from the head of the US HHS on arrangements concerning bilateral cooperation on public health and novel coronavirus prevention and control.
(37) February 14: Xi Jinping chaired the 12th meeting of the Commission for Further Reform under the CPC Central Committee. He emphasized that protecting people's lives and health is a high priority on the CPC's governance agenda. Immediate, science-based and targeted measures must be taken to stamp out the virus. Experience and lessons must be drawn to enhance preparedness in the future. Swift actions must be taken to address problems, plug loopholes, and reinforce weak links. He also emphasized the need to improve both the mechanism for preventing and controlling major epidemics and the national public health emergency response system.
(38) February 14: All provinces and equivalent administrative units other than Hubei saw a continuous drop in newly confirmed cases for the 10th consecutive day.
(39) February 15: The State Council Information Office held its first press conference on novel coronavirus prevention and control in Wuhan. By that day, seven types of test reagents had been approved for market launch, and progress had been made in drug screening, development of therapeutic regimens and vaccines, and animal model construction.
(40) February 16: The WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19, consisting of 25 experts from China, Germany, Japan, ROK, Nigeria, Russia, Singapore, the US and the WHO, started its nine-day field visit to Beijing, Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Wuhan.
(41) February 17: Through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council issued Guidelines on Taking Science-based, Targeted, Region-specific, and Tiered Measures for Covid-19 Prevention and Control. Local authorities and government departments were required to take measures matching the corresponding levels of emergency response and ensure an orderly return to work and normal life.
(42) February 18: Nationwide, the daily number of newly cured and discharged coronavirus patients exceeded that of newly confirmed cases, and the number of confirmed cases began to drop.
The NHC sent a reply to the US HHS on further arrangements concerning bilateral health and anti-virus cooperation.
(43) February 19: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. The meeting heard reports on coronavirus prevention and control, and studied plans on strengthening virus control while promoting economic and social development.
(44) February 19: The NHC released Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Covid-19 (Trial Version 6).
(45) February 19: For the first time in Wuhan, newly cured and discharged cases outnumbered newly confirmed ones.
Stage III: Newly Confirmed Domestic Cases on the Chinese Mainland Drop to Single Digits
(February 21-March 17, 2020)
China had made significant progress: The rapid spread of the virus had been contained in Wuhan and the rest of Hubei Province, the situation in other parts on the mainland had stabilized, and the daily figure for new cases had remained in single digits since mid-March. As the situation evolved, the CPC Central Committee decided to coordinate epidemic control with economic and social development, and organize an orderly return to normal work and daily life (see Chart 6).
(1) February 21: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He pointed out that while significant progress had been made in containing the epidemic, the turning point had not yet arrived at the national level. Wuhan and the entire province of Hubei still faced a grave and complex threat. He instructed that differentiated control measures be adopted to address the problems in different regions, to defend Hubei and its capital city, to step up support to regions with insufficient capacity, and to make an all-out effort to ensure the safety of Beijing, the national capital. He required that economic and social order be managed in parallel with the anti-epidemic endeavor, and called for an orderly return to normal work and daily life.
(2) February 21: Through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council issued Guidelines on Covid-19 Prevention and Control Measures for Resumption of Work.
The NHC released Protocol on Prevention and Control of Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (Edition 5).
(3) February 21: Most provinces and equivalent administrative units started to downgrade their public health emergency response level in light of the local situation, and gradually lifted traffic restrictions. By February 24, all provincial trunk highways had reopened, and order was restored to the transport networks with the exception of those in Hubei and Beijing.
(4) February 23: President Xi spoke to 170,000 officials nationwide by video link, at a meeting on coordinating epidemic control with economic and social development. He emphasized that this epidemic, given the speed and scope of its spread, represented the most challenging public health emergency in China since the founding of the People's Republic, and that it was both a serious crisis and a major test.
He acknowledged the arduous efforts of all involved, welcoming the fact that control measures were producing increasingly positive results, but noting that the overall situation remained complex and serious, and this stage would be crucial in curbing the spread. The people must maintain their faith in ultimate victory and make unremitting efforts in all of their prevention and control work. He encouraged the nation to turn pressure into strength and adversity into opportunities, and steadily resume normal work and daily life. He demanded a redoubled effort to stabilize the six frontsÔºçemployment, finance, foreign trade, inbound investment, domestic investment, and market expectationsÔºçcalled for stronger policies to unleash the full potential and maintain the strong momentum of China's development, and urged the nation to achieve the goals and tasks set for this year's economic and social development.
(5) February 24: The WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19 held a press conference in Beijing, during which team members agreed that China had achieved notable success in slowing the spread of the virus and blocking human-to-human transmission, at least delaying and possibly preventing hundreds of thousands of infections. "This approach, what we call an 'all-of-government, all-of-society' approach, very old-fashioned, too old in some ways, has probably, definitely reverted, and probably prevented at least tens of thousands, but probably hundreds of thousands of cases of Covid-19 in China."
By February 24, the daily number of new infections on the Chinese mainland had remained below 1,000 for five consecutive days, the number of existing confirmed cases had kept dropping for almost a week, and the daily figure for discharged patients was equal to or had surpassed that of new infections in all provincial-level administrative units.
(6) February 25: China started to tighten up border quarantine, conducting a strict check of health and body temperature, and carrying out medical inspection, epidemiological investigation, medical screening, and sample monitoring of all inbound and outbound travelers, in order to minimize the cross-border spread of the epidemic.
(7) February 26: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He told the meeting that the national situation in epidemic control was turning for the better and economic and social development was quickly returning to normal, while Wuhan and Hubei as a whole still faced a grave and complex situation, and the possibility of an epidemic resurgence must not be overlooked in other regions.
He called for a greater effort to marshal the resources of the whole country to reinforce Wuhan and Hubei. He emphasized the need to make an accurate assessment of the epidemic dynamics and the conditions facing economic and social development, and focus on the main problems and the key elements of these problems, so as to ensure an overall victory in the battle against the virus, and achieve the goals of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and of the country's poverty alleviation.
(8) February 27: The daily figure for new cases in Hubei other than Wuhan, and in other places on the mainland outside Hubei, both dropped to single digits for the first time.
(9) February 28: Through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council released Notice on Furthering Differentiated, Region-specific and Tiered Prevention and Control Measures.
(10) February 29: The WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19 released a report about its field study trip in China. The report described China's control efforts. It said, "In the face of a previously unknown virus, China has rolled out perhaps the most ambitious, agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history‚Ä¶ As striking, has been the uncompromising rigor of strategy application that proved to be a hallmark in every setting and context where it was examined‚Ä¶ Achieving China's exceptional coverage with and adherence to these containment measures has only been possible due to the deep commitment of the Chinese people to collective action in the face of this common threat. At a community level this is reflected in the remarkable solidarity of provinces and cities in support of the most vulnerable populations and communities."
(11) March 2: President Xi inspected several scientific institutions in Beijing, observing their research and development on Covid-19 prevention and control. He said that this work must be taken as a major and pressing task and proceed as speedily as possible, while abiding by the rules of science and ensuring safety, so as to provide strong scientific and technological support for overcoming the epidemic.
Xi Jinping pointed out that saving as many lives as possible, by every possible means, was the number one priority. Research on and development of medicines and medical equipment should be integrated with clinical treatment, with the twin goals of raising the cure rate and lowering the fatality rate. Development of vaccines should be expedited through multiple approaches, so as to make them available for clinical trial and application as quickly as possible.
The president said that biosecurity should be an important part of the holistic approach to national security, and he called for efforts to enhance China's scientific research capacity regarding epidemic prevention and control and public health.
(12) March 3: The NHC released Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Covid-19 (Trial Version 7), which made modifications in the determination of transmission routes and clinical symptoms, updated diagnostic criteria, and emphasized the integration of traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine in treating the disease.
(13) March 4: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He emphasized the need to quickly bring order to economic and social development in the context of epidemic control, improve relevant measures, and consolidate and extend the country's hard-won progress. Wuhan and Hubei must continue their epidemic control, and continue the measures for preventing the virus from spreading within their local area or beyond.
(14) March 6: Xi Jinping attended a symposium on securing a decisive victory in poverty alleviation. He pointed out that the solemn pledge to lift all rural people living below the current poverty line out of poverty by 2020 had been made by the CPC Central Committee to the whole nation, and it must be fulfilled on schedule. He called for greater determination and intensity in advancing poverty alleviation, and highlighted the need to offset the impact of the epidemic in order to clinch a complete victory over povertyÔºça cause of such tremendous importance to China and all of humanity.
(15) March 6: The daily increase in the number of domestic cases on the Chinese mainland dropped below 100, and fell further to single digits on March 11.
(16) March 7: The NHC released Protocol on Prevention and Control of Covid-19 (Edition 6).
(17) March 10: Xi Jinping went to Wuhan to inspect work on epidemic control. He acknowledged that the situation in Hubei and Wuhan was improving and that hard work had delivered important results, and pointed out that the task remained arduous. He encouraged the people to persevere in their efforts and win the battles against the virus in Hubei and Wuhan. He praised residents in Wuhan for considering the national interest and the general situation. They had proved themselves indomitable and resilient, and they had consciously subordinated their needs to the overall interests of epidemic control, joined the battle against the epidemic, and made a huge contribution.
He pointed out that there were two fronts in the battle against the epidemic: the hospital and the communityÔºçthe life-saving front and the epidemic prevention and control front. Communities should play their key role in epidemic prevention and control, and every community should serve as a bastion of defense against the virus. He called for a general mobilization, putting in place a defense line across the whole of society and relying on the people to win the battle.
(18) March 11: WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced, "We have therefore made the assessment that Covid-19 can be characterized as a pandemic."
(19) March 11 to 17: The daily increase in the number of domestic cases on the Chinese mainland remained in single digits. The epidemic peak had passed in China as a whole, with the number of new cases steadily declining and the epidemic comfortably under control.
(20) March 17: Forty-two medical teams from around the country left Wuhan, having completed their mission there.
Stage IV: Wuhan and HubeiÔºçAn Initial Victory in a Critical Battle
(March 18-April 28, 2020)
By making critical advances in the city of Wuhan, the main battleground against the virus, China initially halted the spread of Covid-19 on the mainland. Restrictions on outbound traffic from Wuhan City and Hubei Province were lifted, and all Covid-19 patients in Wuhan hospitals were discharged. China won a critical battle in defending Wuhan and Hubei against Covid-19, which was a major step forward in the nationwide virus control effort.
During this period, sporadic cases were reported, and more infections were caused by inbound arrivals carrying the virus which continued to spread overseas. In response to the evolving Covid-19 dynamics, the CPC Central Committee adopted an approach to prevent the coronavirus from entering the country and stem its domestic resurgence. Efforts were made to consolidate gains in virus control, promptly treat cluster cases, and get the country back to work sector by sector. Care and support were given to Chinese citizens abroad (see Chart 7).
(1) March 18: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He emphasized the need to take rigorous steps to stop inbound cases, so that hard-won gains in virus control would not be lost. He urged stronger measures to protect the health of Chinese citizens overseas.
(2) March 18: The State Council issued Decision on Implementation of Measures to Stabilize Employment by Offsetting the Impact of Covid-19.
(3) March 18: For the first time, no new domestic cases were confirmed on the Chinese mainland. By March 19, no new cases had been confirmed for seven days outside of Hubei Province.
(4) March 25: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear briefings about virus control and current economic conditions and discuss virus control measures and ways to sustain economic growth.
(5) March 25: Hubei lifted outbound traffic restrictions and removed all health checkpoints on highways across the province except in Wuhan. With the exception of Wuhan, work and life gradually returned to normal in the whole province, and people could now leave Hubei if they had a "green" health code to show that they were not infected.
(6) March 25: Confirmed inbound cases were reported in 23 provinces, signaling the need to curb the spread of the virus.
(7) March 26: President Xi attended the G20 Extraordinary Leaders' Summit on Covid-19 and delivered a speech titled "Working Together to Defeat the Covid-19 Outbreak".
(8) March 27: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He called for a timely improvement in China's Covid-19 control measures in response to changing Covid-19 dynamics, both domestically and globally, with a shift in focus to preventing inbound cases and domestic resurgence, so as to sustain the positive momentum in virus control.
He stressed the need to speedily resume work and normal life while continuing Covid-19 prevention and control, in order to minimize the losses caused by Covid-19 and fulfill the goals of economic and social development set for the year. Provided that prevention and control protocols were duly observed, support should be given to get Hubei back to work in an orderly manner, and help enterprises create jobs, keep their employees, and ensure their livelihoods.
(9) March 29 to April 1: Xi Jinping made an inspection tour to Zhejiang Province to review its Covid-19 control and economic and social development.
He stressed that guarding against inbound infections should be the top priority for the country both now and in the foreseeable future and that control must be targeted and effective so as to build a strong line of defense against inbound cases.
He emphasized the need to remain sensitive to changes, respond to them with well-judged actions, be ready to adjust the approach when necessary, and identify and seize opportunities in the current crisis.
He urged a steady return to work in more sectors while strictly continuing virus control measures and resolving problems hindering the return to work, so as to restore the operation of complete industrial chains.
(10) April 1: Chinese customs began nucleic acid testing (NAT) on inbound arrivals at all points of entryÔºçair, water and land.
(11) April 4: A nationwide ceremony was held on the traditional Tomb-sweeping Day to pay tribute to all those who had given their lives in fighting Covid-19, and others who had died of the novel coronavirus.
(12) April 6: Through its Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council issued Notice on Prevention and Control Measures for Key Locations, Organizations and Population Groups, and Manual for Management of Asymptomatic Virus Carriers.
(13) April 7: The Central Leading Group for Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control issued Guidelines on Resumption of Work while Preventing and Controlling Covid-19; and the State Council released Guidelines on Covid-19 Prevention and Control Measures for Localities at Different Risk Levels to Resume Work. Region-specific and tiered measures for Covid-19 control were adopted to pave the way for a return to normal work in different locations.
(14) April 8: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He reiterated the need to stay alert against potential risks and be prepared, both in thinking and action, to respond to long-term changes in the external environment.
He warned against any relaxation of the efforts to both stop inbound cases and forestall domestic resurgence of cases. Targeted measures should be taken to manage asymptomatic cases, build a strong line of defense and plug any loopholes that might cause a resurgence of the virus. Control at land and sea points of entry should be tightened to minimize domestic cases caused by arrivals carrying the virus.
(15) April 8: Wuhan lifted its 76-day outbound traffic restrictions; and local work and daily life began to return to normal.
(16) April 10: The number of patients in severe or critical condition in Hubei dropped to double digits for the first time.
(17) April 14: Premier Li Keqiang delivered a speech at a special meeting attended by leaders of ASEAN nations, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea on the fight against the novel coronavirus. He shared with these leaders China's experience in coordinating the fight against the virus with its efforts to continue economic and social development. He proposed to strengthen cooperation on the fight against the virus, on efforts to resume economic development, and on policy coordination among the participating countries.
(18) April 15: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear briefings on virus control and current economic conditions, and discuss virus response measures and ways to sustain economic growth.
(19) April 17: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He called for full implementation of virus control measures to prevent both inbound cases and domestic resurgence and to build positive momentum in Covid-19 control.
He emphasized the need to follow the general principles of pursuing stable performance and making new progress, returning to work while continuing Covid-19 control, restoring economic and social order, fostering new growth areas, and actively promoting development.
(20) April 17: Wuhan City Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control Command Center released Briefing on Modifying the Figures of Confirmed Covid-19 Cases and Fatalities in Wuhan. By midnight on April 16, the total number of confirmed cases in the city had been revised up by 325 to 50,333, and the number of deaths up by 1,290 to 3,869.
(21) April 20-23: Xi Jinping made an inspection tour to Shaanxi Province. He urged local officials to pursue steady performance, make new progress, and act according to the new development philosophy. He called on them to carry out the following tasks: stabilizing employment, finance, foreign trade, inbound investment, domestic investment, and market expectations, and guaranteeing jobs, daily living needs, food and energy, industrial and supply chains, the interests of market players, and the smooth functioning of grassroots government. By so doing, China could offset the adverse impact of Covid-19 and fulfill the goals of eliminating poverty and achieving moderate prosperity.
(22) April 23: Premier Li Keqiang chaired a video conference on the economic situation in some provinces and cities in order to promote economic and social development in these regions.
(23) April 26: The last hospitalized Covid-19 patient in Wuhan was discharged.
(24) April 27: Xi Jinping chaired the 13th meeting of the Commission for Further Reform under the CPC Central Committee. He pointed out that the CPC leadership and China's socialist system had played a critical role in Covid-19 control and the resumption of business activities in China. As the environment for development became more complicated, China should be more resolute in furthering reform and improving its governing systems, and it should fully leverage its strengths to deal with risks and challenges.
(25) April 27: The Central Steering Group returned to Beijing from Hubei.
Stage V: Ongoing Prevention and Control
(Since April 29, 2020)
Sporadic cases have been reported on the mainland, resulting in case clusters in some locations. Inbound cases are generally under control. The positive momentum in Covid-19 control has thus been locked in, and nationwide virus control is now being conducted on an ongoing basis. China has made vigorous efforts to resume work and reopen schools. The ongoing control measures passed the test of the travel peak during the May Day holiday.
With the approval of the CPC Central Committee, an inter-departmental contact group under the Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism of the State Council was dispatched to Hubei to oversee local virus control (see Chart 8).
(1) April 29: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He concluded that thanks to arduous efforts, China had won a vital battle in defending Wuhan and Hubei against the novel coronavirus, and achieved a major strategic success in the nationwide control efforts. At the same time, he emphasized that virus control should continue in key regions and target key groups, with a focus on inbound cases.
(2) April 30: The public health emergency response was lowered to Level 2 in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region.
(3) May 1: The WHO announced that given the current international Covid-19 dynamics, the novel coronavirus still remained a "public health emergency of international concern".
(4) May 2: The public health emergency response was lowered to Level 2 in Hubei.
(5) May 4: An inter-departmental contact group under the Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism of the State Council was dispatched to Wuhan with the approval of the CPC Central Committee.
(6) May 6: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He pointed out that under the strong leadership of the Central Committee and with the support of all the people, the Central Steering Group had been working with the people of Wuhan and other parts of Hubei Province. They had done their utmost in the fight to curb the spread of the virus and erected a first line of defense for the nation, making a significant contribution to beating the virus.
He said the contact group should guide and support follow-up work in Wuhan and other parts of Hubei and advise on the rehabilitation and psychological counseling of patients in recovery, to ensure that the gains would be consolidated.
(7) May 7: Through the Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism, the State Council released Guidelines on Conducting Covid-19 Prevention and Control on an Ongoing Basis.
(8) May 8: The CPC Central Committee held a meeting to hear the views and proposals from the central committees of China's eight other political parties, representatives of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, and prominent figures without party affiliation. General Secretary Xi chaired and addressed the meeting.
He said that when the novel coronavirus struck, catching the country unawares, the CPC Central Committee gave its full attention to the matter. Putting people's lives and health first, it swiftly adopted a series of policies on prevention and control of the virus and treatment of the infected. It took the country over a month to achieve initial success in curbing the spread of the virus, about two months to bring the daily figure of new domestic cases on the mainland down to single digits, and three months to win a decisive victory in defending Wuhan City and Hubei Province. For China, with a large population of 1.4 billion, this achievement did not come easily.
(9) May 11-12: Xi Jinping made an inspection tour to Shanxi Province to be briefed on what had been done in the province to conduct Covid-19 prevention and control on an ongoing basis while promoting economic and social development, and to consolidate gains in poverty alleviation.
He urged local officials to act according to the new development philosophy for making steady progress, and carry out supply-side structural reform. They were required to stabilize the six fronts (employment, finance, foreign trade, inbound investment, domestic investment, and market expectations), and guarantee the six priorities (jobs, daily living needs, food and energy, industrial and supply chains, the interests of market players, and the smooth functioning of grassroots government).
He called on local officials to overcome the adverse impact of the virus, accelerate high-quality economic transformation, and meet the goals of eliminating poverty and achieving moderate prosperity in all respects.
(10) May 14: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. He urged that Covid-19 control be strengthened in key areas and key places to prevent its resurgence, and that targeted measures be taken where case clusters had recently occurred. Flexible and effective measures should be adopted to respond to evolving Covid-19 dynamics overseas, and key sectors and weak links in the prevention of inbound infection should be shored up.
(11) May 15: Xi Jinping chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to discuss the draft Report on the Work of the Government, which the State Council would submit to the forthcoming Third Session of the 13th National People's Congress for deliberation.
He pointed out that to fulfill the tasks of the year, the nation must carry out Covid-19 prevention and control as well as promoting economic and social development to reach the goal of achieving moderate prosperity in all respects.
He said that while conducting control on an ongoing basis, the country should continue to deliver steady performance, act according to the new development philosophy, conduct supply-side structural reform, promote high-quality development through further reform and opening up, and continue the three critical battles against poverty, pollution and major risks. There should be solid progress in stabilizing the six fronts and guaranteeing the six priorities. Domestic consumption must be expanded, and economic development and social stability must be maintained, so as to fulfill the goals of eliminating poverty and achieving moderate prosperity in all respects.
(12) May 18: President Xi delivered a speech titled "Fighting Covid-19 through Solidarity and Cooperation, Building a Global Community of Health for All" at the opening of the 73rd World Health Assembly.
(13) May 21-27: The Third Session of the 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference was held in Beijing. May 22-28: The Third Session of the 13th National People's Congress was held in Beijing.
II. Well-Coordinated Prevention, Control and Treatment
The coronavirus caught China unawares. Putting people's lives and health first, the Chinese government has acted swiftly to fight the virus and provide medical treatment for patients. It has adopted the most thorough, rigorous and comprehensive prevention and control measures, enforced quarantine and isolation on a scale never seen before, and mobilized medical resources across the country. It has ensured that all those in need have been tested, quarantined, hospitalized or treated. With these measures in place, China has prevented a wider spread and further development of the virus. "The time that can be gained through the full application of these measures [in China]Ôºçeven if just days or weeksÔºçcan be invaluable in ultimately reducing Covid-19 illness and deaths," says Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) published on February 28, 2020. (Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (Covid-19), February 28, 2020. http://www.who.int/publications-detail/report-of-the-who-china-joint-mission-on-coronavirus-disease-2019-(covid-19).)
1. Centralized and Efficient Command
Under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Xi Jinping at its core, China has put in place an efficient system under which the central authorities exercise overall command, while local authorities and all sectors follow the leadership and instructions of the central authorities, perform their respective duties, and cooperate with each other. This highly efficient system has made it possible for China to win its all-out people's war against the virus.
General Secretary Xi Jinping takes charge of Covid-19 response. Attaching high importance to Covid-19 prevention and control, Xi Jinping assumed full command over the control efforts from the very beginning. He highlighted the need to put people's lives and health first, to firm up confidence, strengthen solidarity, adopt a science-based approach, and take targeted measures. He called for a nationwide effort to block the spread of the virus and defeat it.
Xi Jinping has chaired 14 meetings of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, 4 meetings of the Political Bureau, meetings of the Central Commission for Law-based Governance, Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission, Central Commission for Further Reform, and Central Commission for Foreign Affairs, and a meeting with prominent non-CPC figures. At these meetings, he heard briefings from the Central Leading Group for Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control and the Central Steering Group, adjusted response measures in view of the evolving Covid-19 dynamics, and made decisions on overall plans for strengthening control efforts and international cooperation.
He inspected community response and Covid-19 research in Beijing, and visited Wuhan to guide the frontline response. He made inspection tours to Zhejiang, Shaanxi and Shanxi provinces where he was briefed on progress in coordinating epidemic prevention and control with economic and social development, and in poverty alleviation. He has closely followed developments in China's virus control and made timely decisions accordingly.
Government departments have made well-coordinated control efforts. Premier Li Keqiang, as head of the Central Leading Group for Novel Coronavirus Prevention and Control, has chaired more than 30 meetings of the leading group to discuss key issues concerning Covid-19 control and economic and social development, and important decisions were made at the meetings. He visited Wuhan and inspected China CDC, the Institute of Pathogen Biology CAMS& PUMC, Beijing West Railway Station, Beijing Capital International Airport, and the National Distribution Center for Major Anti-epidemic Medical Supplies.
The Central Steering Group responded swiftly to guide Hubei Province and Wuhan City to intensify their control efforts. It thus helped contain the virus and hold a strong first line of defense against the virus.
The Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism of the State Council has played the coordinating role and held regular meetings to keep abreast of the situation, dispatch medical teams, and allocate supplies, and it has made timely adjustments to control policies and priorities in response to new developments. Through its mechanism for promoting the return to work, the State Council has strengthened guidance and coordination, removed barriers in the industrial and supply chains, and ensured the resumption of normal daily life.
Local authorities and other stakeholders have lived up to their responsibilities. Emergency command mechanisms headed by leading Party and government officials were established in provinces, cities and counties across the country, forming a top-down system with unified command, frontline guidance, and coordination between departments and among provinces. Local authorities and other stakeholders have implemented each and every one of the decisions, plans and prohibitions of the central authorities, and strictly and effectively enforced all response measures. Thus, an effective and well-functioning whole-of-the-nation control mechanism is in place.
2. A Tight Prevention and Control System Involving All Sectors of Society
The Chinese New Year is marked by enormous population flows in dense groups. In view of this fact, the Chinese government quickly mobilized the whole of society and galvanized the people into a nationwide response. A targeted, law-and science-based approach was adopted, and public health emergency response measures were rolled out on an unprecedented and extensive scale across the country. Through the strictest social distancing and flexible, people-centered social management, China put in place a prevention and control system involving governments at all levels and the whole of society, and launched a people's war on the virus applying non-medical means that has effectively blocked its transmission routes.
Strong measures were taken to control sources of infection. The Chinese government defined a set of requirements: early detection, reporting, quarantine and treatment with a focus on the four categories of vulnerable people (confirmed cases, suspected cases, febrile patients who might be carriers, and close contacts). It had also taken measures to ensure that they were hospitalized, treated, tested or quarantined as appropriate. It has done everything in its power to reduce infections to the minimum.
While keeping all its outbound routes closed, Wuhan carried out two rounds of community-based mass screening of its 4.21 million households, leaving no person or household unchecked and ruling out all potential sources of infection.
The Chinese government redoubled efforts to increase the capacity of nucleic acid testing, supply more test kits, and approve more testing institutions. As a result, the testing period was shortened and the quality enhanced, ensuring that all those in need could be tested immediately and as appropriate. In Hubei Province, the testing period was shortened from 2 days to 4-6 hours, and the daily capacity expanded from 300 samples in the early stage of the epidemic to more than 50,000 in mid-April. Such advances made early detection and confirmation of infection possible and reduced the risk of transmission.
To identify the four categories of vulnerable people, community grid-based screening was carried out across the country. All residents were requested to report their health condition on a daily basis. Community workers for their part visited households door-to-door to collect and verify this information. Temperature checking was made a routine at all places. Work was done to strengthen the monitoring and online reporting of cases identified at fever clinics of medical facilitiesÔºçall such cases had to be reported online to higher authorities within 2 hours; their test results sent back to the reporting clinics within 12 hours; and on-site epidemiological investigation completed within 24 hoursÔºçso that confirmed cases and asymptomatic carriers would be identified and reported without delay. Epidemiological tracing and investigation were enhanced to precisely detect and cut off virus transmission routes. As of May 31, a total of more than 740,000 close contacts had been traced and handled as appropriate.
Breaking the chains of transmission through early intervention. The strictest closure and traffic restrictions were enforced on all outbound routes from Wuhan and Hubei. International passenger flights, and ferries and long-distance passenger transport services in many parts of the province were suspended, as were road and waterway passenger services bound for Wuhan from other places of the country. Airports and railway stations were closed and intra-city public transport halted in Wuhan and many other parts of Hubei. All these restrictions effectively stopped the virus from spreading nationwide, especially in rural Hubei where public health infrastructure was relatively weak.
Areas outside Hubei took a differentiated approach to traffic control. The provinces abutting Hubei built traffic control "isolation zones" around the province, preventing the virus from spreading beyond Hubei. Other parts of China adopted a targeted, tiered, and region-specific approach. They exercised a dynamic control over urban and rural road transport services and strengthened health and quarantine measures for domestic routes.
Rigorous measures were taken to prevent public gatherings and cross-infection. The Chinese New Year holiday was extended, public gatherings were canceled or postponed, and the spring semester was postponed in schools. Cinemas, theaters, internet caf√©s, and gyms were all closed. Strict procedures had to be followed in essential public facilities, including bus stations, airports, ports, farmers markets, shopping malls, supermarkets, restaurants and hotels, and in enclosed transport vehicles such as buses, trains and planes. All persons were required to wear masks and undergo temperature monitoring when accessing these venues or vehicles. In addition, all such facilities had to be disinfected, meet certain hygiene standards, ensure good ventilation, monitor visitors' temperature, and control the number of passengers or visitors at a given period of time.
Government services were provided online and through prior reservation, non-physical-contact delivery or services were extended, people were encouraged to stay at home and work from home, and businesses were encouraged to telecommuteÔºçall these measures effectively reduced population flows and public gatherings. Clear signs urging people to maintain at least one meter of distance and avoid close contact could be seen in all public places.
Strict health and quarantine measures were enforced at points of entry and exit across China to prevent inbound and outbound spread of the virus. The strictest-ever measures were applied at border control to suspend non-urgent and nonessential outbound travel by Chinese citizens.
The community-based line of defense was well guarded. Communities and villages made up the first line of defense in epidemic prevention and control, a major barrier to inbound cases and local transmission. They served as the mainstay in China's Covid-19 response. Residents and villagers were mobilized to help manage communities. Strict access control and grid-based management were exercised in communities, and human and material resources were channeled down to the community level to reinforce implementation of targeted measures. Task forces comprising both full-time and part-time community workers were set up, while officials at the sub-district/township and community/village levels, health workers of community medical facilities, and family doctors all performed their duties as a team. Through all these efforts, communities and villages were turned into strongholds, securing full implementation of response measures down to the lowest level.
To deal with the four categories of vulnerable people, a number of measures were taken in accordance with the law, such as tracing, registering, and visiting each individual, placing them under community management, and transferring them, if necessary, to designated medical facilities for quarantine or treatment as per due procedures. Community actions were taken to keep local areas in good condition and promote health education.
In Wuhan, rigorous 24-hour access control was enforced in all residential communities. No residents were allowed to leave and no non-residents allowed to access the community area other than for essential medical needs or epidemic control operations. Community workers were responsible for the purchase and delivery of daily necessities according to residents' needs. This approach was also applied in communities and villages in other parts of China, where all residents had to register and undergo temperature checking when leaving or entering the residential area or village.
Education programs were conducted to raise public awareness of the need for personal protection and enhance the sense of social responsibility. People observed self-quarantine at home and 14-day self-isolation after cross-region travel. They strictly followed personal protection measures such as wearing a mask when going out, maintaining proper social distancing, avoiding crowds, frequent hand-washing, and regular ventilation. The tradition of the Patriotic Public Health Campaign which was initiated in the 1950s, with an emphasis on sanitation and personal hygiene, was also encouraged, along with a healthy, environment-friendly lifestyle.
A multi-level, category-specific, dynamic and targeted approach was adopted. China also applied a region-specific, multi-level approach to epidemic prevention and control. To better prevent and control the epidemic, each region at or above the county level was classified by risk level on the basis of a comprehensive evaluation of factors such as population and number of infections in a given period of time. There are three levels of risk: low, medium, and high. Regions could take measures according to the risk level, which was dynamic and adjusted in light of the evolving situation.
In response to Covid-19, a low-risk region was requested to remain vigilant against any potential inbound transmission while fully restoring normal order in work and daily life; a medium-risk region had to prevent inbound and local transmission while restoring normal work and daily life as soon as possible; and a region classified as high-risk was obliged to prevent any spread in its jurisdiction or beyond, enforce strict control measures, and focus on containment. Once the situation stabilized, provincial-level authorities could step up efforts to restore order in work and daily life in areas under their jurisdiction, while adapting to the new normal of Covid-19 control by establishing a sound long-term epidemic response system that ensures early detection, quick response, targeted prevention and control, and effective treatment. Every effort has been made to stem the virus spread in the capital of Beijing to safeguard public health.
Appropriate measures were implemented to prevent any cluster outbreaks in key locations, major organizations, and priority population groups, and manage the aftermath of any such outbreaks. The elderly, children, pregnant women, students, and health workers were to be well protected as a priority.
Health management of priority population groups was enhanced. Protective measures were intensified in medical facilities, communities, office buildings, shopping malls and supermarkets, passenger terminals, transport vehicles, child-care centers and kindergartens, elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, nursing homes, charity houses, mental health institutions, and first-aid stations. These measures were implemented nationwide, covering all population groups, locations, and communities, and leaving no areas unattended and no hidden dangers unaddressed.
To control any inbound infections from overseas, China has strictly enforced its border health and quarantine rules to ensure a full, closed cycle of management of all arrivals, from their entry at the border to the doorstep of where they would stay. Sustained, meticulous efforts have been made to prevent both inbound cases and a recurrence in domestic cases.
Legal safeguards for epidemic prevention and control were strengthened. China listed Covid-19 as a Class B infectious disease, but addressed it with measures applicable to a Class A infectious disease under the Law of the People's Republic of China on Prevention and Treatment of Infectious Diseases. It also applied control and quarantine measures under the Frontier Health and Quarantine Law of the People's Republic of China consistent with relevant provisions of international law and other domestic laws. Standing committees of some sub-national people's congresses launched emergency legislation procedures as per the national legal framework, empowering local governments to introduce interim emergency administrative rules relating to healthcare and epidemic control.
The Law on Prevention and Treatment of Infectious Diseases and measures for its implementation have been strictly enforced, and guidelines have been promulgated on controlling the disease, combating epidemic-related crimes in accordance with the law, and protecting people's lives and health. Law and order, and market supervision have been strengthened. Price gouging, hoarding and profiteering, production and sales of counterfeit or substandard products, and any other crimes impeding response efforts have been punished by law. Quality and price control of anti-epidemic supplies has been reinforced, and stronger measures have been taken against deceptive and illegal advertising, ensuring social order and stability. Supervision on administrative law enforcement has been intensified during epidemic control to ensure that the law is enforced in a strict, impartial, procedure-based, and non-abusive way. Legal disputes associated with the epidemic have been resolved in accordance with the law, and legal guarantees and services have been provided for Covid-19 response and for businesses returning to work. The government has also made greater efforts to raise public legal awareness and guide people to act within the parameters of the law.
Prevention and control efforts have been based on science. Covid-19 is a new virus and it will take time for humanity to understand it completely. In its quest for victory over the coronavirus, China has been mapping its own route to successÔºçone based on reliable experience, tailored to its national conditions, and rooted in sound epidemiological practice.
China values the role of experts in virology, epidemiology, clinical medicine and related fields. China's response has been professional because its response measures were based on timely analyses and assessments by scientists and public health experts, whose views and proposals were fully respected.
China has given full support to factual and scientific research on virus infection, pathogenesis, transmission routes and transmissibility while maintaining exchanges and communication with the WHO and other countries and regions.
With a growing body of knowledge of the virus, China has modified and optimized its response measures in a timely manner to make them more effective. It has developed a Covid-19 prevention and control protocol and updated it five times based on assessments of the evolving epidemic dynamics. The protocol provides a set of reliable standards for case monitoring, epidemiological investigation, management of close contacts and of those suspected of exposure to infection, and procedure-based tests in laboratories. China has also published 15 technical manuals on epidemic prevention and control for key population groups, locations and organizations, 6 work plans on psychological counseling for people affected by Covid-19, and 50 specific technical guidelines. All of this has ensured that China's prevention and control efforts are more targeted and science-based.
3. An All-Out Effort to Treat Patients and Save Lives
From the outset, China's goal in its medical response to Covid-19 has been to improve the patient admission and cure rates and reduce the infection and fatality rates. The infected were treated in dedicated medical facilities where medical specialists from all over the country and all the necessary medical resources were concentrated. Both traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine were applied. A condition-specific and category-based approach was applied to medical treatment of patients. Severe cases were treated by the best doctors using the most advanced equipment, and critical supplies were pooled to save lives at all costs. It is through such efforts that the Covid-19 fatality rate in China has dropped sharply. Early medical intervention has made it possible to have patients with mild symptoms cured without delay, thus significantly reducing the risk that their condition might worsen.
Pooling premium resources to treat severe cases. The sudden appearance of Covid-19 in Wuhan put an overwhelming strain on its medical resources. There was a severe shortage of hospital beds in the early stage as the number of infections surged. By directing resources to Wuhan, China expanded the capacity of designated hospitals to deal with severe cases and increased the number of beds. Patients in severe and critical condition were gathered for treatment and intensive care at the best hospitals with the greatest capacity for accommodating patients with infectious respiratory diseases. Two hospitals with 1,000-plus beds eachÔºçHuoshenshan and LeishenshanÔºçwere built as specialist hospitals for treating infectious diseases, and a number of designated and general hospitals were expanded or remodeled. The number of beds for severe cases quickly increased from around 1,000 to more than 9,100. Hospitals were able to admit large numbers of patients who were seriously ill.
The treatment strategy for severe cases was improved, and tailored treatment provided to individual patients. Inspection teams consisting of top experts were organized to regularly inspect Wuhan's designated hospitals and evaluate patients in critical condition and their therapeutic regimen. For those with serious underlying medical conditions, who accounted for more than 80 percent of all severe cases, case-by-case treatment was prescribed after consultation with a multidisciplinary team consisting of experts on infection, respiratory diseases, heart and kidney diseases, and intensive care. In addition, a set of standards were formulated for nursing patients in severe and critical condition, and such measures as high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy, non-invasive and invasive mechanical ventilation, and ventilation in a prone position were adopted. Expert consultation on complex, severe and critical cases, and fatal cases, and other core medical security systems were strictly implemented. Those who have been cured and discharged from hospital have received rigorous health monitoring, and patients in severe condition have been given quality medical treatment.
The plasma of convalescent Covid-19 patients has been collected to set up an emergency plasma reserve, and convalescent plasma therapy has been applied in clinical treatment. As of May 31, convalescent plasma had been collected from 2,765 recovered patients, and 1,689 patients had been treated with the therapy, with positive results.
Early intervention for patients with mild symptoms. China has been quick to have patients with mild symptoms admitted to designated medical facilities for early medical intervention, and has done its best to prevent mild cases from worsening. The national clinical treatment network has been expanded to include more than 10,000 hospitals dedicated to the treatment of Covid-19 patients. A national network of medical treatment coordination has also been formed to provide technical support through online consultation.
In Wuhan, faced with surging infections and considering that 80 percent of cases were mild, the city government mobilized resources to repurpose stadiums and exhibition centers into 16 temporary treatment centers. With some 14,000 beds, these centers were able to admit all confirmed mild cases for treatment. This helped to reduce infections and virus transmission in communities and prevent mild cases from worsening. The 16 treatment centers received a total of more than 12,000 patients; 8,000 and more were cured and discharged; and more than 3,500 were transferred to hospitals. While in service, these facilities had zero cases of infection, death, or relapse.
Temporary treatment centers, or Fangcang shelter hospitals, are a major innovative solution that provided enough beds to admit all confirmed cases, thus turning the tide in the battle against Covid-19. An article in The Lancet wrote, "To relieve the huge pressure on the healthcare system, Fangcang shelter hospitals have also been crucial." (The Lancet: "Sustaining Containment of COVID-19 in China", April 18, 2020. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30864-3/fulltext)
Reviewing diagnostic and therapeutic plans and applying effective ones on a broad scale. China's diagnostic and therapeutic plans for Covid-19 have been developed and improved through clinical practice, medical research, experimentation and regular reviews. Based on scientific knowledge and accumulated evidence, R&D results and the diagnostic and therapeutic regimens that proved effective were incorporated in the national diagnosis and treatment plans. These include seven versions of the diagnosis and treatment protocol, three editions of the protocol for severe and critical cases, two editions of the manual for mild case management, two editions of convalescent plasma therapy treatment protocol, and one rehabilitation treatment program for patients discharged from hospitals. All these protocols and plans have contributed to science-based treatment of patients and the establishment of standards for medical treatment.
In Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol for Covid-19 (Trial Version 7), information on pathological changes, clinical symptoms, criteria for diagnosis, therapies, and criteria for patient discharge was added or updated. The protocol states that asymptomatic cases may be contagious. It also notes that plasma from convalescent cases may work in treating the infected. This edition has been adopted or used for reference in a number of countries.
Concerning discharged patients, quarantining, monitoring of their health and rehabilitation, and reexamination and re-testing have all been strengthened. Integrated medical services covering treatment, rehabilitation and health monitoring have been put in place. Differentiated treatment approaches have been adopted for children and pregnant women, among other groups.
Leveraging the unique strength of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Both TCM and Western medicine were used and traditional Chinese and Western drugs administered. China has leveraged the unique strength of TCM in preemptive prevention, differentiated medication, and multi-targeted intervention, and at every step of Covid-19 treatment and control. The etiology and pathogen of the disease were analyzed and confirmed through TCM methodology, as were the principles and methods of treatment. A set of TCM diagnosis and treatment protocols were developed to cover the entire process of medical observation, treatment of mild, moderate, severe, and critical cases, and recovery, and they have been applied nationwide.
TCM hospitals were used in the treatment of Covid-19 patients, and TCM teams took charge of and ran some wards for patients in severe condition at designated hospitals and some treatment centers. All the other shelter hospitals had resident TCM experts. TCM has played its part in the entire process of Covid-19 response, from early intervention to administering case-specific treatment. TCM drugs and treatment methods were used for early intervention and treatment of patients with mild symptoms; for patients with severe symptoms they were used in combination with Western medicine; for those under medical observation for fever and those who had been in close contact with confirmed cases they served to improve immunity; they helped to strengthen the constitution of those who had recovered. A national TCM coordination network was formed to offer guidance to patients recovering from the disease.
Chinese herbal formulas and drugs were administered to 92 percent of all confirmed cases. In Hubei Province, more than 90 percent of confirmed cases received TCM treatment that proved effective. Jinhua Qinggan Granules, Lianhua Qingwen Capsules/Granules, Xuebijing Injection, Lung Cleansing and Detoxifying Preparation, Dampness Resolving and Detoxifying Preparation, Lung Diffusing and Detoxifying Preparation, and other TCM drugs and herbal formulas have proved effective in treating different types of Covid-19 patients. They have significantly reduced the incidence rate, prevented cases with mild symptoms from worsening, increased the cure rate, lowered the fatality rate, helped nucleic acid turn negative, and sped up the rehabilitation of recovered Covid-19 patients.
Providing free treatment for patients. Government funds for Covid-19 control were made available in advance to ensure that patients could receive timely treatment and local authorities could proceed smoothly with measures for medical treatment and epidemic control. As of May 31, a total of RMB162.4 billion had been allocated by governments of all levels to fight the virus.
Policies for medical insurance were quickly adjusted, with clear provisions for confirmed or suspected Covid-19 patients. They could get treatment with delayed settlement of accounts. All Covid-19 patients, confirmed or suspected, received subsidies from state finance for any medical bills not covered by basic medical insurance, serious disease insurance, or the medical assistance fund. In the case of patients receiving treatment in places where they were not registered for basic medical insurance, their medical bills related to Covid-19 were paid by the local insurance fund first and settled later.
As of May 31, the medical bills of 58,000 inpatients with confirmed infections had been settled by basic medical insurance, with a total expenditure of RMB1.35 billion, or RMB23,000 per person. The average cost for treating Covid-19 patients in severe condition surpassed RMB150,000, and in some critical cases the individual cost exceeded RMB1 million, all covered by the state.
Strengthening infection control at medical institutions and ensuring personal protection for health workers. A set of technical manuals and normative documents on infection control were developed to regulate the layout of key areas in medical institutions and the consultation and treatment process, including clean zones, partially contaminated zones, contaminated zones, and separate passages for medical staff and patients. Health workers received training in workplace infection control, and nationwide supervision was strengthened to ensure control measures were implemented to the letter. Targeted guidance was given to the hardest-hit areas, hospitals at a higher risk of infection among staff, and areas and hospitals under the greatest pressure in treating patients. A major effort was put into the sorting, collection, storage and removal of medical waste, and the treatment of the remains of the deceased.
All emergency medical teams coming to Wuhan and Hubei from other parts of China had at least one infection control expert. Thanks to this arrangement, there have been no cases of infection in the teams. Since February there has been a sharp drop in the number of reported infections among medical staff nationwide. Health workers have been cared for and their needs attended to. A series of policies and measures have been introduced to ensure their wellbeing, such as psychological counseling and staff rotation, to ease their physical and psychological stress, help them stay healthy, and allow them to continue the fight on the front line.
4. China Has Released Information in an Open and Transparent Manner as Required by Law
While making an all-out effort to contain the virus, China has also acted with a keen sense of responsibility to humanity, its people, posterity, and the international community. It has provided information on Covid-19 in a thoroughly professional and efficient way. It has released authoritative and detailed information as early as possible on a regular basis, thus effectively responding to public concern and building public consensus. Its experience is something other countries can draw on in their fight against the virus.
A strict system of information release has been established. China has released information on Covid-19 in a timely, open and transparent manner as required by law. Strict regulations are in place to see there is no withholding of information, underreporting, or delay in reporting cases of infection. On December 31, 2019, the Wuhan government began to release coronavirus information in accordance with the law, and gradually increased the frequency of release. Since January 21, 2020, the NHC has provided daily updates on nationwide cases on its official website and social media platform, and provincial health departments have done the same on local cases. Starting from February 3, the NHC has released the information simultaneously on its English-language website.
A tiered news release mechanism has been formed. At both national and local levels, a tiered information release mechanism has been formed to circulate authoritative information through various channels and platforms, both onsite and online, in order to address domestic and international concerns on virus control, medical treatment, and scientific research. By May 31, the Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism and the Information Office of the State Council had held 161 press conferences during which officials from more than 50 government departments appeared over 490 times and answered more than 1,400 questions from Chinese and foreign media. One hundred and three press conferences had been held in Hubei and 1,050 in the other provinces.
Covid-19 statistics have been updated in accordance with the law. In the early stage of Covid-19 control, there were late, incomplete and erroneous reports of Covid-19 cases in Wuhan due to unverified deaths at home, inadequate hospital capacity, hospitals being overwhelmed, and incomplete recording of deaths. After the domestic spread of Covid-19 had been brought under control, the city updated the number of confirmed cases and deaths based on big data application and an epidemiological investigation to ensure accuracy of the data, and released the results in an open and transparent manner in accordance with the law.
Covid-19-related information is provided through various channels and platforms. The NHC's official Chinese and English websites and its social media platform have special sections where Covid-19-related information is released on a daily basis, including information on relevant policies, progress in China's containment efforts, updates on disease prevention and control, and clarifications that refute rumors. Information on local Covid-19 control has been promptly released on government websites and social media platforms of all provinces. To disseminate knowledge about its Covid-19 response, China has released relevant information through platforms for popularizing science, and through the media and the internet. Leading medical experts have offered advice on routine self-protection to help the public see Covid-19 in a rational way and forestall panic. The media has expanded public outreach and sent a positive message in combating the virus, and public opinion has played its role of oversight to help solve problems affecting virus control.
5. Science and Technology Underpin China's Efforts
Science and technology are the sharp blade that humanity wields in the battle against disease. Such battles could not have been won without scientific advances and technological innovation. Confronted by Covid-19, a previously unknown virus, China has exploited the pioneering role of science and technology and fully applied the results of scientific and technical innovation in recent years. Top scientific research resources have gathered from around the nation to support virus control. Focusing on the main battlefield of Wuhan and coordinating efforts in the most severely-affected areas and across the rest of the country, China pinpointed key R&D areas for different stages of virus control. The close coordination between scientific research, clinical application, and frontline virus control, and between enterprises, universities, and research institutes, has given powerful support for the war against the virus.
Key progress has been made in scientific research. Following the principles of safety, effectiveness and availability, China has accelerated the R&D and application of medicines, vaccines, and new test kits. To meet the urgent needs of frontline virus control, and to ensure traceability of infection sources, diagnosis and treatment of patients, and prevention and control of infections, China has pooled resources from enterprises, universities, and research institutes, directing them to focus on five areasÔºçclinical treatment, new medicines and vaccines, testing techniques and products, viral etiology and epidemiology, and animal model construction. Top research resources from around the nation have been galvanized to work on these tasks in pursuit of early results and application. A total of 83 emergency R&D programs have been initiated. Vaccines are being developed in five categoriesÔºçinactivated vaccines, recombinant protein vaccines, live attenuated influenza vaccines, adenovirus vaccines, and nucleic acid-based vaccines. To date, four inactivated vaccines and one adenovirus vaccine have been approved for clinical trials. While scientists in China and abroad have kept up with mutual developments, China leads the world in the development of certain types of vaccines. Research teams have also been assembled to trace the origin of Covid-19.
Scientific R&D has been integrated with clinical treatment and epidemic control. Having promptly developed nucleic acid test kits, China has also introduced a range of high-sensitivity, easy-to-use test equipment and reagents. Its R&D of reagents covers nucleic acid testing, gene testing, and immunological testing.
Putting existing medicines to new use, China has searched for effective medicines and new therapies, and summarized clinical experience based on rigorous in vitro experiments and pathogenic research. Ten types of medicine, including chloroquine phosphate, tocilizumab, finished TCM drugs, and herbal preparations, as well as convalescent plasma therapy, have been adopted in treatment plans. Approval for clinical trial has been given to four medicines, and guidelines formed or expert consensus reached in five areas. Clinical treatments have been trialed, and diagnosis and treatment methods and medicines that have proven clinically effective have been rolled out at a faster pace. Biosecurity has been strengthened at laboratories, as has the management of blood samples for Covid-19 testing and biological samples for laboratory testing.
Big data and artificial intelligence have been used in epidemic control. China has fully utilized big data, artificial intelligence, and other new technologies in research and analysis to forecast the trend of Covid-19 developments. These tools have also been exhaustively applied in epidemiological investigations to find every infected person and track every close contact for quarantine. A database has been set up in accordance with the law to provide data services for virus risk control, precisely identify different groups at risk, predict risk factors in different areas, and facilitate the orderly flow of people and the resumption of business operations. Via online platforms based on 5G technology, epidemiological teams in remote mountainous areas have been able to engage in real-time discussion with top experts thousands of miles away. With authorization from the public, health QR codes and digital travel records have been employed as permits for making trips, going to school or work, and accessing certain public venues, and for other daily errands. The results shown on the codes and records provide a base for travel control and differentiated response measures, which has made risk identification and targeted control possible in different areas and at different levels. Applying big data technology, an "epidemic map" has been created to display the specific names and locations of the communities where cases have been reported and the number of infections that has been ascertained. The map has made it easier for the public to guard against infection.
Through the battle against Covid-19, China has accumulated valuable experience in responding to major public health emergencies, and deficiencies in the national response system have been exposed. Summarizing this experience and learning from lessons, China will adopt a series of important measures to reinforce weak links. China will:
- reform and improve the disease prevention and control system;
- establish a major epidemic prevention, control and treatment system adapted to both times of peace and times of crisis;
- improve the emergency supply system;
- strengthen the new strategy of pooling nationwide resources for breakthroughs in core technologies;
- continue to implement initiatives to improve public sanitation; and
- improve the public health system.
China will make solid efforts to build capacity and improve its response to major public health emergencies, and better safeguard people's lives and health.
III. Assembling a Powerful Force to Beat the Virus
Facing the sudden onslaught of a previously unknown virus, China has put the people's interests firstÔºçnothing is more precious than people's lives. It has rapidly mobilized the manpower and resources of the whole nation and done everything possible to protect the lives and health of its people. A powerful synergy has been formed thanks to the following factors: observing the people-centered governance philosophy of the CPC; China's ability to mobilize resources to accomplish major initiatives; its composite national strength built up during more than four decades of reform and opening up, particularly since the 18th CPC National Congress held in November 2012; remarkable achievements in modernizing governance; two defining values of Chinese cultureÔºçsolidarity and mutual assistance; and the profound love of the Chinese people for their family and their country.
1. Lives Are Precious
At a critical time when people's lives and health were endangered, the CPC and the Chinese government acted with a keen sense of responsibility and swiftly identified the problem. The central authorities took multiple factors into consideration, made timely and resolute decisions, employed extraordinary measures to deal with an extraordinary emergency, and made every effort to safeguard people's lives and health.
Placing people's lives above economic growth. When the novel coronavirus struck, China decided that it would protect the lives and health of its people even at the cost of a short-term economic downturn and even a temporary shutdown. The government took strict and comprehensive control measures, never tried before, in the city of Wuhan and Hubei Province. To stem the spread of the virus, the movement of people across the country was tightly restricted, the Chinese New Year holiday was extended, gatherings were stopped, and the spring semester and business operations were postponed. In an editorial, The Lancet stated: "China's success has come with huge social and economic costs, and China must make difficult decisions to achieve an optimal balance between health and economic protection." (The Lancet: "Sustaining containment of COVID-19 in China", April 18, 2020. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30864-3/fulltext.)
At the critical juncture of the fight against the virus, based on a precise understanding of the evolving situation, China took the major decision to continue Covid-19 prevention and control while resuming economic and social development. While restarting normal work in an orderly manner, it took targeted measures in different regions based on local conditions, so as to ensure people's daily life and wellbeing to the greatest possible extent. Having succeeded in containing the spread of the virus on the mainland, the Chinese government adopted a strategy of preventing inbound infections and domestic resurgence, to ensure its hard-won progress would not be lost.
Saving lives at all costs. In the early stage of the epidemic, as the cases of infection soared, China made raising the cure rate and lowering the fatality rate its top priority. The best doctors and nurses were rapidly dispatched to the front line of the fight against the virus. Employing proactive, science-based, and flexible ways of treatment, they did everything possible to treat each and every patient, from an infant only 30 hours old to a centenarian. The goal was to save every single patient whatever the cost.
Medical workers braved the threat of infection to collect virus specimens. No one flinched, however daunting their task. To treat seriously ill patients, local governments and hospitals tried every means to acquire and reallocate ECMO equipment. Since the virus struck, hospitals in Wuhan designated for treating severe cases have treated more than 9,600 such cases. The recovery rate has risen from 14 percent to 89 percent, higher than the average rate for normal viral pneumonia. Tailored treatment was given to elderly patients with underlying medical conditions. As long as there was the slightest hope, doctors would never give up, and the need for personnel, medicines, equipment, or funds was met. To date, more than 3,000 patients over the age of 80, including 7 centenarians, have been cured, with many of them brought back to life from the verge of death. For example, a 70-year-old patient was saved thanks to intensive treatment and care by more than 10 medical workers over a period of several weeks. The cost of his treatment, nearly RMB1.5 million, was fully covered by the government.
Care and compassion for Chinese citizens overseas. China takes the safety of its citizens abroad very seriously. It has urged the governments of other countries to take effective measures to ensure the safety of Chinese students, the personnel of Chinese-funded institutions, and other Chinese nationals in their countries, and has supported them in doing so. Medical expert teams and work groups have been dispatched overseas and telemedicine service platforms set up, which provide scientific and professional guidance on Covid-19 prevention and control for Chinese citizens in other countries. Chinese medical teams have worked with host countries to ensure the best possible treatment for Chinese citizens diagnosed with infection. China has fully mobilized experts at home, medical teams on foreign aid missions, and other resources to assist foreign countries to provide treatment to these patients.
Performing their consular protection duties, Chinese embassies and consulates abroad have disseminated information on Covid-19 prevention and self-protection through all channels, and have provided more than 1 million "health kits" to overseas Chinese students. They have also helped overseas Chinese citizens in difficulty to return home.
National tribute to the deceased. On April 4, the Chinese traditional Tomb-sweeping Day, China paid tribute to all those who had given their lives in the fight against Covid-19, and those who had died of the disease. People throughout the country observed a silence to mourn the loss of lives and pay tribute to heroes who had protected others' lives at the cost of their own. From the top leader to ordinary people, 1.4 billion Chinese bade farewell to their dear departed. This solemn national ceremony demonstrates that the country respects and holds in awe the dignity and lives of people as individuals. It signifies the solidarity and strength of 1.4 billion Chinese.
2. Mobilizing the Whole Country to Fight the Epidemic
When a disaster strikes in one location, help comes from all quarters. After the outbreak, the entire country acted promptly. Relying on its overall national strength, China mobilized the people, enhanced R&D, procured supplies, and brought them to those in need rapidly. It mustered the support of the whole country to assist Hubei, and particularly Wuhan, to combat the disease. It pooled all its strength in the shortest period of time, and halted the spread of the epidemic. Hailing the speed and scale of China's response, WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus described it as unprecedented, and said it showed the efficiency and the strength of China's system. ("China Focus: Xi Voices Full Confidence in Winning Battle against Novel Coronavirus", Xinhuanet.com, January 28, 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-01/28/c_138739962.htm.)
Launching the largest medical assistance operation since the founding of the PRC. China mobilized all its medical resources to support the efforts in Wuhan and other locations in Hubei. From January 24, Chinese New Year's Eve, to March 8, it rallied 346 national medical teams, consisting of 42,600 medical workers and more than 900 public health professionals to the immediate aid of Hubei and the city of Wuhan. Nineteen provinces and equivalent administrative units assisted 16 other cities in Hubei in the form of paired assistance. While burdened with the heavy responsibility of coronavirus prevention and control and treatment of patients in their home cities, they still pooled together quality medical resources to assist Hubei and Wuhan.
The People's Liberation Army (PLA) dispatched over 4,000 medical personnel to Hubei to work in epidemic control. They took on medical work in three designated medical institutions, including Huoshenshan Hospital in Wuhan. The PLA Air Force dispatched aircraft to transport emergency medical supplies. Medical teams were formed within two hours of receiving the order, and they arrived at their destinations within 24 hours, carrying a seven-day stock of protective materials. On arrival, they started to treat patients right away.
The government urgently solicited automatic temperature measuring equipment, negative pressure ambulances, ventilators, electrocardiogram monitors, and other key medical supplies from across the country for Wuhan and other locations in Hubei (see Table 1). It mobilized 40,000 construction workers and several thousand sets of machinery and equipment to build two hospitals. The construction of the 1,000-bed Huoshenshan Hospital was completed in just 10 days, and that of the 1,600-bed Leishenshan Hospital in just 12 days. In 10 short days, 16 temporary treatment centers providing over 14,000 beds were built. To increase blood supply for clinical use in surgery, 10 provinces donated to Hubei 45,000 units of red blood cells, 1,762 therapeutic doses of platelets, and 1,370 liters of fresh frozen plasma (not including convalescent plasma). These massive and powerful medical assistance actions have guaranteed Covid-19 treatment in Hubei and Wuhan, greatly relieving the pressure on the hardest-hit areas caused by severe shortages of medical resources.
Increasing the production and supply of medical supplies and medical support services. Victory in the battle against Covid-19 depends on logistical support. In view of the extreme scarcity of medical protective materials in Wuhan during the early stage of the epidemic, medical workers on the front line overcame difficulties and used every item for the longest possible time, so as to conserve them in the race to save lives. To address the shortfall in medical resources while patient numbers surged, China exploited the full strength of its comprehensive and resilient manufacturing sector and its complete industrial chain.
To overcome the unfavorable combination of a pause in work and the resultant decline in manufacturing output during the Chinese New Year holiday, the Chinese government mobilized factories across the country to operate at full capacity and tap into their full potential. With all its strength, it supported raw materials supplies and transport facilities throughout the industrial chain, so as to ensure large-scale production and distribution of materials for epidemic prevention and control. Medical manufacturers overcame such difficulties as labor shortages caused by workers not having returned to their posts. They resumed production as quickly as possible, and expanded capacity to the maximum.
Enterprises in other industries made rapid adjustments to their manufacturing facilities and turned to producing masks, protective suits, disinfectants, temperature measuring devices, and other products for the fight against the epidemic, thereby effectively expanding the overall output of such materials and equipment. The Chinese government quickly started procedures to review applications for producing medical supplies in times of emergency, and imposed stricter quality and safety supervision across the board, so as to facilitate production, ensure the quickest approval for sale, and guarantee supplies.
As of May 31, relevant authorities had approved 19 applications for clinical trials of 17 medicines and vaccines for coronavirus prevention and control, and conditionally approved the applications for sale of two medicines. Thanks to the joint efforts of many parties, manufacturing capacity for medical supplies increased steadily, and efforts to ensure the supply of medical materials and equipment achieved rapid progress: from acute shortage to borderline sufficiency, then from demand-supply balance to timely and sufficient supplies (see Table 2). The daily output of medical N95 masks and medical non-N95 masks increased from 130,000 and 5.86 million in early February to over 5 million and 200 million by the end of April. These efforts opened up unimpeded supply chains and logistics channels, gave birth to a coordination mechanism ensuring material supply, and allowed continuous transport of materials from across the country to the hardest-hit areas.
Coordinating and ensuring the supply of daily necessities. Once outbound traffic from Wuhan had been halted, nearly 10 million people were under home isolation in the city, requiring a huge amount of grain, vegetables, meat, eggs, and milk every day. A coordination mechanism was established to ensure supply of such products, which involved nine provinces, and 500 enterprises for prioritizing the shipment of supplies in times of emergency. The mechanism involved coordination between central and local governments, and joint actions by government and enterprises. It boosted the supply of grain and cooking oil, released central government reserves of frozen pork, and raised the supply capacity of provinces which are major vegetable bases. Transport teams were organized for emergency supplies, and forceful measures were taken to ensure the production, stocks, supply, and price stability of daily necessities for residents in Hubei, and particularly in Wuhan.
From January 27 to March 19, 928,800 tonnes of epidemic prevention and control materials and daily necessities were transported from across the country to Hubei via railway, highway, waterway, civil aviation, and express postal services. Bulk goods such as thermal coal and fuel totaling 1.49 million tonnes were also shipped. Sufficient supplies of coal, electricity, fuel, gas, and heat ensured the normal functioning of society and the smooth implementation of quarantine measures in Hubei and particularly in Wuhan. In Wuhan, delivery of daily necessities was included in community services, thus the last link of daily distributionÔºçfrom supermarkets to communitiesÔºçwas assured. Through contactless delivery, vegetables that had gone through quarantine and met the standards were delivered directly to communities, meeting residents' needs and ensuring safety in terms of epidemic prevention.
Public participation in virus control. Trade unions, Communist Youth League organizations, women's federations, and other mass organizations organized and mobilized their contacts among the general public to get involved in Covid-19 prevention and control. Urban and rural residents, enterprises, and social organizations donated money and materials. Charities and the Red Cross Society of China improved the allocation of donated funds and materials, with a focus on Wuhan and other severely affected areas inside Hubei Province and elsewhere. As of May 31, they had received donations totaling about RMB38.93 billion and 990 million items of different materials. Of these, RMB32.83 billion and 940 million items had been disbursed.
Since the onset of the epidemic, fellow countrymen and women in Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan, and overseas Chinese have given a helping hand through various means and channels. They have actively donated money and materials for epidemic prevention and control. This shows how much we Chinese at home and abroad are committed to each other and demonstrates the unity and cohesion of the Chinese nation in times of difficulty.
3. Coordinating Prevention and Control with Social and Economic Development
Without compromising Covid-19 control, China has steadily resumed social and economic activities in an orderly way, so as to stabilize the six fronts (employment, finance, foreign trade, inbound investment, domestic investment, and market expectations), and guarantee the six priorities (jobs, daily living needs, food and energy, industrial and supply chains, the interests of market players, and the smooth functioning of grassroots government).
It has fostered a social and economic order under the conditions imposed by Covid-19 control and striven to minimize their impact on social and economic development, thus providing a strong material and social buttress for the fight against the epidemic.
Maintaining social order and stability. China has made every effort to ensure social order and stability, market order, public security, and supervision over the quality and pricing of epidemic-control supplies. It has adopted timely policies to ensure the basic livelihood of people in difficulties caused by Covid-19. Psychological counseling is provided to ease distress, nurture a healthy mindset, prevent and resolve potential problems, and defuse local disputes.
Despite strict measures such as traffic control and home-based quarantine, the economy and society have remained resilient. The supply of water, electricity, natural gas and telecommunication services continues, as does the supply of daily necessities in urban and rural areas. Key sectors providing food, pharmaceuticals, energy, basic industrial products, and public services that are essential to social stability and people's wellbeing are in normal operation, meeting the basic needs of 1.4 billion people.
Orderly resumption of work. The central government has quickly adopted a host of policies to reduce the burdens of businesses, particularly small and medium enterprises and self-employed people. These include measures such as reducing fees and lowering taxes, increasing government subsidies, strengthening financial support, stabilizing and expanding employment, and improving government services.
Local governments have issued detailed rules to implement these policies, especially to help the 10,000 plus key enterprises essential to Covid-19 control, public services, and daily necessities. Comprehensive services are being provided to help enterprises to resume operation, including providing personal protective gear and facilitating the flow of labor and materials. Point-to-point buses, trains and planes were chartered to send migrant workers back to their work posts. Preferential tax treatments such as exemption from value-added tax are available to businesses in transport, catering, hospitality, tourism, sport, entertainment and other sectors hit hard by the epidemic. Businesses also enjoy a temporary reduction in or exemption from social security contributions, a waiver of highway tolls, and reduced electricity and gas prices, and they are allowed to postpone their housing provident fund payments. Rent is being reduced for small and micro enterprises and the self-employed. The principal and interest repayment periods on loans to micro, small and medium enterprises are being extended, and more concessional loans are being provided.
Key groups such as college graduates and migrant workers are receiving support in finding jobs or starting businesses. Subsidies given to micro, small and medium enterprises to reduce layoffs are being extended to more businesses so as to stabilize employment and help them survive.
Policies on export tax rebates and export credit insurance are being put to good use, export credits expanded and new export markets explored. The negative list of market access for foreign investment has been cut to attract foreign investment. All these efforts will cut burdens on enterprises and stimulate their growth.
State-owned enterprises have taken the lead in resuming operations, providing impetus for upstream and downstream industries, including small and medium enterprises. By the end of April, 99 percent of companies of designated sizeÔºçwith a revenue of more than RMB20 million per annum-had resumed operations, as had 88.4 percent of micro, small and medium enterprises. Construction of over 95 percent of major projects across the country had resumed. In Hubei Province, more than 98.2 percent of enterprises of designated size had resumed operations, and 92.1 percent of their employees had returned to their jobs, and both these figures were close to the national average. Now, work on some key national science and technology projects, major national projects related to people's daily lives, and landmark foreign-funded projects has resumed. The Chinese economy is accelerating its return to normal operation, and it is becoming increasingly robust.
Gradual return to normal life. With steady progress made in Covid-19 control, public life is gradually returning to normal. Public transport services have fully resumed. More restaurants are reopening to the public. The May Day holiday in China saw a bustle of activity. During the five-day holiday, 121 million trips were made via railways, highways, waterways and air; and 115 million visits were paid to domestic tourist attractions, generating revenue of RMB47.56 billion.
Services such as shops, supermarkets, hotels, and restaurants have reopened their doors under Covid-19 control conditions. Students across the country have resumed their studies, and some have now returned to school. As of May 31, 163 million students and children in some grades of kindergarten, elementary and secondary schools across the country had returned to school or kindergarten. Public life is returning to normal in China, with people resuming their daily routines and consumption gradually picking up.
4. Uniting as OneÔºçChina's Billion People
All citizens share a responsibility for the fate of their country. The 1.4 billion Chinese people, irrespective of their gender, age, and occupation, have plunged themselves into the battle against the epidemic. Resilient and united, they represent a formidable force.
Medical workers rose to the challenge. Medical workers, from the very young to the very old, showed no hesitation in confronting the epidemic. At the outset, some 540,000 medical workers from Wuhan and other parts of Hubei plunged into the fray, joined soon by more than 40,000 civilian and military medical workers who rushed from other parts of the country. Millions of medical workers grappled with the epidemic at the front line across the country. Showing professional devotion and a deep respect for life, many of them risked their own lives, racing against time and working round the clock to try to save every patient. They built a Great Wall against the virus, bringing light and hope to the nation at a dark time. They endured tremendous fatigue and stress, and paid a heavy price. More than 2,000 medical workers were infected, and scores died in the line of duty. No one is born a hero, yet their selflessness made them fearless. These people, with the nobility, kindness, and devotion that are intrinsic to their profession, have etched an unforgettable chapter in the history of the Chinese nation and in the hearts of the Chinese people.
People in Wuhan and other parts of Hubei fought with resolve against the novel coronavirus and made sacrifices to contain its spread. The people of Wuhan and Hubei were confronted with many challenges. All channels of exit from the city and the province were temporarily closed, intra-city public transport was suspended, and the capital city came to a standstill. The high risk of infection, tight supply of medical and daily necessities, and extended period of isolation were compounded by the trauma of bereavement for those who lost friends or family members to the virus. However, with grit in their hearts and the wider interests of others in their minds, they united to stop the transmission of the virus. In this great war, their heroism will be remembered and will go down in history.
Community workers, primary and community-level officials, officials sent to work in communities, police, and customs officers worked day and night to protect lives and public safety. Some 4 million community workers are working in around 650,000 urban and rural communities, monitoring the situation, taking body temperatures, screening for infection, disseminating government policies, and sanitizing neighborhoods. Dedicated and responsible, they have meticulously protected their communities from the virus. CPC members working in communities quickly communicated the policies of the Party and the government, mobilized residents to engage in epidemic prevention and control, and actively helped them solve their daily difficulties. They divided communities into sub-units called grids to improve services and management.
Police and auxiliary police officers handled emergent, dangerous, difficult, and burdensome tasks such as guarding hospitals, transporting patients, and patrolling the streets to maintain order. More than 130 have died in the line of duty.
Customs officers have applied the law and carried out quarantine and other health-related duties, preventing the virus from entering the country.
Couriers, sanitation workers, transport employees, media workers, volunteers, and many people from other sectors of society also devoted themselves to the fight against the epidemic. When things were at their most serious, while people kept their doors closed, millions of couriers braved the virus and the cold, delivering warmth and comfort to people in cities and rural areas.
China's 1.8 million sanitation workers worked from dawn to dusk to clean and disinfect public spaces, and collect and transport medical and other wastes to centralized treatment facilities.
Tens of millions of transport employees, including taxi drivers in many cities, remained at their posts, providing a vital support to epidemic prevention and control, carrying supplies for work and daily life, and helping to get the country back to work.
Some media workers also worked at the front line, recording the battle against the epidemic, spreading warmth, and evoking strength.
Many ordinary people volunteered at the front line, standing guard in communities, screening for infection, carrying out cleaning and disinfection work, and buying medicines and delivering groceries for other residents' pressing needs. Preliminary statistics show that as of May 31, 8.81 million registered volunteers across the country had participated in more than 460,000 volunteer projects, rendering a total of more than 290 million hours of voluntary service.
The general public shouldered their responsibilities, united as one, and proactively participated in epidemic prevention and control. In the face of adversity, Chinese people have great faith in the Party and the government. They courageously shouldered their social responsibilities, and on this occasion made great sacrifices to win the battle against the epidemic.
The Chinese New Year holiday arrived amid the epidemic. Following government orders to contain the virus, the whole population acted in concert, and social exchanges shrank to a minimum. Visits to friends and relatives were canceled and so were other gatherings; people quarantined themselves, wore masks, began to take their body temperature regularly, and practiced other social distancing measures. The consensus was that protecting oneself was protecting others and making contribution to the country, so everyone took voluntary actions against the virus. People stayed at home for extended periods of time, taking online courses, honing culinary skills, and spending time with their families. Many found creative ways to keep themselves occupied, and confronted the epidemic with a positive attitude.
Speaking of the general public in China, Dr. Bruce Aylward, former assistant director general of the WHO and senior advisor to WHO director general, said at the press conference of WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19 held on February 24 in Beijing, "And that's because we want to emphasize this can't work without the collective will of the population contributing to it. And that's what really distinguishes this country, this response and the ability to take these old-fashioned strategies, some of the earliest ones we had in public health, apply them to the most modern virus and somehow do that." (Press Conference of WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19, Beijing, February 24, 2020. https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/transcripts/joint-mission-press-conference-script-english-final.pdf?sfvrsn=51c90b9e_10.)
A major crisis is a litmus test of the ruling Party's governance philosophy and effectiveness. The strong leadership of the CPC has been fundamental to China's rapid containment of the virus. The CPC has a strong leadership core, a people-oriented governance philosophy, and well-established organization and operation mechanisms. It quickly made the right decisions in response to the crisis. Under its leadership, efficient and powerful response measures were implemented. Within a short time, across-the-board crisis-response mechanisms were established down to the community level, motivating all those involved across the country to follow instructions and act as one.
The CPC has more than 4.6 million primary-level organizations, which have served as strongholds against the epidemic, rallying and serving the general public. With the epidemic putting people's lives and safety in danger, CPC members have acted as the vanguard. More than 39 million CPC members fought the virus at the front line, and more than 13 million CPC members volunteered their services. Nearly 400 CPC members have defended others' lives and safety at the cost of their own. Party members have also voluntarily donated money for epidemic prevention and control.
The CPC attaches great importance to tempering its members in times of trial, to gauge their commitment to serving the people and their sense of responsibility. The leadership of Wuhan City and Hubei Province was reshuffled, with some officials sanctioned for irresponsibility and dereliction of duty while others have been honored and promoted for their dedication and sense of responsibility.
After weathering the epidemic, the Chinese people have keenly realized that the CPC leadership is the most reliable shelter against storms. Their trust in and support for the Party have increased, along with their confidence in China's political system.
IV. Building a Global Community of Health for All
Coronavirus is raging all over the world, and lives are being lost every day. In the face of this serious crisis humanity once again stands at a crossroads. Which route shall we take? Shall we uphold science and rationality, or shall we manufacture political disputes? Strengthen unity and cooperation, or seek isolation? Promote multilateral coordination, or pursue unilateralism? Every country has a choice to make. China believes that all countries should make the choice that is right for the interests of all humanity and the wellbeing of our future generations. Upholding the vision of a global community of shared future, we should support each other and join hands to contain the spread of the virus, and protect the health and wellbeing of people across the globe.
1. China Appreciates Support from the International Community
At the time when the situation in China was at its most difficult, the international community provided valuable support and assistance to our country and our people. Leaders of more than 170 countries, heads of 50 international and regional organizations, and more than 300 foreign political parties and organizations expressed solidarity and support for China through phone calls, letters, and statements. Seventy-seven countries and 12 international organizations donated emergency medical supplies, including masks, protective suits, goggles, and ventilators. Donations of materials were also made by local governments, enterprises, non-governmental organizations and people from 84 countries. The BRICS New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank provided emergency loans of RMB7 billion and RMB2.485 billion, while the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank offered loans for the building of China's public health emergency management system. China appreciates the understanding and support of the international community, which our people will always cherish. The Chinese nation never forgets the help and generosity it receives, and always reciprocates with the same goodwill. We are now doing all we can to support the international community in the fight against the coronavirus.
2. China Conducts Active International Exchanges and Cooperation
China has been carrying out exchanges and cooperation with the international community from the outset. It has strengthened high-level communication, shared information, and cooperated in scientific research with international organizations and other countries, and done all it can to provide assistance, contributing ingenuity and strength to the global fight against the coronavirus. The CPC has issued a joint appeal with 240 political parties in more than 110 countries, calling on all stakeholders to put people's lives and health first, uphold the vision of a global community of shared future, and pull together to combat the virus.
President Xi has personally promoted international cooperation. In phone calls or meetings with nearly 50 foreign leaders and heads of international organizations, President Xi explained China's tactics and achievements in fighting the virus, and emphasized China's open, transparent and responsible approach towards releasing information and sharing its experience in virus control and the treatment of infected cases. He expressed empathy for the difficulties faced by other countries, saying that China would do all it can to help them. He called on all parties to build a global community of shared future, strengthen bilateral and multilateral cooperation, and support international organizations in order to work together to meet the challenge.
President Xi delivered a speech at the G20 Extraordinary Leaders' Summit on Covid-19 on China's experience. In a call on the international community to rise to the challenge and act swiftly, he put forward a series of cooperation initiatives and four key proposalsÔºçlaunch an all-out global war against Covid-19, establish a collective response for control and treatment at the international level, support international organizations in playing their roles, and strengthen coordination of international macroeconomic policies.
On May 18, he addressed the opening of the 73rd World Health Assembly, calling for a joint effort on the part of all countries to overcome the virus and build a global community of health for all. Six proposals were put forward: to do everything we can for Covid-19 control and treatment, to support the WHO in leading the global response, to provide greater support for Africa, to strengthen global governance in public health, to restore economic and social development, and to strengthen international cooperation. He also announced a series of major measures that China would take in supporting the global fight, including US$2 billion of international aid over two years, the establishment of a global humanitarian response depot and hub in China in cooperation with the United Nations, the establishment of a cooperation mechanism for Chinese hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals, the Covid-19 vaccine to be used as a global public product once it is developed and deployed in China, and the implementation of the Debt Service Suspension Initiative for the poorest countries together with other G20 members.
China has shared information and experience with the international community. China has provided support for global virus prevention and control by promptly sharing information and experience with the international community. It wasted no time in releasing information such as the whole coronavirus genome sequence and the specific primers and probes for detecting the coronavirus to the WHO and other relevant countries and regional organizations, and has kept them informed with regular updates. China has conducted more than 70 exchanges with international and regional organizations including ASEAN, the European Union, the African Union (AU), APEC, the Caribbean Community, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), as well as the ROK, Japan, Russia, the United States, Germany, and other countries. The National Health Commission (NHC) has worked out diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control solutions, had them translated into three languages, and shared them with over 180 countries and more than 10 international and regional organizations. Together with the WHO it held an international briefing via video link on China's experience in Covid-19 control. The Information Office of the State Council held two special English-language press conferences in Wuhan, inviting experts and frontline health workers to talk about China's experience and practices. To build platforms for exchanges between countries, the Chinese media has designed a TV program Covid-19 Frontline and a newspaper column Fighting Covid-19 the Chinese Way, among others. Chinese think tanks and experts have communicated with their counterparts around the world in a variety of ways. The WHO-China Joint Mission on Covid-19 made site visits to Beijing, Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, and Wuhan, and spoke highly of China's efforts and success in prevention and control.
China has provided humanitarian assistance to the international community. Even while under the tremendous pressure of coronavirus control, China has moved quickly to provide as much assistance to the international community as it can. It has provided two batches of cash support totaling US$50 million to the WHO, assisted the organization in purchasing personal protective equipment and establishing reserve centers of supplies in China, and helped its Covid-19 Solidarity Response Fund to raise funds in China. It has also participated in the WHO's "Access to Covid-19 Tools (act) Accelerator" initiative, aiming to speed up the development, production and equitable distribution of new tools.
China has been active in providing medical aid to other countries. As of May 31, China had sent 29 medical expert teams to 27 countries, and offered assistance to 150 countries and 4 international organizations. It has instructed its medical teams stationed in 56 countries to support the local fight, and provide counseling and health information to local people and overseas Chinese. They have so far organized over 400 online and offline training sessions in this regard. Local governments, enterprises, non-governmental organizations and individuals in China have donated materials to more than 150 countries and regions, and international organizations through various channels. The Chinese government has always had at heart the lives and health of foreigners in China, and it has provided undifferentiated and timely treatment to those infected with the disease.
China has made arrangements for orderly exports of protective materials. While ensuring domestic needs, China has tried every possible means to provide support to all countries in purchasing protective materials. It has smoothed the channels for supply-demand docking, organized logistics, transport, and the supply of goods, and accelerated export customs clearance. It has taken effective measures to control product quality, regulate export procedures, issue guidelines on foreign market access, and strengthen market and export quality supervision, so as to provide other countries with goods of the highest quality. From March 1 to May 31, China exported protective materials to 200 countries and regions, among which there were more than 70.6 billion masks, 340 million protective suits, 115 million pairs of goggles, 96,700 ventilators, 225 million test kits, and 40.29 million infrared thermometers.
China's growing exports provide strong support for the prevention and control efforts of affected countries. From January to April, the number of China-Europe freight trains and the volume of goods delivered increased by 24 percent and 27 percent compared with the same period last year, and a total of 660,000 packages were transported. This has played an important role in maintaining a smooth flow of international industrial and supply chains, and in ensuring the delivery of protective supplies to relevant countries.
China has carried out international exchanges and cooperation on scientific research. China has strengthened communication and exchanges with the WHO, conducted exchanges and cooperation with other countries on research in virus traceability, medicines, vaccines, and testing, shared scientific research data and information, and jointly studied prevention, control and treatment strategies. The Ministry of Science and Technology, the NHC, the China Association for Science and Technology, and the Chinese Medical Association have jointly put in place a Covid-19 Academic Research Communication Platform for worldwide researchers to release results and participate in discussion. By May 31, a total of 104 journals and 970 papers and reports had been posted. The National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine and the SCO Committee on Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation held a video conference on the diagnosis and treatment of Covid-19 between a group of Chinese experts on integrating traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine, and hospitals from SCO countries. It also guided the World Federation of Chinese Medicine Societies and the World Federation of Acupuncture-Moxibustion Societies in organizing such events as Expert Dialogue on Covid-19 Prevention and Control with Traditional Chinese Medicine and International Lectures on Covid-19.
The Chinese Academy of Sciences has released the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource database, and built the Novel Coronavirus National Science and Technology Resource Service System and the Covid-19 Pneumonia Scientific Literature Sharing Platform. As of May 31, the three platforms had provided nearly 48 million download, browsing and retrieval services to more than 370,000 users worldwide. China has established an international pool of experts and has cooperated with other countries in vaccine and medicine research and development. It has encouraged the Alliance of International Science Organizations in the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative to promote cooperation among its members in Covid-19 treatment and research. Chinese scientists, medical institutions, and disease control centers have published dozens of well-researched papers in some of the world's leading academic journals such as The Lancet, Science, Nature and The New England Journal of Medicine, releasing timely results of tests on the first patients, including the clinical characteristics of the virus, the risk of human-to-human transmission, China's experience of temporary treatment centers, medicine research and development, and experimental results of vaccines on animals. To accelerate the development of vaccines and the clinical trials of medicines, China has also carried out cooperation in scientific research with other countries, and with such organizations as the WHO, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness and Innovation and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation.
3. International Solidarity and Cooperation in Fighting the Pandemic
The global spread of Covid-19 is causing great concern. Both the fight to rein in the virus and the endeavor to fend off a deepening global recession call for the international community to stand in unity and engage in cooperation. They also call for multilateralism, and commitment to building a global community of shared future. Solidarity and cooperation are the most powerful weapons available to the international community in the war against the pandemic. What we do today determines how we will fare in the future. China calls on all countries to act promptly, demonstrate solidarity, strengthen cooperation on all fronts, and fight the pandemic together.
Conducting effective international cooperation on joint prevention and control. In responding to a pandemic, all countries must act in coordination to establish an impermeable network for joint prevention and control. Since Covid-19 struck, the WHO has diligently performed its duties, adopted an objective and impartial stance, and taken a slew of professional, science-based, and effective measures. It has made a significant contribution to the fight against the pandemic by leading and advancing global cooperation. China firmly supports the WHO in playing the leading role in this global battle, and calls on the international community to give it more political and financial support, so that we can mobilize the necessary resources worldwide to defeat this virus.
China maintains that all countries should implement their response under the guidance and coordination of the WHO. This includes adopting science-based, rational, and well-coordinated prevention and control measures, appropriately allocating medical resources and key supplies, adopting effective methods in key areas such as prevention, isolation, testing, treatment and case tracing, stepping up information sharing and experience exchanges, engaging in international cooperation on the research and development of testing methods, clinical treatments, drugs and vaccines, and supporting scientists around the world in studying the origin and transmission routes of the virus.
China calls on multilateral organizations, including the G20, APEC, BRICS, and SCO, to increase dialogue, exchanges and policy coordination within their respective frameworks. G20 members should act on the consensus reached at the G20 Extraordinary Leaders' Summit on Covid-19 held in late March 2020.
In international cooperation on joint prevention and control, it is essential that major countries take the initiative, fulfill their responsibilities and do their share of the work. China is ready to strengthen exchanges and cooperation with other countries including the US to jointly tackle this pandemic, especially in the fields of research, development, production and distribution of vaccines and drugs.
Managing the pandemic's impact on the world economy through cooperation. The global spread of the pandemic has impeded the flow of people, cross-border trade, and other economic activities, triggered fluctuations on the financial market, and delivered a blow to both the industrial and supply chains, making a severe global economic recession unavoidable. It is imperative that the international community work together to stabilize and rehabilitate the world economy. While continuing to heighten epidemic control, China is ready to join forces with other countries to address the deepening global recession, stepping up international coordination on macroeconomic policies, and jointly safeguarding the stable, secure and smooth operation of international industrial and supply chains.
Covid-19 is changing the form but not the general trend of economic globalization. Decoupling, erecting walls and deglobalization may divide the world, but will not do any good to those who themselves are engaged in these acts. China believes that the international community should proceed with globalization, safeguard the multilateral trading system based on the WTO, cut tariffs, remove barriers, facilitate the flow of trade, and keep international industrial and supply chains secure and smooth. Countries also need to implement strong and effective fiscal and monetary policies, better coordinate financial regulation to keep global financial markets stable, and thus prevent a global financial crisis that may consequently plunge the world economy into a massive, protracted recession. China will continue to supply the international market with anti-epidemic materials, pharmaceutical ingredients, daily necessities, and other supplies. At the same time, China will continue to advance reform and opening up, expand imports and outbound investment, and thereby contribute further to other countries' fight against the virus and to a stable world economy.
Assisting weaker countries and regions. Without assistance, developing countries with weaker public health systems in Asia, Africa and Latin AmericaÔºçespecially AfricaÔºçwill struggle to handle the daunting challenges posed by this pandemic. Helping them improve their capacity and performance in epidemic prevention and control should be a top priority in the global response. China calls on multilateral organizations including the UN, the WHO, the IMF and the World Bank to provide emergency aid to African countries, and calls on developed countries to take on more responsibilities, to play a bigger role in the global battle, and to provide more material, technological and personnel support to their developing counterparts, especially those in Africa.
China has actively participated in and acted upon the Debt Service Suspension Initiative of the G20. It has so far announced the suspension of debt repayments from 77 developing countries. In addition to the medical supplies sent to over 50 African countries and the AU, and the seven medical expert teams dispatched to the continent, China will offer more assistance to African countries, and continue to do all in its power to offer support. This includes sending the most urgent medical supplies, conducting cooperation on medical technologies, and dispatching more medical expert teams and task forces. China will also provide support to the Covid-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan of the UN.
Firmly opposing stigmatization and politicization of the virus. In the face of a novel coronavirus that poses a worldwide threat to human lives and health, the most urgent task is to defeat it through solidarity and cooperation. The common enemy of humanity is this virus, not any particular country or any particular race. China calls on the international community to come together, abandon prejudice and arrogance, resist scapegoating and other such self-serving artifices, and stand against stigmatization and politicization of the virus. In doing so we will see that the spirit of solidarity, cooperation, responsibility and dedication leads people around the world towards victory in our fight against the pandemic.
China has suffered tremendously but has contributed generously to the global efforts to combat the virus. Its efforts should be duly recognized, and it should not be criticized groundlessly. Since the early days of the outbreak China has informed the rest of the world of every development in clear and unambiguous terms. Certain countries ignored this information, and now blame China for their own failure to respond to the epidemic and protect their people's lives. Those who are intent on maligning others will easily find a pretext. China has always acted with openness, transparency and responsibility, and informed the international community of developments of the epidemic in a timely manner. The baseless accusation that China concealed epidemic information and death figures is a calculated slur on the 1.4 billion Chinese people, including those killed by the virus, and on millions of Chinese medical workers. China categorically rejects any such accusation.
The novel coronavirus is a previously unknown virus. Determining its origin is a scientific issue that requires research by scientists and doctors. The conclusion must be based on facts and evidence. It is both irresponsible and immoral to play the blame game in an attempt to cover up one's own shortcomings. China will never accept any frivolous lawsuits or compensation claims.
In the face of a virus that is spreading worldwide, China has offered help to other countries to the best of its ability. It is doing so out of the kindness of its people, the empathy they have with people of other countries suffering from the pandemic, the humanitarian spirit of helping each other amid disasters, and its sense of responsibility as a major country. China is not exporting its model, nor is it pursuing selfish geopolitical interests.
Building an efficient and sustainable global public health system for the benefit of all humanity. Human history is a history of grappling with viruses. There are multiple deficiencies in current global health governance, including the absence of an international mechanism for joint prevention and control of infectious diseases and a dire shortage of international public health resources. On top of these, the upsurge in deglobalization has rendered the global public health system even more vulnerable.
Humanity will prevail over the pandemic, but it will certainly not be the last major public health emergency we will encounter. China therefore calls on the international community to draw lessons from this pandemic, reflect carefully, and turn crises into opportunities. Countries should show extraordinary political vision and a strong sense of responsibility by doing the following:
¬∑embrace a philosophy that puts life above everything else, regards the world as a whole, and stresses equality, mutual respect, cooperation and mutual assistance;
¬∑establish sound mechanisms for international cooperation, including a long-term financing mechanism, a monitoring, early warning and joint response mechanism for threats to public health, and a mechanism for reserving and allocating resources;
¬∑create an efficient, sustainable global public health system for all;
¬∑fortify defenses for the lives and health of all; and
¬∑build a global community of health for all.
China supports efforts to make a full, objective, impartial, scientific, and professional assessment of the global response once the pandemic has been brought under control. This will enable us to learn lessons and remedy weaknesses. China proposes that countries take immediate action and adopt decisive measures to minimize both the imminent and potential threats of the virus. This is in the interest of future generations and the wellbeing of all humanity.
As a responsible country, China stands for the vision of a global community of shared future, and has actively participated in and advanced international cooperation in public health. It will put into action the six proposals and five measures put forward by President Xi Jinping in his speech at the opening of the 73rd World Health Assembly, and contribute more to securing regional and international public health and building a global community of health for all.
Afterword
The Chinese nation has never been driven down by adversity. The more daunting the challenge, the greater the courage it has mustered. Overcoming difficulties has helped China to grow stronger. Confronted by this virus, the Chinese people have joined together as one and united their efforts. They have succeeded in containing the spread of the virus. In this battle, China will always stand together with other countries.
Now, when the coronavirus is still spreading and causing devastation all over the world, the international community will have to face even greater difficulties and challenges. Preventing and controlling the spread of the virus has become a fight to safeguard global public health, to secure the wellbeing of humanity, to maintain world prosperity, and to enforce morality and conscience on the international community. It is a fight that will determine the future of the human race. We have no other choice but to overcome the pandemic. The international community must find resolve and forge unity. Solidarity means strength. The world will win this battle.
The pandemic will have a significant impact on the development of humanity, but the people's longing for a happy life will remain unchanged. Peace, development, and win-win cooperation will prevail. The sun will always shine again after a storm. As long as the world's peoples can cherish hopes and dreams, can embrace the idea of a global community of shared future, and can unite in pursuit of a common goal, we will be able to overcome all our current difficulties and challenges, and build a better world for all.
Doctors conduct a bronchoscopy on a COVID-19 patient at the Union Hospital affiliated to Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan, Hubei province, in March. TANG MINGMING/FOR CHINA DAILY
Staff of Chinese embassy in Ghana pose for a group photo with delegates of countries to receive aid at Accra Kotoka International Airport, on April 6. XU ZHENG/XINHUA
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/44/159158199233.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/159158199249.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/5/159158199420.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/88/159158199493.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/30/159158199631.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/90/159158199978.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/159158200129.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/26/159158200267.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/159158200355.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/78/159158200388.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/80/159158200528.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU,ZHANG ZHIHAO in Beijing and LIU KUN in Wuhan | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-02-10 07:21

Peter Ben Embarek (center), head of the WHO team investigating the origins of COVID-19, greets Liang Wannian, head of the expert panel on COVID-19 response at China's National Health Commission, at the WHO-China joint study news conference in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Tuesday. [Photo/Agencies]
It is "extremely unlikely" that the novel coronavirus spread to humans through a laboratory leak, a team of international experts from the World Health Organization said on Tuesday, adding that future studies into the origin of the virus will head "wherever indicated" and not be "geographically bound".
No known viruses being studied or identified in laboratories around the world have been found to be closely linked to the novel coronavirus, and the team's fieldwork in Wuhan, Hubei province, in the past four weeks and its discussion with local scientists support dismissing the theory that a laboratory incident triggered the outbreak, Peter Ben Embarek, a WHO expert on animal disease and food safety, said during a news conference.
Referring to the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, he said the state of the laboratory shows that "it was very unlikely that anything could escape from that place".
With the possibility of a laboratory leak being highly unlikely, Embarek suggested focusing on rational facts at hand and conducting systematic analysis.
"It is a much more useful approach than to put personal feelings and views or only looking at half the arguments," he said.
Embarek heads a 17-member international team of experts convened by the WHO for origin-tracing of the novel coronavirus in Wuhan together with Chinese experts from Jan 10 to Tuesday.
Their work in China has shown that the most likely path for the introduction of the virus to the human population is through an intermediary species, Embarek said, adding that the possibility of two other routes examined by the teamÔºçfrom an animal host to humans and transmission through cold or frozen foodÔºçhas not been ruled out.
He underscored that, future research into the virus' origin should not be confined to certain regions.
Embarek said that the possible transfer of the virus from animal hosts to humans "could have taken a long and convoluted path, involving movement and travel across borders before arriving in Huanan market". Some of the earliest cases detected in Wuhan, in December 2019, were linked to but not confined to the market.
"We need to conduct more surveys into certain animal species that could act as a reservoir, including more sampling and study of the bat population, not only in China where a lot of bats have already been tested," he said.
"Some of the similar species found in China are also found in neighboring countries and in other parts of the world," he said, adding that the bat population outside China has not yet been sufficiently tracked and tested.
Based on the team's research thus far, bats and pangolins have been identified as the likeliest reservoirs of the virus, but genome sequences of coronaviruses found in them are not sufficiently similar to the virus circulating in the public to ascertain their roles.
Liang Wannian, head of the China team in the joint study, said mass testing of animal products from the Huanan Seafood Market, bats in Hubei, and livestock, poultry and wild animals across the country have so far not detected traces of the virus.
"The virus may have made its way into the market by infected personnel, contaminated goods in cold-chain logistics, animal products or other means," Liang said.
Marion Koopmans, a virologist and a team member, said to better understand the virus' origin, more efforts should be devoted to finding and analyzing an earlier spread of the virus.
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-03-31 07:13

A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The virus that caused the COVID-19 pandemic is "extremely unlikely" to have originated in a lab, but most likely jumped from an animal to humans, according to a World Health Organization report released on Tuesday by a joint international and Chinese team probing the virus' origins.
The 120-page report said the virus most probably jumped from an animal, potentially a bat or pangolin, to an unknown intermediate animal host and then to humans. However, the path of transmission is still not known.
"There is no record of viruses closely related to SARS-CoV-2 in any laboratory before December 2019, or genomes that in combination could provide a SARS-CoV-2 genome," the report said.
"In view of the above, a laboratory origin of the pandemic was considered to be extremely unlikely."
The report said that the two most likely scenarios to explain the emergence of COVID-19 both involve the transmission of the virus from animals to humans.
"So far, we have not been able to document any substantial transmission of SARS coronavirus in the months preceding the outbreak in December," Thea Fisher, a member of the international team, said at a news conference on the report on Tuesday.
Peter Ben Embarek, WHO International Team Lead of the WHO-convened Global Study of the Origins of COVID-19 attends a news conference in Geneva, Switzerland, in this Feb 12, 2021 file photo. [Photo/Agencies]
Peter Ben Embarek, a Danish food safety and animal disease scientist who heads the international team, said the joint team looked into all scenarios.
"We try to stay with the arguments we have, the hard facts we have," he said.
He called it "a huge report" with a lot of new knowledge, data and information, and added that information will continue to come out after the initial studies.
He also praised the good collaboration between the Chinese and international experts.
"I think the size of the report, and the amount of material and results and analysis and data in the report, speaks for itself in terms of how the collaboration went," he said.
"There would never be anything like that if we did not have a very strong, good collaboration with our colleagues in China," Embarek added.
The report was written by a joint international team made up of 17 international experts and 17 Chinese experts under a mandate from the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the WHO. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization participated as an observer.
The team conducted a joint study from Jan 14 to Feb 10 in Wuhan, Hubei province, following initial online meetings, according to the report.
Peter Daszak, a member of the international team, tweeted, "I do hope people actually read the huge amount of new data in the report!"
---
Updated: 2020-04-29 02:17

[Photo/Agencies]
Conspiracy theories suggesting that the novel coronavirus originated in a laboratory in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, have no basis in fact, the head of the lab told Reuters, adding that there were "still no answers" as to the origin of the virus.
The rumors claims that the novel coronavirus, now responsible for more than 200,000 deaths worldwide, was synthesized by the Wuhan Institute of Virology, or WIV, based in the city where the disease was first identified.
Yuan Zhiming, professor at WIV and the director of its National Biosafety Laboratory, said "malicious" claims about the lab had been "pulled out of thin air" and contradicted all available evidence.
"The WIV does not have the intention and the ability to design and construct a new coronavirus," he said in written responses to questions from Reuters. "Moreover, there is no information within the SARS-CoV-2 genome indicating it was manmade."
"More than 70 percent of emerging infectious diseases originated from animals, especially wild animals," Yuan said.
"In recent years, we have seen increasing risks posed by close contact between humans and wild animals, with global climate change and the continuous expansion of human activities," he said.
All seven known human coronaviruses have origins in bats, mice or domestic animals, scientists say.
Yuan also rejected theories that the lab had accidentally released a coronavirus it had harvested from bats for research purposes, saying the lab's biosecurity procedures were strictly enforced.
"High-level biosafety labs have sophisticated protective facilities and strict measures to ensure the safety of laboratory staff and protect the environment from contamination," he said.
Experts overwhelmingly say analysis of the new coronavirus's genome rules out the possibility that it was engineered by humans, as some commentators have suggested, according to The Associated Press.
Nor is it likely that the virus emerged from a negligent laboratory in Wuhan, they say. "I would put it on a list of 1,000 different scenarios," said Nathan Grubaugh of Yale University, who studies the epidemiology of microbial disease.
Scientists say the virus arose naturally in bats.
Agencies
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/57/158809733368.jpeg
---
By Chen Weihua in Brussels | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-23 07:31

An undated transmission electron micrograph of a SARS-CoV-2 virus particle, also known as novel coronavirus, the virus which causes COVID-19, isolated from a patient. [Photo/Agencies]
Scientists, governments and the World Health Organization have rebutted the notion that the novel coronavirus that caused COVID-19 originated in a Wuhan lab.
The WHO said on Tuesday that all available evidence suggests the novel coronavirus originated in animals and was not manipulated or produced in a laboratory.
United States President Donald Trump said last week that his government was trying to determine whether the virus emanated from a lab in Wuhan in Hubei province, where the COVID-19 outbreak was first reported in December. The widely discredited theory has been given prominent play by some US news outlets, such as Fox News, that have quoted unnamed US government sources.
"All available evidence suggests the virus has an animal origin and is not manipulated or constructed in a lab or somewhere else," WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib said at a Geneva news briefing, according to Reuters.
"It is probable, likely, that the virus is of animal origin," she said.
Chaib said that it was not clear how the virus jumped the species barrier to humans but there had "certainly" been an intermediate animal host.
"It most likely has its ecological reservoir in bats but how the virus came from bats to humans is still to be seen and discovered," she said.
Her views were echoed by Takeshi Kasai, WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, who warned against speculation.
"I think at this stage it's not possible to determine the precise source, but available evidence suggests that it has an origin from animals," Kasai said at a virtual news conference on Tuesday.
Dennis Carroll, a renowned US infectious disease expert and former director of the US Agency for International Development's Emerging Threats Division, dismissed on Tuesday the belief that the virus came from a lab.
"Everything, everything points to this being not only a natural virus, but its introduction into the human population was not by way of a laboratory," he told CNN's Christiane Amanpour.
Carroll, who is now chairman of Global Virome Project, a scientific initiative to discover unknown zoonotic viral threats and stop future pandemics, said there were two potential routes for the COVID-19 virus to make its way from its natural reservoir into the human population.
Carroll said that one could be that a pangolin, a type of anteater, was infected by a bat, and that the pangolin was brought into a wildlife market. Exposure in that market could have led to a spillover of the virus into humans.
He explained that this was similar to SARS in 2002, when a civet acted as an intermediary, moving a bat virus into the human population.
Carroll said bats can also directly infect people by depositing their feces in areas where people might be exposed. "You can get the virus directly from that exposure as well," he said.
"We are not sure which route was taken. But we are clear that this is a natural virus and that the way it moved into the human population was through a natural route," he said.
He said that he would "agree absolutely" that the virus did not come from a lab and was not developed as a biological weapon.
"There has been some very good, deep genetic work looking at this particular virus. And it has the genetic signatures of a natural virus, nothing man-made about it," Carroll said.
French officials said on Friday that there is no evidence of a link between the virus and the work of a virology lab in Wuhan.
"We would like to make it clear that there is to this day no factual evidence corroborating the information recently circulating in the United States press that establishes a link between the origins of COVID-19 and the work of the P4 laboratory of Wuhan, China," an unnamed official at President Emmanuel Macron's office said, according to television network France 24. P4 stands for Class 4 pathogens, or dangerous viruses that pose a high risk of person-to-person transmission.
Anthony Fauci, director of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House Coronavirus Task Force, also rejected the theory that the virus was created in and escaped from a Chinese lab.
"There was a study recently that we can make available to you, where a group of highly qualified evolutionary virologists looked at the sequences there and the sequences in bats as they evolve. And the mutations that it took to get to the point where it is now is totally consistent with a jump of a species from an animal to a human," Fauci said at a daily briefing on Friday.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/65/158760053345.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhouxiang | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-11 07:25

Foreign Ministry spokeswomen Hua Chunying. [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]
On Saturday, Hua Chunying, spokesperson for the Foreign Ministry, tweeted: "China won't be Iraq."
She tweeted that in response to a CNN report that said US politicians were trying to pressure their intelligence community to say they "have some kind of smoking gun with regard to China", an old trick used by their predecessors 18 years ago to launch the Iraqi war.
Ever since the start of the novel coronavirus outbreak, certain US politicians have been trying to blame China for it. And as the situation has continued to worsen in the United States, they have gone one step further by fabricating the conspiracy theory that the virus was leaked from a Chinese virology laboratory. They do so, not only to shrug off their own responsibility for failing to curb the outbreak effectively in the US, but also to weaken China.
These US politicians hope to turn China into a country torn by war with its people living in fear. A simple look at the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region will show that is not an exaggeration. Organized rioters, armed with weapons of various kinds, have intimidated law-abiding residents and disrupted ordinary life in the SAR. There are signs that behind the violence are the black hands of US agencies, and some Hong Kong residents have protested, saying "Hong Kong gangsters are made in America".
But the dreams of the US politicians that they can turn China into another Iraq or Syria will never be realized. China will never allow any violation of its sovereignty, and the conspiracy theory about the virus being engineered in a lab has long been proven wrong by scientists worldwide.
Chinese scientists have been cooperating with their global counterparts in tracking the origin of COVID-19. However, that's no excuse for the US politicians to presume China's "guiltiness" and claim, groundlessly, that the virus originated in China. The US politicians are trying to cover up their own failure to protect people in the US and they want China to be their scapegoat.
US politicians should stop attacking China and protect the US people.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/56/158915567609.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-16 13:50

Peter Daszak, a member of the World Health Organisation (WHO) team tasked with investigating the origins of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), walks at a lakeside at a hotel in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, February 3, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
A WHO team member who recently finished his trip to China stressed that his Chinese colleagues were open and trustworthy in giving the WHO team access to critical data during their COVID-19 origin-tracing mission in Wuhan.
"As lead of animal environment working group, I found trust & openness w/ my China counterparts," Peter Daszak wrote on Twitter on the weekend in response to what he believed was a selectively misquoted report by The New York Times.
"We DID get access to critical new data throughout. We DID increase our understanding of likely spillover pathways," read Daszak's tweet.
Daszak said the WHO team obtained new data, such as who are the vendors in the Huanan seafood market and where they got their supply chains, which the team had not yet seen outside China, according to a condensed transcription of an interview with The New York Times.
"When you asked for more, the Chinese scientists would go off, and a couple of days later, they've done the analysis, and we've got new information," said Daszak, who called what the Chinese counterparts did "extremely useful".
A screenshot of Peter Daszak's twitter. [Photo/chinadaily.com.cn]
Daszak reaffirmed Chinese scientists' efforts to find out what was going on since the market reported novel coronavirus cases and closed on Dec 31, 2019.
"It was a very extensive study, swabbing every surface of this place," he said, while in the meantime regretting that few reports have revealed what the Chinese group had done.
"There was not really much information publicly about what had been done‚Ä¶They'd actually done over 900 swabs in the end, a huge amount of work," according to the interview transcription.
Daszak refuted the lab conspiracy theory regarding the origin of the COVID-19 virus. Both the WHO team and their Chinese counterparts largely agreed on the hypotheses of the "pathway (of) wildlife, through a domesticated wildlife link, into Wuhan", he claimed.
Peter Ben Embarek, head of a WHO expert team, said the Wuhan trip was "successful in many ways" at a virtual news conference from Geneva on Friday.
Experts will still continue to look for answers on this point as "there's not a clear candidate for intermediates or hosts yet," said virologist Marion Koopmans, a member of the team, at the WHO news conference.
Earlier, the international team presented their initial findings at a news conference in China, discounting the hypothesis that the virus escaped from a laboratory.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
By ZHANG YU and LI LEI in Shijiazhuang | China Daily | Updated: 2021-01-11 07:39

A courier disinfects parcels before delivering them in Shijiazhuang, Hebei province, on Sunday. The city's delivery service resumed to help replenish residents' stocks as people are restricted to their homes to curb the virus spread. WANG ZHUANGFEI/CHINA DAILY
First infection in current outbreak likely before Dec 15, provincial CDC says
Experts estimate that patient zero, the first patient in the Hebei province coronavirus outbreak recently, would have been infected before Dec 15, based on gene sequencing and an epidemiological survey.
"The risk of further spreading (the virus) still exists, and the work to trace its origins are underway," Shi Jian, head of the Hebei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention's emergency management office, said on Sunday, adding that the outbreak still hasn't reached a peak.
Genetic sequencing of the virus found in confirmed cases in Shijiazhuang and Xingtai cities in Hebei also showed the coronavirus strain is a European one and is not related to the recent domestic outbreaks, Shi said. He added that the Hebei virus was not a variant of those discovered in the United Kingdom or South Africa.
Hebei has seen infections rise in recent days, with 40 new confirmed cases and six asymptomatic carriers as of 10 am Sunday. The total number of confirmed cases in Hebei stands at 223 and asymptomatic carriers at 161, data from the provincial government showed.
According to Shi, as of 2 pm Saturday, 119 people who had close contact or secondary contact with confirmed cases in Hebei have been located in 20 provinces. Their COVID-19 tests were all negative.
Both the provincial capital of Shijiazhuang and Xingtai, where all the cases have been found, were placed in lockdown last week to contain the virus spread. Members of the public have also been barred from making unnecessary trips.
However, couriers and other delivery personnel in Shijiazhuang were allowed to resume work on Sunday after their test results were negative. Authorities have put a number of measures in place to ensure residents' daily needs are met.
Over 25,000 delivery personnel have completed a second round of nucleic acid testing, said Ma Yujun, acting mayor of Shijiazhuang.
Zhao Qi, head of a logistics station in Shijiazhuang's Xinhua district, said most of his delivery workers had returned to their jobs after finishing two rounds of testing.
Li Qing, one of the deliverymen, said he was a bit worried when he was told to stop working and quarantine at home late on Tuesday.
"But now I am relieved, because our jobs are in urgent demand during the lockdown, " Li said.
Lyu Yue, Li's colleague, praised the local government for allowing couriers to resume work.
"To restore the courier service is to guarantee people's well-being," he said.
To further contain the spread, Nangong city in Xingtai has begun a second round of mass nucleic acid testing. Shijiazhuang will start citywide testing and expects to be finished in two days, which is faster than the first round, the deputy mayor of the city, Meng Xianghong, said on Sunday night.
The newly built Huoyan, or Fire Eye, laboratory will help process the tests. The white, tent-like inflatable facilities serve as temporary negative pressure isolation labs and can help test up to 1 million samples a day, said Zhao Lijian, vice-president of BGI Genomics, a private biotech company based in Shenzhen, Guangdong province.
Its construction was completed late on Friday in less than 20 hours.
https://img2.chinadaily.com .cn/images/202101/11/5ffb902aa31024adbdadcccf.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-02 15:58
A 3D scan of SARS-CoV-2 virus created by design lab Nanographics is seen in this handout released in Vienna, Austria, January 20, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
A laboratory in Cambodia has found close relatives of the pathogen in samples stored in a freezer for more than a decade, according to a report from South China Morning Post.
Two viruses discovered in the samples were taken from horseshoe bats in northeastern Cambodia in 2010 and were identified in research released on last Tuesday. They have a 92.6 percent similarity to SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19), according to the report.
This latest discovery was made by researchers at the Pasteur Institute in Cambodia in Phnom Penh, SCMP reported.
Little is known about how the outbreak started, but scientists suspect the virus may have originated in bats and then spread to humans directly or through an intermediary animal.
The hunt for the origin has led many labs to back-test stored animal samples to look for traces of similar viruses in order to provide more clues.
According to the report, the findings from Phnom Penh, which have not been peer reviewed, "suggest that Southeast Asia represents a key area to consider in the ongoing search for the origins of SARS-CoV-2, and in future surveillance for coronaviruses", said the researchers, including scientists from Sorbonne University and Pasteur Institute in France and the University of California, Davis in the US.
The viruses were picked up in swabs taken from Shamel's horseshoe bats as part of a project backed by UNESCO and the samples were stored at -80 C, the paper said.
Of the 430 samples they retested, 16 tested positive for coronaviruses. Two of them were nearly identical strains that turned out to be the close SARS-CoV-2 relatives, the report said.
The researchers said their analysis suggested the geographic distribution of viruses related to SARS-CoV-2 was much wider than previously understood.
This "possibly reflects a lack of sampling in Southeast Asia", they said, calling for more surveillance of the area, which is home to both a high diversity of bats and wildlife as well as wildlife trade and land-use change ‚Äì known drivers of emerging infectious diseases.
Members of the WHO team in China have expressed similar views on the need for more regional data, according to the report.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
By ANGUS MCNEICE in London | China Daily | Updated: 2020-07-03 09:58

A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Tests point to global circulation for months before first case confirmed
Like mini time capsules, frozen sewage samples can provide a wealth of information about the health and habits of people living within the catchment areas of wastewater treatment plants.
Levels of illicit drug use as well as pharmaceuticals and other chemical compounds are monitored in communities around the world through techniques in the field known as wastewater epidemiology.
Experts are now calling for more rigorous detection of the novel coronavirus in sewage systems, as evidence mounts that the pathogen was already widely circulating the globe well before the first known cases of infection in China.
Recent retrospective analysis of sewage from Spain, Italy and Brazil have returned positive tests for the novel coronavirus in samples taken as far back as March last year, well in advance of the first documented instance of COVID-19 in China in late December.
On Monday, Brazilian researchers announced they had found fragments of genetic material from the virus in a sewage sample collected on Nov 27 in the city of Florianopolis. The finding predates the first case of COVID-19 in Brazil by 91 days and is also ahead of the initial confirmed infections in the United States which came in late January.
Italian scientists announced similar results on Thursday for samples collected in Milan and Turin on Dec 18, and analysis of Barcelona sewage retrieved on March 12 also showed signs of the virus, according to a study published in mid-June.
The findings have paradoxically shed light on and further complicated what we know about the origins of the novel coronavirus pandemic. They have also provoked calls for more project funding and increased international collaboration among researchers involved in the unglamorous yet valuable field of sewage science.
Techniques to measure drugs and chemicals in sewage have been perfected over the last two decades, while those that monitor potential outbreaks of disease are more recent.
Scientists in several countries began testing for the novel coronavirus in wastewater in the spring, after it was confirmed the virus could be detected in feces and urine. In March, researchers in the Netherlands found the virus in samples collected at a wastewater plant near Utrecht, weeks before the city's first confirmed case of COVID-19.
"Even if people are in the early stage of infection, without symptoms, their stool can still contain virus particles," said Yang Zhugen, a lecturer in sensor technology at the Cranfield Water Science Institute in the United Kingdom.
Yang has worked in wastewater epidemiology technology for a decade, and recently developed a device that can test for novel coronavirus on site at treatment plants. He is participating in a project launched on Thursday by the UK government that is monitoring the novel coronavirus in sewage across the country, so authorities can get ahead of potential localized outbreaks. Yang was not involved in the studies from Italy, Brazil or Spain.
"This methodology is very promising," Yang said. "The findings from Italy and Spain are very interesting. I would be keen to see more to confirm the results and more strong evidence to conclude the origin of this virus, because I think everybody is interested to know where it is from and how it spread through the world."
Yang says that if the findings from the University of Barcelona-led study are validated, it could be said with confidence that novel coronavirus was present in Europe more than nine months before the first confirmed case of human infection in China.
He provides the caveat that there is no way of knowing if the virus particles found in the samples were excreted by humans or other animal species harboring the pathogen. He also said that in order to corroborate the findings, more robust testing needs to be done.
Such studies initially use methods that analyze very small fragments of genetic material. Closely related organismsÔºçincluding viruses in the same familyÔºçcan have similar segments of DNA and RNA, meaning researchers must run repeated and varied tests on several samples to reach clear conclusions.
The study in Italy, which was led by the Italian National Institute of Health, used two separate methods of genetic analysis, and also tested more gene sequences from a larger number of samples than the Barcelona study.
More research needed
Yang said he finds the Italian study "quite convincing", and he would like to see more extensive testing of the Barcelona sewage samples. He said in both cases, whole sequencing of the virus would provide evidence of a higher standard.
Davey Jones, a professor of soil and environmental science at Bangor University, agrees that more tests are needed. Jones has run extensive novel coronavirus testing in wastewater in Wales and is also part of the government-backed project launched in the UK on Thursday.
"The Italy study looks more credible just in terms of timelines," Jones said.
"The reports are interesting, but I think more research is needed to definitively say this is really the case for the Spanish dataset, specifically they need to rule out the possibility of laboratory contamination. They also need to sequence the strain of the virus before we can really say that their results are correct."
Oliver Pybus, a professor of evolution and infectious disease at the University of Oxford, said that positive tests results from November onwards align with the majority of research undertaken into the origins of the pandemic.
"The results of the Italy study are more consistent with all the other information we have about the epidemic history," Pybus said.
Yang said that labs around the world need to collaborate closely and agree on standardized methods as they use this "exciting but emergent" way of tracking the spread of the novel coronavirus.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/33/159374929459.jpeg
---
By Angus McNeice in London | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-09 03:14

File photo: the emblem of the WHO. [Photo/Agencies]
The novel coronavirus belongs to a group of viruses that are found in bats, an expert from the World Health Organization said at a press briefing amid international debate on the origins of the disease.
Peter Ben Embarek, a WHO scientist who studies animal-to-human transmission of diseases, said that there is evidence that cats and other felines are susceptible to the disease. He said it is important to establish which animals can get infected in order to monitor potential reservoirs for the virus.
Embarek said it is safe to say that a traditional food market in Wuhan played some role in the spread of the disease, though the WHO is yet to determine the source of the disease or which exact animal species it came from initially.
He said that the novel coronavirus finds its origins in animals, much in the same way that previous outbreaks of diseases, including SARS, MERS and types of bird and swine flu,began through close contact between humans and other species. Embarek was speaking at aUN news conference on Friday, amid ongoing discussions around the globe about the origins of the novel coronavirus.
Some politicians in the United States and elsewhere have promoted the theory that the novel coronavirus was engineered or manipulated by scientists in a laboratory setting.
"The origin is not unique, we have seen several of these events," Embarek said. "It is not unusual to have these events but of course this one is totally unique in the scale and size of how it has impacted public health and our daily life in recent months."
Embarek said further research needs to be done to uncover the precise source of the disease. He said that while the food market in Wuhan played a role in the spread of the disease, the WHO does not know if the virus first infected humans at the market, or if the spread of infection was amplified there. They also do not know if an animal was the first to spread the virus at the market, or if an infected person arrived at the market and transmitted it to other people.
Embarek said that it is vital that sanitary standards are improved at traditional food markets, which act as a source of fresh produce for millions around the world.
"Food markets are often overcrowded, in poor condition, and maintaining hygiene and food safety is difficult, so it's not surprising that these events happen," he said. "It is therefore critically important that we pay more attention and give more resources to improving traditional food markets."
He said that more research needs to be done to establish what animal species are susceptible to COVID-19 infection. This is because some species could act as reservoirs for the virus, and potentially trigger future outbreaks.
Cats are known to be susceptible to infection and can pass on infection to each other. Embarek said there is some evidence that dogs are also susceptible, but to a much lesser extent. He said that pigs and poultry are not known to carry the virus. More work needs to be done to establish susceptibility in other farm animals.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/42/158898984095.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-02 13:28

A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The US right-wing media and supporters of US President Donald Trump have fanned the latest round of speculation that the novel coronavirus of COVID-19 came from a laboratory in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, according to a recent news report on BuzzFeed News.
The claim that the Wuhan Institute of Virology could have been the origin of the novel coronavirus seems to be emanating from a misleading video, according to Wilson Center disinformation researcher Nina Jankowicz.
On April 14, Washington Post columnist Josh Rogin published excerpts from two-year-old US State Department communications in which US diplomats described what they saw as safety issues at the Wuhan lab.
On April 15, Fox News published a story claiming COVID-19 "likely" originated in the Wuhan lab.
Following the reports, the right-wing media machine began to roll out unproven articles or supportive pieces for the claim, such as in the Washington Examiner and the American Conservative.
Jankowicz said that putting the blame on a Wuhan lab helps the Trump administration find a scapegoat.
It becomes more politically convenient for Trump and his administration, she said.
Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, commented on Twitter about how the Trump administration has groped to find a direct link between the coronavirus and Chinese labs.
Konyndyk is also critical of the Washington Post's Rogin for publishing excerpts of a two-year-old cable, rather than the cable in its entirety.
"It's irresponsible for political reporters like Rogin [to] uncritically regurgitate a secret 'cable' without asking a single virologist or ecologist or making any attempt to understand the scientific context," tweeted Columbia University virologist Angela Rasmussen.
Vincent Racaniello, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Columbia University, said that there was no way this could escape a lab and if this escaped a Wuhan lab, [the researchers] would have all gotten sick.
Racaniello said the two claims ‚Äî that the virus could be human-made and that it could have escaped from a laboratory ‚Äî had no scientific backing. "No human could ever design this virus."
"All available evidence suggests the virus has an animal origin and is not [a] manipulated or constructed virus in a lab or somewhere else," WHO spokesperson Fadela Chaib said on April 21, echoing the results of a study published in March.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/158839947648.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-08 07:20

Delegates from embassies in China and international organizations attend a briefing in Beijing last month. The briefing, co-hosted by Chinese government and WHO, shares China's experience on COVID-19 response via livestreaming. [Photo/China Daily]
Editor's note: China on Monday published a timeline on how it has shared information and advanced international cooperation in the fight against the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic. Full text below:
The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic is a major public health emergency that has spread the fastest, caused the most extensive infections and been the hardest to contain since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949.
Under the strong leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core, China has taken the most comprehensive, the strictest and the most thorough prevention and control measures to battle the epidemic. In their tenacious fight against the coronavirus, 1.4 billion Chinese people have pulled together in tough times and paid a tremendous price and sacrificed a lot.
With the joint efforts of the whole nation, the positive trend in preventing and controlling the epidemic in China has been constantly consolidated and expanded, and the restoration of normal production and everyday life has been quickened.
The pandemic has recently been spreading rapidly across the world, posing a formidable challenge to global public health security. According to data from the World Health Organization (WHO), COVID-19 had affected more than 200 countries and regions with over 1.13 million confirmed cases by April 5,2020.
Virus knows no national borders, and the epidemic distinguishes no races. Only with solidarity and by cooperation can the international community prevail over the pandemic and safeguard the common homeland of humanity. Upholding the vision of building a community with a shared future for humanity, China has been timely releasing information on COVID-19 since the onset of the epidemic in an open, transparent and responsible manner, unreservedly sharing with the WHO and the international community its experience in epidemic response and medical treatment, and strengthening cooperation on scientific research. It has also provided assistance to all parties to the best of its ability. All these efforts have been applauded and widely recognized by the international community.
Based on media reports and information from the National Health Commission, scientific research institutions and other departments, Xinhua News Agency sorted out the main facts China has taken in the global joint anti-virus efforts to timely release epidemic information, share prevention and control experience, and advance international exchanges and cooperation on epidemic response.
The following timeline was arranged in chronological order.
Late December 2019
¬∑ The Wuhan Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in central China's Hubei Province detected cases of pneumonia of unknown cause.
Dec. 30, 2019
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission issued an urgent notification to medical institutions under its jurisdiction, ordering efforts to appropriately treat patients with pneumonia of unknown cause.
Dec. 31, 2019
¬∑ The National Health Commission (NHC) made arrangements in the wee hours, sending a working group and an expert team to Wuhan to guide epidemic response and conduct on-site investigations.
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission released a briefing on its website about the pneumonia outbreak in the city, confirming 27 cases and telling the public not to go to enclosed public places or gather. It suggested wearing face masks when going out.
¬∑ Starting Dec. 31, 2019, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission released briefings on the pneumonia outbreak in accordance with the law.
January 2020
Jan. 1
¬∑ The NHC set up a leading group to determine the emergency response to the epidemic. The group convened meetings on a daily basis since then.
Jan. 2
¬∑ The Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) and the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) received the first batch of samples of four patients from Hubei Province and began pathogen identification.
¬∑ The NHC came up with a set of guidelines on early discovery, early diagnosis and early quarantine for the prevention and control of the viral pneumonia of unknown cause.
Jan. 3
¬∑ Starting Jan. 3, China has been regularly informing the WHO, relevant countries and regions and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan about the pneumonia outbreak.
¬∑ China began to inform the United States of the pneumonia outbreak and response measures on a regular basis.
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated briefing on its website about the situation of viral pneumonia of unknown cause, reporting a total of 44 cases of viral pneumonia of unknown cause.
¬∑ The NHC organized the China CDC and three other institutions to carry out parallel laboratory testing of the samples for pathogen identification.
¬∑ The NHC and the Health Commission of Hubei Province jointly worked out nine documents on the outbreak, including a trial version of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of viral pneumonia of unknown cause.
Jan. 4
¬∑ The NHC and relevant health departments in Hubei Province issued a treatment manual for viral pneumonia of unknown cause to all medical institutions in Wuhan City, and provided citywide training.
¬∑ Head of the China CDC talked over phone with director of the U.S.CDC about the pneumonia outbreak. The two sides agreed to keep in close contact for information sharing and technological cooperation.
Jan. 5
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated briefing on the situation of viral pneumonia of unknown cause, reporting a total of 59 cases. Laboratory test results ruled out respiratory pathogens, such as influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus, and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus, as the cause.
¬∑ China informed the WHO about the outbreak updates.
¬∑ The WHO released its first briefing on cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan.
Jan. 6
¬∑ The NHC gave a briefing on cases of pneumonia of unknown cause at a national health conference, calling for efforts to strengthen monitoring, analysis and study, and make timely response.
Jan. 7
¬∑ Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, made instructions on epidemic response when presiding over a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee.
¬∑ The China CDC succeeded in isolating the first novel coronavirus strain.
Jan. 8
¬∑ An expert evaluation team from the NHC initially identified a new coronavirus as the cause of the epidemic.
¬∑ Heads of China and U.S. CDCs talked over phone to discuss technological exchanges and cooperation.
Jan. 9
¬∑ An expert team from the NHC made public of the pathogen, saying a new type of coronavirus was initially identified as the cause of the viral pneumonia in Wuhan.
¬∑ China informed the WHO about the epidemic, sharing with the WHO the initial progress in determining the cause of the viral pneumonia in Wuhan.
¬∑ The WHO released on its website a statement regarding a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, saying that preliminary identification of a novel coronavirus in a short period of time is a notable achievement.
Jan. 10
¬∑ Research institutions including the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) developed testing kits. Wuhan City organized tests of all relevant cases admitted at hospitals in the city.
¬∑ Head of the NHC Ma Xiaowei talked over phone with WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus about the epidemic response.
¬∑ Head of China CDC exchanged information over phone with WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.
¬∑ The China CDC shared with the WHO the specific primers and probes for detecting the novel coronavirus.
Jan. 11
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated briefing on the situation of viral pneumonia of unknown cause.
Jan. 12
¬∑ The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission changed the name of "viral pneumonia of unknown cause "to "pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus" for the first time in a briefing.
¬∑ The China CDC, the CAMS and the WIV under the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), as designated agencies of the NHC, submitted to the WHO the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), which was published by the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) and shared globally.
¬∑ The NHC shared with the WHO about information on the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus.
Jan. 13
¬∑ The NHC held a meeting to instruct Wuhan authorities to further strengthen social management measures and body temperature monitoring of people at ports and stations, as well as reduce crowd gathering.
¬∑ Delegations from the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan visited Wuhan (until Jan. 14.)
¬∑ Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated the outbreak briefing on its official website, saying Wuhan had reported a total of 41 cases of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus as of Jan. 12.
¬∑ The WHO issued on its official website a statement on the discovery of the novel coronavirus cases in Thailand, pointing out that China's sharing of the genome sequence enabled more countries to quickly diagnose patients.
Jan. 14
¬∑ The NHC held a national teleconference, making arrangements for Hubei Province and Wuhan City to strengthen epidemic prevention and control, while ordering the whole country to prepare for epidemic prevention and response.
Jan. 15
¬∑ The NHC unveiled the first version of guidelines on diagnosis and treatment for pneumonia caused by novel coronavirus, along with the guidelines on prevention and control measures.
Jan.16
¬∑ After the optimization of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) diagnostic reagents was complete, Wuhan City took proactive measures to screen all patients treated in fever clinics or under medical observation in 69 secondary or above hospitals.
¬∑ Foreign journalists asked about the epidemic for the first time at a press conference held by the Chinese foreign ministry in Beijing. Foreign ministry spokesperson said that China has timely informed the WHO and other international organizations of the outbreak and kept close communication with them.
Jan. 17
¬∑ The NHC sent seven inspection teams to different provincial-level regions to instruct local epidemic prevention and control work.
Jan. 18
¬∑ The NHC organized and sent a high-level expert team, headed by Zhong Nanshan, to Wuhan City to carry out on-site investigation into the prevention and control work (until Jan. 19).
¬∑ The NHC released the second version of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment for the pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus.
Jan. 19
¬∑ The NHC distributed nucleic acid testing reagents to health departments across the country.
¬∑ The China CDC communicated with the U.S. CDC on epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated the outbreak briefing on its official website, saying as of Jan. 17, Wuhan had reported a total of 62 confirmed cases, including 19 cases discharged after recovery, eight cases with severe symptoms, and two deaths.
Jan. 20
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, has made important instructions on the outbreak of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus in Wuhan City and other places in Hubei Province, stressing the Party committees and governments at all levels must put people's safety and health as the top priority, make thorough plans, take effective measures to curb the spread of the virus, timely release information and deepen international cooperation.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Premier Li Keqiang chaired an executive meeting of the State Council to make further arrangements on the prevention and control work of the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus.
¬∑ A teleconference of the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council was held in Beijing, at which Vice Premier Sun Chunlan stressed local authorities must take their responsibilities, strengthen the prevention and control measures, secure people's health, and maintain normal production and everyday life order.
¬∑ Wuhan Municipal Health Commission updated the outbreak briefing on its official website: as of 10 p.m. on Jan. 19, Wuhan reported a total of 198 cases of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus, with 25 cured and discharged cases, three deaths.
¬∑ The NHC held a press conference for the high-level expert team headed by Zhong Nanshan, who on the team's behalf confirmed human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus and called on people not to go to Wuhan except for extremely important reasons.
¬∑ The NHC released a statement to classify the novel coronavirus pneumonia as a category B infectious disease under the law on prevention and control of infectious diseases, but take preventive and control measures of category A infectious diseases; the novel coronavirus pneumonia was put under quarantinable infectious disease management according to the Frontier Health and Quarantine Law.
¬∑ The NHC published the second version of guidelines on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus pneumonia.
¬∑ Researchers from City University of Hong Kong published a genetic analysis on the bioRxiv preprint platform, suggesting what animals that serve as the transmission vehicle of the 2019-nCoV remains to be identified.
Jan. 21
¬∑ The NHC started to update via its official website and its new media platform the epidemic information of the previous day on a daily basis. It had updated 71 times by March 31. Starting on Feb. 3, the English official website of the NHC started releasing epidemic information simultaneously, updating the data for 58 times by March 31.
¬∑ A foreign ministry spokesperson said China will, upon invitation from the WHO, send representatives to attend an International Health Regulations (IHR) Emergency Committee meeting.
¬∑ The People's Government of Guangdong Province held a press briefing on the pneumonia outbreak and epidemic prevention and control measures. Zhong Nanshan told the briefing that "since it is known that the virus can be transmitted from people to people, one thing to do is to strictly quarantine patients and track close contacts, which is probably the most important thing," adding that there has been thus far no targeted and effective drugs against the novel coronavirus.
¬∑ The WHO published a statement on its official website saying on Jan.20-21, a WHO delegation conducted a field visit to Wuhan to learn about the response to 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) and visited the Wuhan Tianhe Airport, Zhongnan hospital, Hubei provincial CDC.
Chinese experts shared with Gauden Galea, the WHO Representative in China, Olowokure Babatunde and other members of the delegation a range of protocols that will be used in developing international guidelines, including case definitions, clinical management, and infection control among others.
¬∑ The China CDC Weekly reported for the first time the epidemiological characteristics of the novel coronavirus, displaying the whole genome sequence of three strains of the virus, in an article titled "Note from the Field: A Novel Coronavirus Genome Identified in a Cluster of Pneumonia CasesÔºçWuhan, China 2019-2020."
¬∑ Researchers from the Institut Pasteur of Shanghai under the CAS, the Institute of Military Medicine under the Academy of Military Sciences, and the CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences published a paper in the English version of "Science China Life Science," titled "Evolution of the novel coronavirus from the ongoing Wuhan outbreak and modeling of its spike protein for risk of human transmission," evaluating the potential human-to-human transmission capacity of the virus, providing scientific theoretical basis for confirming the source and transmission route of infection as soon as possible and formulating prevention and control strategies.
Jan. 22
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with French President Emmanuel Macron at request.
Macron said that France supports China in actively dealing with the epidemic and is willing to enhance health cooperation with the Chinese side.
Xi said that since the outbreak, China has taken strict measures in prevention, control and treatment, and has been releasing relevant information to the public and keeping the World Health Organization as well as relevant countries and regions informed in a timely manner.
China is willing to work with the international community to effectively tackle the spread of the disease and maintain global health security, Xi said.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with German Chancellor Angela Merkel at request.
Merkel said Germany appreciates China's efforts to respond in a timely manner, stay open and transparent, and actively carry out international cooperation, adding that Germany is willing to provide China with support and assistance.
Xi expressed his gratitude to Germany, stressing that China is willing to strengthen cooperation with Germany, the WHO and the international community.
¬∑ The NHC published the third version of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia, detailing the use of traditional Chinese medicine in treatment.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference about epidemic and the prevention and control work, advising people outside Wuhan not to go to the city in principle and Wuhan residents not to leave the city without special reasons.
¬∑ At the invitation of the WHO, China attended an International Health Regulations (IHR) Emergency Committee meeting along with other countries affected by the epidemic. Participating countries, the WHO and experts shared information on the epidemic and conducted scientific research and assessment of the epidemic at the meeting.
¬∑ China's NHC received a notification from the United States saying the first confirmed case had been reported in the United States.
¬∑ The China CDC weekly for the first time reported the epidemiological investigation results of the pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus in Wuhan in an article titled "Note from the Field: An Outbreak of NCIP (2019-nCoV) Infection in ChinaÔºçWuhan, Hubei Province 2019-2020."
¬∑ Researchers from the MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research and the Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, posted their sequence analysis of the 2019-nCoV on a medical discussion forum Virological, suggesting the novel coronavirus may have originated in bats rather than snakes.
¬∑ The 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource (2019nCoVR), a database develop by the China National Center for Bioinformation, was officially launched to release worldwide novel coronavirus genome and information on variation analysis.
Jan. 23
¬∑ Wuhan epidemic prevention and control headquarters issued a notice to shut down the city's outbound channels at airports and railway stations starting 10 a.m. on Jan. 23.
¬∑ In an emergency notice, the Ministry of Transport demanded other parts of the country suspend the passenger traffic into Wuhan by road or by waterway.
¬∑ The NHC and other five departments jointly issued a statement on preventing the transmission of the novel coronavirus-caused pneumonia via transportation, requiring efforts for health management of vehicles, trains, planes and other means of transport, as well as key places including stations, airports and docks to prevent to the greatest extent the spread of the epidemic.
¬∑ Researchers from WIV under the CAS, Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital and the Hubei Provincial CDC found that the full-length genome sequences of the 2019-nCoV shares 79.5 percent of SARS-CoV sequence, which was published on the bioRxiv preprint platform.
Jan. 24
¬∑ Researchers from the Beijingbased China-Japan Friendship Hospital, the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and the Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital published an article in the Lancet, titled "Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China."
¬∑ WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on social media thanked the Chinese government for its cooperation and transparency, saying that the Chinese government has been successful in isolating and sequencing the virus very quickly and has shared that genetic sequence with the WHO and the international community.
¬∑ The National Microbiology Data Center and the National Pathogen Resources Collection Center jointly established the Novel Coronavirus National Science and Technology Resource Service System, releasing the first electron microscope picture of the virus and strain information.
Jan. 25
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the outbreak of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus, making further study of and new arrangements on issues especially related to the treatment of patients.
The meeting decided to set up a CPC Central Committee leading group for the epidemic response work under the leadership of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee.
The CPC Central Committee decided to send guidance groups to Hubei Province and other seriously affected areas to enhance the frontline prevention and control work.
¬∑ The NHC unveiled six guidelines on public prevention for general use, tourism, households, public places, public transport and self observation at home.
¬∑ The NHC replied in a letter to WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, welcoming the WHO to send a group of international experts to cooperate with China to strengthen epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Led by the China CDC, several hospitals and research institutes jointly published a paper, titled "The novel coronavirus carried by Chinese pneumonia patients in 2019," revealing their finding of a Betacoronavirus that had never been seen before through whole genome sequencing, which became the seventh member of the coronavirus family that infects human.
Jan. 26
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, also a member of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, and head of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the response to the novel coronavirus outbreak, presided over the leading group's meeting. The meeting made further epidemic prevention and control arrangements according to instructions by Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference to invite the NHC head Ma Xiaowei to brief on the epidemic and introduce the joint prevention and control work.
Ma told the press conference recent clinical results showed that the novel coronavirus has more transmissibility and the epidemic situation is grim and complicated, adding that the country is at a crucial time in the prevention and control of the outbreak.
Ma said that the source of infection is yet to be found and studies are still needed to understand its pathogenicity, adding that the possibility of virus changes over time can't be ruled out.
¬∑ The NHC and relevant departments jointly provided detailed information to the WHO Western Pacific Region on measures taken in Wuhan which may restrict international travel, including the suspended operation of city buses, subways and ferries, as well as public health reasons for the above measures.
Jan. 27
¬∑ A guidance group, sent by the CPC Central Committee and headed by Vice Premier Sun Chunlan, arrived in Wuhan to guide the epidemic prevention and control work in Hubei Province, repeatedly demanding open and transparent release of epidemic information.
¬∑ The NHC released the fourth version of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing to give briefings on the development of the community-based prevention measures to curb the novel coronavirus epidemic.
Such press conference has been held every day since Jan. 27, releasing updated data on a daily basis, including new confirmed cases, people discharged from hospital, people who had had close contact with infected patients and were discharged from medical observation, severe cases, deaths, suspected cases, people receiving treatment in quarantine, close contacts still under medical observation, accumulative data on the Chinese mainland as well as data reported in the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions and Taiwan.
As of March 31, 65 press conferences under the mechanism had been held on a wide range of topics, including the epidemic prevention and control, treatment and scientific research. Officials of 69 departments answered 779 questions raised by Chinese and foreign reporters at the conferences.
¬∑ Head of China's NHC Ma Xiaowei talked over phone with U.S. secretary of health and human services Alex Azar at request, discussing the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak.
Jan. 28
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping met with WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in Beijing.
"The epidemic is a devil. We will not let it hide," Xi said, stressing the Chinese government has released information about the epidemic in a timely, open, transparent and responsible manner, actively responded to concerns of all sides, and enhanced cooperation with the international community.
Xi noted that China is ready to work with the WHO as well as the international community to safeguard regional and global public health security.
¬∑ The NHC released the third-edition guidelines on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus pneumonia.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on details of medical workers sent from other parts of China to Hubei Province to help fight the epidemic.
¬∑ The Ministry of Foreign Affairs held a briefing for foreign embassies and missions in China on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak. The NHC and the foreign ministry briefed on the current situation and China's efforts to prevent and control the epidemic, and answered questions. Foreign diplomats and representatives present made positive comments on the briefing held by the Chinese side, and appreciated the Chinese government's firm and decisive measures in handling the epidemic, as well as the open, transparent and responsible attitude it has shown. They said that they are willing to strengthen communication and coordination with the Chinese side, and cooperate with China in prevention and control efforts to jointly safeguard regional and international health security.
Jan. 29
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the response to the novel coronavirus outbreak to further study the prevention and control of the epidemic, and roll out targeted and enhanced measures to curb the epidemic.
¬∑ Yang Jiechi, a member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, also head of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee, spoke over phone with U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Pompeo expressed appreciation for China's timely response to U.S. concerns after the epidemic.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing to advise the public on the prevention of the novel coronavirus outbreak.
¬∑ A thesis on the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus by a research team of the WIV of the CAS was formally accepted by the journal Nature.
¬∑ The China CDC published an epidemiological feature analysis of the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak in the New England Journal of Medicine.
¬∑ Researchers from the Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and WIV under the CAS published an article in the Lancet, titled "Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study", revealing data regarding clinical features and treatment of novel coronavirus patients.
¬∑ Researchers from the China CDC published a paper in the Lancet, titled "Genomic characterization and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding," analyzing 10 genome sequences of 2019-nCoV obtained from nine confirmed patients in Wuhan.
¬∑ Research team of Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica under the CAS published an article on the bioRxiv preprint platform, revealing research results about drugs by computer-simulated screening.
¬∑ Researchers of the Institute of Automation under the CAS published an article on the medRxiv preprint platform, estimating the development trend of the epidemic based on the daily reported novel coronavirus cases by the China CDC.
Jan. 30
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on policies to ensure transportation of anti-epidemic materials in the fight against the novel coronavirus outbreak.
¬∑ China's NHC notified the U.S.side that American experts are welcomed to join the China-WHO joint mission. The U.S. side responded the same day and expressed their appreciation.
¬∑ The China CDC published a paper in the New England Journal of Medicine, titled "Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia," revealing the epidemiological characteristics of the 2019-nCoV on the basis of data collected from the first 425 confirmed cases.
Jan. 31
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, making arrangements for the transportation for the post-Spring Festival trips while enhancing the epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ The NHC released guidelines on gathering patients infected with novel coronavirus that show severe symptoms into designated medical institutions for treatment, in order to minimize the fatality rate and increase the recovery rate.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on the epidemic prevention and control work concerning major groups and by community organizations.
February 2020
Feb. 1
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese Premier Li Keqiang spoke over phone with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, noting the Chinese government and people have confidence, resolution and ability to win the battle against the epidemic.
Li said China is willing to strengthen information, policy and technology exchanges, and carry out relevant cooperation with EU and the international community.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing giving briefings on the epidemic prevention and control work concerning pregnant women, infants and nurseries.
Feb. 2
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, urging authorities in some provincial-level regions to flexibly arrange their work to battle the epidemic, step up prevention and control efforts and ensure market supply while pledging greater medical supplies support to key areas in Hubei Province.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing providing epidemic prevention guidance for people exposed to public places, public transport and other potential coronavirus risks.
As revealed by China CDC experts at the press conference, the finding of novel coronavirus from fecal samples of confirmed cases showed the virus can exist and replicate in digestive tract, but it needs further epidemiological research to determine whether the virus can transmit through the fecal-oral route or respiratory droplets-formed aerosol.
¬∑ Head of China's NHC Ma Xiaowei sent a letter to the U.S. secretary of health and human services Alex Azar, further exchanging views on bilateral cooperation in health as well as epidemic prevention and control.
Feb. 3
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear briefings from the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak and from relevant departments, and study epidemic prevention and control work in the near future. Xi's speech was later published on the Qiushi Journal, a flagship magazine of the CPC Central Committee, in its fourth issue of 2020.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference on ensuring supplies of crucial anti-epidemic medical materials and daily necessities. At the press conference, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology said about 60 percent of production capacity of domestic mask manufacturers have been resumed. Though N95 masks were in shortage, the supply would keep on increasing through expanded domestic production and increased international procurement.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about provision of psychological assistance through online or hotline counseling services amid efforts to prevent and control the epidemic.
¬∑ During the first online press conference of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a ministry spokesperson gave briefings on donations of epidemic prevention and control supplies China has received. The spokesperson said China attaches great importance to the lives and health of Chinese and foreign nationals in Wuhan, and has timely taken effective measures to address their concerns and needs.
¬∑ The NHC introduced the epidemic situation in China and presented suggestions for further cooperation at a video conference held among senior health officials from China, ASEAN, Japan and the Republic of Korea (ROK).
¬∑ The WHO Executive Board convened its 146th session meeting in Geneva, during which China's deputy permanent representative to the UN Office at Geneva and other international organizations in Switzerland called for concerted efforts from the international community to combat the epidemic.
¬∑ As of Feb. 3, China has given the United States briefings on the epidemic information and control measures in China for 30 times, including sharing with U.S. CDC project manager in China information about China's diagnosis and treatment guidelines, prevention and control guidelines, and the linkage of the novel coronavirus database that China shares with the world in real time.
¬∑ Officials of the China CDC welcomed a U.S. expert from the Columbia University.
¬∑ Researchers from Fudan University, Central Hospital of Wuhan, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention of China CDC, Wuhan CDC, and the University of Sydney published a paper in the journal Nature, titled "A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China."
Feb. 4
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, rolling out measures to improve the admission and cure rates, reduce the infection and fatality rates of patients in Wuhan, and further improve supplies of medical materials and life necessities.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on the treatment of novel coronavirus-infected patients with severe symptoms.
As revealed by the NHC at the press conference, the number of confirmed cases on the Chinese mainland had reached 20,438 as of Feb. 3, with a total of 425 deaths and a fatality rate of 2.1 percent. The NHC vowed to concentrate resources to improve the admission and cure rates and reduce the infection and fatality rates.
¬∑ Head of the China CDC spoke over phone with director of the U.S.National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to exchange information on the epidemic.
¬∑ The Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health and Harvard University had first discussion over scientific research cooperation to fight the novel coronavirus epidemic.
¬∑ Researchers from WIV under the CAS and the Institute of Military Medicine under the Academy of Military Sciences released a paper in the journal Cell Research, titled "Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro."
Feb. 5
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that President Xi Jinping presided over the third meeting of the Commission for Overall Law-based Governance of the CPC Central Committee, and delivered an important speech, stressing that under the CPC Central Committee's centralized and unified leadership, ensuring the safety and health of the people should always be prioritized.
Xi, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, and head of the Commission for Overall Law-based Governance of the CPC Central Committee, called for greater legislative, law enforcement, judicial and law observance efforts to strengthen the capacity to carry out law-based epidemic prevention and control. Excerpts of Xi's speech at the meeting were published by the Qiushi Journal in its fifth issue of 2020.
¬∑ President Xi Jinping met with Cambodian Prime Minister Samdech Techo Hun Sen in Beijing, saying a friend in need is a friend indeed as the Cambodian people stand with the Chinese people at this special moment.
Xi said Cambodian King Norodom Sihamoni and his mother, former Queen Norodom Monineath Sihanouk, had specially extended sympathy and support to the Chinese side.
The Cambodian prime minister had expressed strong support to China on many occasions and even made a special tour to China, which demonstrated unbreakable friendship and mutual trust between the two nations and showcased the essence of building a community of shared future of the two countries, Xi said.
¬∑ The NHC made revisions and published the fifth edition of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of the novel coronavirus patients.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on the latest development of work involving production, dispatch and imports of medical supplies, and briefing on the fifth-edition guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of the novel coronavirus patients.
¬∑ While meeting with a delegation of Russian experts on epidemic prevention, a Chinese foreign ministry official said China is committed to maintaining global public health security and conducting international cooperation in epidemic prevention and control in the principles of openness and transparency. The epidemic prevention exchanges and joint research between the two countries will definitely help win the fight against the epidemic.
¬∑ While meeting with French Ambassador to China Laurent Bili, a Chinese foreign ministry official briefed him on the latest situation of the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak, saying that the life and health of French citizens in China are guaranteed and it is hoped that France will view and support the Chinese side's work in a rational, calm and scientific manner.
¬∑ Chinese foreign ministry hosted the second briefing on the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak for diplomatic missions in China. The briefing was held online and attended by representatives of more than 180 diplomatic missions. Officials from the NHC and the foreign ministry gave briefings on the epidemic situation and the containment measures taken by the Chinese government, and answered questions of concern to the diplomatic envoys.
Feb. 6
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke over phone with Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud at request, noting China will keep on working with Saudi Arabia and other countries to jointly handle the epidemic, and maintain public health security in the region and around the world in openness and transparency.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, making arrangements of more targeted measures to enhance epidemic prevention and control, and resume production and ensure market supply step by step.
¬∑ While meeting with Ambassador of the United Kingdom to China Barbara Janet Woodward, a Chinese foreign ministry official briefed on the latest development of prevention and control of the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak, and stressed that China has the confidence and capability to win this battle. The life and health of all the foreign nationals, including the British people, are guaranteed.
¬∑ A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said at a regular press conference that the Chinese government puts people's lives and health as its top priority. Acting with openness, transparency and a high sense of responsibility, it has been timely sharing information, enhancing international cooperation, putting in place a nationwide scheme to pool national resources and take the strictest and most thorough measures to fight the outbreak. The ministry started to update cases of the novel coronavirus pneumonia at the regular press conferences.
Feb. 7
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke over phone with U.S. President Donald Trump at request, stressing that China is dedicated to safeguarding the lives and health of not only its own people but also people all over the world.
With an open, transparent and responsible attitude, China has kept the WHO as well as relevant countries and regions, including the United States, posted on the epidemic, and invited WHO and other experts to conduct field visits in Wuhan, Xi said.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held publishing measures to enhance epidemic prevention and control in key regions, and improve the admission and cure rates and reduce the infection and fatality rates.
¬∑ While meeting with Head of the Delegation of the European Union to China Nicolas Chapuis, a Chinese foreign ministry official briefed on the latest development of the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, saying China will continue to share information and data with the EU and the international community in an open, transparent and responsible manner and strengthen cooperation in the field of public health.
¬∑ Experts of the China CDC joined the WHO informal expert conference call and epidemiology working group expert conference call.
Feb. 8
¬∑ The NHC gave briefings on China's anti-epidemic efforts and measures at the first meeting of the APEC health working group.
¬∑ The NHC gave briefings to Chinese diplomatic missions overseas on the country's plans for the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, diagnosis and treatment, monitoring, epidemiological probe and laboratory testing.
¬∑ Chinese, U.S. health authorities had another discussion over arrangements regarding the participation of American experts in the China-WHO joint mission.
Feb. 9
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang talked over phone with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, exchanging views over the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak.
Li said China is open, transparent and highly responsible in epidemic prevention and control work, releasing information to the Chinese people and the international community in a timely manner.
"The measures we have taken have gone far beyond the requirements of the International Health Regulations and the recommendations of the WHO," Li said.
Li said he hopes that the international community, including Germany, can stay rational, support China's efforts in containing the epidemic, maintain normal bilateral exchanges, and strengthen international cooperation on public health security, adding he hopes that the German side can provide China with necessary convenience so that China can purchase medical supplies from Germany through commercial channels.
Feb. 10
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, made an inspection tour in Beijing on the epidemic prevention and control. Xi said the situation at the moment remains very serious, calling on Party committees and governments at all levels to firmly follow the CPC Central Committee's decisions and arrangements on epidemic prevention and control.
Xi urged strict enforcement of the general requirements of firm confidence, sticking together in tough times, scientific prevention and control and carrying out targeted policies.
Calling for persistent efforts, Xi said with firmer confidence, more indomitable will and more decisive measures, and by firmly relying on the people, China will resolutely contain the spread of the epidemic, and win the people's all-out war against the epidemic.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak, making arrangements to further increase the production and supply of key medical prevention and control materials, and strengthen the deployment of medics and development of drugs against the novel coronavirus.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on measures to enhance epidemic prevention and control at the grassroots level.
¬∑ The Ministry of Commerce held the first online press conference, giving briefings on the supply of daily necessities in the battle against the epidemic. The weekly news conferences had been held for seven consecutive weeks as of March 31, taking many epidemic-related questions, such as about the consumer market, resumption of work and production as well as foreign trade and investment.
¬∑ An advance squad of the WHOled team arrived in Beijing.
Feb. 11
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke over phone with Indonesian President Joko Widodo at request, noting China has been safeguarding the lives and health of the Chinese people and fulfilling responsibility for the cause of global public health by upholding the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind.
Xi said China will continue to strengthen cooperation on the prevention and control of the epidemic with Indonesia and other countries in an open and transparent manner to safeguard regional and global public health security.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Qatari Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani at request, stressing that China has been safeguarding the Chinese people's lives and health while actively contributing to global public health security.
Xi said China is willing to maintain close communication with Qatar, timely provide updates on the latest situation of the epidemic, ensure the life and health of the Qatari nationals in China so as to safeguard the health and safety of the people of both countries.
¬∑ Experts of the China CDC participated in a WHO-coordinated research and innovation forum, held on Feb. 11-12 in Geneva, either in person or online. The forum, co-hosted by WHO and the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease Preparedness, attracted more than 400 participants, including leading scientists from virus-related disciplines, representatives of countries with confirmed COVID-19 cases and those of public health agencies. Soumya Swaminathan, WHO chief scientist, hailed the contribution made by Chinese researchers attending the forum.
¬∑ The China-WHO joint mission held the first meeting, discussing and reaching initial agreement on issues including the principle in determining the list of members, priorities of field visits and agenda of the mission.
¬∑ Experts from the China and U.S.CDCs held a conference call, discussing and sharing epidemic prevention and control information.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on measures to enhance epidemic prevention and control in rural regions.
¬∑ Researchers from the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and the China CDC for the first time used transgenic mice to study the pathogenicity of the novel coronavirus, and published an article in the bioRxiv platform. This may facilitate the development of therapeutics and vaccines.
Feb. 12
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear the report of the central leading group on the prevention and control work to the COVID-19 outbreak, analyze the epidemic situation, and study measures to strengthen prevention and control work.
¬∑ Specialists from the NHC joined a China-EU teleconference on COVID-19 related technical exchanges, introducing the latest developments of the epidemic, prevention and control measures, and the situation of international cooperation.
Feb. 13
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad at request, noting that China has taken strong measures in response to the epidemic in a way that not only assumes the responsibility for the health of its people, but also contributes to the cause of global public health, which has been fully recognized by the WHO and other countries in the world.
Xi said China will continue to strengthen cooperation with Malaysia and other ASEAN countries on prevention and control of the epidemic in an open and transparent manner to jointly safeguard regional public health security.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the COVID-19 outbreak, making arrangements to take category-specific prevention and control measures, optimize diagnosis and treatment, and accelerate the development of drugs for the scientific prevention and control efforts.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held on the new category of clinically diagnosed COVID-19 cases.
As revealed at the press conference, the new category was created in Hubei Province to define suspected cases with pneumonia-related computerized tomography (CT) scan results as confirmed cases to facilitate early standardized treatment and further improve the recovery rate.
China is strengthening efforts to treat the 13,332 clinically diagnosed cases in Hubei to reduce the number of severe cases and the death rate.
The WHO supported the adoption of the new category, believing it helpful in providing patients with faster clinical care, while citing the resulting rise in confirmed cases not meaning a major change in the trajectory of the epidemic.
¬∑ The U.S. department of health and human services sent a letter to China's NHC to communicate the arrangements of bilateral cooperation in health and epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health and Harvard Medical School jointly formed a COVID-19 research team, co-chaired by Chinese respiratory expert Zhong Nanshan and the dean of Harvard Medical School. The team works in four major fields including rapid detection and diagnosis, clinical treatment, drug screening and vaccine development.
Feb. 14
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chairman of the Central Military Commission and the head of the CPC Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform, presided over the 12th meeting of the central committee for deepening overall reform and made an important speech.
Xi stressed safeguarding people's life and health is a major mission of the Party in governing the country, urging efforts to win the battle against the epidemic with scientific and accurate measures, strengthen areas of weakness, and close the loopholes exposed in the current epidemic.
Xi demanded improvement in the mechanism for major epidemic prevention and control and the national public health emergency management system. Excerpts of Xi's speech at the meeting was published by the Qiushi Journal in its fifth issue of 2020.
¬∑ Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO health emergencies program, refuted remarks by Lawrence Kudlow, the director of the White House National Economic Council, that described the Chinese government's response to the epidemic outbreak as lacking transparency.
Ryan said the remarks did not accord with the facts, as the Chinese government actively cooperated with the WHO and displayed a high level of transparency.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held announcing China's daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases outside Hubei had been dropping for 10 consecutive days.
Feb. 15
¬∑ Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi made a speech at the 56th Munich Security Conference, introducing China's decisive measures to combat the COVID-19 epidemic and the notable results it has achieved.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Wuhan, briefing the work of epidemic prevention and control and medical treatment in Hubei Province. It was the first of such conferences held in the province by the office amid the epidemic outbreak. The office held three press conferences in Beijing and Wuhan that day.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Beijing on epidemic prevention and control related to the return trips of the Spring Festival travel rush.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing updating progress in drug development and scientific research related to the COVID-19.
As revealed at the press conference, seven types of detection reagents have been approved to tap the market, while staged progress has been made in drug screening and treatment, vaccine development and animal model construction.
Feb. 16
¬∑ The China-WHO joint expert team started a nine-day field visit in China, scheduled to inspect cities including Beijing, Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Wuhan.
The team consists of 25 experts from China, Germany, Japan, Republic of Korea (ROK), Nigeria, Russia, Singapore, the United States and WHO.
Foreign experts include senior WHO adviser Bruce Aylward, Tim Eckmanns, researcher with the Robert Koch Institute, Dale Fisher, professor at the National University of Singapore, Chikwe Ihekweazu, head of the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control, Cliff Lane, researcher with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the United States, Jong-Koo Lee, associate professor at Seoul National University College of Medicine, Natalia Pshenichnaia, Aleksandr Semenov, Hitoshi Takahashi, scientist with the National Institute of Infectious Diseases of Japan, Maria van Kerkhove, head of WHO's emerging diseases and zoonosis unit, and Weigong Zhou.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing updating the country's prevention and control situation.
As revealed at the press conference, as of Feb. 15, the proportion of severe and critical cases among all confirmed COVID-19 cases had dropped significantly in China (including Wuhan and Hubei Province).
Feb. 17
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on response to the COVID-19 outbreak, making arrangements to continue the treatment of COVID-19 patients and ensure market supply in Hubei Province, particularly in Wuhan City, and advance orderly resumption of work and production while enhancing epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ During a working consultation with Estonian officials in Tallinn, the capital of Estonia, a senior official from the Chinese foreign ministry introduced China's progress in prevention and control of the COVID-19, saying China has confidence, ability and certainty to win the battle against the epidemic.
¬∑ At a press conference in Beijing, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson introduced China's efforts in sharing information and anti-epidemic cooperation with Japan.
Feb. 18
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with French President Emmanuel Macron at request, noting China not only safeguards the lives and health of the Chinese people, but acts in a highly responsible manner for global public health security.
Xi said China has always been open and transparent in its cooperation with France and other countries to deal with the epidemic, adding that China stands ready to work with France to boost practical cooperation in the health sector and jointly safeguard regional and global public health security.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson at request, noting that by upholding the idea of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China is not only responsible for the safety and health of its people, but also committed to the cause of safeguarding international public health.
China has made enormous efforts, and has effectively contained the global spread of the virus, Xi said, adding that the Chinese side will continue to cooperate with Britain and all other countries in an open and transparent manner.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing that the daily new confirmed cases nationwide dropped below 2,000 for the first time on Feb. 17, with that outside Hubei Province below 100 for the first time. Daily death across the country also fell below 100 for the first time.
¬∑ The China-WHO joint expert team traveled to Guangdong and Sichuan provinces for a three-day field investigation on the COVID-19 outbreak.
¬∑ An official of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs introduced China's progress in prevention and control of the COVID-19 epidemic when meeting with Albanian officials at Tirana, the capital of Albania.
¬∑ An official of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs met with Greg Gilligan, the new chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, saying the impact of the COVID-19 epidemic is temporary, and the long-term trend of China's economic development has not changed. China welcomes U.S.enterprises to continue their business in China and hopes to strengthen cooperation with the chamber and its members, the official said.
¬∑ China's NHC replied in a letter to U.S. department of health and human services, further communicating on arrangements for bilateral cooperation on health and epidemic control.
Feb. 19
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear reports on the epidemic prevention and control work, and coordinate epidemic control and economic and social development. The meeting decided to submit the relevant measures to the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee for further review.
¬∑ The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs held the third briefing on epidemic prevention and control online. Ambassadors and diplomats from more than 180 foreign missions in China attended the briefing. China's foreign ministry updated the situation of the COVID-19 outbreak in China and the country's efforts in epidemic prevention and control. The Foreign Affairs Office of the People's Government of Beijing Municipality introduced the latest epidemic control arrangements related to people returning to Beijing from abroad amid the outbreak, which was closely followed by foreign missions in China. Officials from the education and foreign ministries answered questions relevant to foreign students and employees in China.
Feb. 20
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan at request, stressing facts have proved once again that China and Pakistan are true friends and good brothers that share weal and woe. Xi said China will take good care of its Pakistani brothers and sisters in the country like its own citizens.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with President of the Republic of Korea Moon Jae-in at request, stressing China's forceful prevention and control measures are not only aimed at safeguarding the lives and health of the Chinese people, but also contributing to the world's public health cause. Xi said China will continue to strengthen communication and cooperation with the Republic of Korea and other countries in an open and transparent manner, so as to tackle the epidemic together and promote the health and well-being of people across the world.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping replied in a letter to Bill Gates, co-chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, expressing his appreciation toward the foundation's act in supporting China's prevention and control work against the COVID-19 epidemic. Xi called for unity and cooperation in the international community to fight the disease.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on response to the COVID-19 outbreak, making arrangements on further improving protection for frontline medics, accelerating effective applications of drugs and continuing to advance orderly resumption of work and production while enhancing epidemic prevention and control measures in a scientific way.
¬∑ Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi attended a special China-ASEAN foreign ministers' meeting, introducing China's progress in epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Hubei Province, briefing epidemic prevention and control work organized by the guidance group sent to the province by the CPC Central Committee.
¬∑ When asked at a press conference whether the novel coronavirus is a biological weapon, a spokesperson of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs said: "What we need in the face of an epidemic is science, rationality and cooperation. We must seek the triumph of science over ignorance, dispel rumors with truth, and replace prejudice with cooperation. We hope the international community, while fighting COVID-19 together, will continue to combat conspiracy theories and other 'political viruses'."
¬∑ Clinical medical experts from China and ASEAN held a video conference to exchange ideas on treatment guidelines and rescue experience on COVID-19 patients.
Feb. 21
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control of the COVID-19 and the coordination between the epidemic control and economic and social development.
The meeting called for deepening opening up and international cooperation, enhancing communication and coordination with China's economic and trade partners, and giving priority to helping the leading enterprises that have a significant influence in the global supply chain to resume production and supply to maintain the stability of the global supply chain.
Efforts will be made to make good use of export credit insurance and encourage key export enterprises to resume operation as soon as possible, according to the meeting.
The meeting also highlighted active international cooperation in epidemic prevention and control from the perspective of building a community with a shared future for humanity.
¬∑ The NHC released the fifth version of guidelines on the prevention and control of the COVID-19.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing the daily number of newly cured and discharged COVID-19 patients on Feb.20 in Wuhan outnumbered that of new confirmed cases for the first time, and the daily number of newly cured and discharged COVID-19 patients nationwide surpassed 2,000 for the first time.
Feb. 22
¬∑ The China-WHO joint expert team arrived in Hubei Province for a two-day field investigation on the COVID-19 outbreak.
The experts visited Tongji Hospital, the Wuhan Sports Center that was converted into a temporary hospital, and the provincial CDC to learn about epidemic prevention and control as well as medical treatment. They also talked with officials and experts in the province.
Feb. 23
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese President Xi Jinping stressed unremitting efforts on the prevention and control of the COVID-19 and coordination in advancing economic and social development.
Xi, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, made the remarks when delivering an important speech at a meeting in Beijing to advance the work on coordinating the prevention and control of the COVID-19 and economic and social development.
The epidemic situation remains grim and complex and it is now a most crucial moment to curb the spread, Xi noted, asking Party committees and governments at all levels to continue to make unremitting efforts in various prevention and control work and resume work and production in an orderly manner.
Efforts should be made to turn pressure into impetus, turn crises into opportunities, restore the work and life order step by step, Xi said, adding measures should be consolidated to stabilize the employment, finance, foreign trade, foreign capital, domestic investment, and expectations, and intensify policy adjustments to fully unleash the huge potential and strong momentum of China's development and strive to achieve the goals and tasks for economic and social development this year, Xi said.
Xi's speech on the meeting was published that day.
Feb. 24
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on response to the COVID-19 outbreak, helping Wuhan City to further enhance epidemic prevention and treatment and making arrangements on region-and category-based differentiated prevention and control strategies.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing China's daily number of new COVID-19 infections had remained below 1,000 for the five consecutive days.
The number of existing confirmed cases had dropped for nearly a week, while the daily number of newly cured and discharged COVID-19 patients was no less than that of new confirmed infections in all provincial-level regions.
¬∑ An official with the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs talked over phone respectively with ambassadors of Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and Costa Rica to China, briefing foreign missions on China's epidemic prevention and control work.
¬∑ The China-WHO joint expert team held a press conference in Beijing, during which team members said China's unprecedented public health responses to the COVID-19 outbreak have yielded notable results in slowing the spread of the epidemic and blocking human-to-human transmission of the virus, preventing or at least delaying hundreds of thousands of cases.
¬∑ The China CDC published a paper on The Journal of the American Medical Association, titled "Characteristics of and Important Lessons from the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China", to describe and analyze the epidemiological characteristics of the 72,314 cases of infection reported through Feb. 11 on the Chinese mainland.
¬∑ The Lancet published an article coauthored by WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and WHO chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan. The article said Chinese doctors quickly identified the novel coronavirus during the flu season and shared genome sequencing information of the virus with international counterparts through the global scientific research network, which laid the foundation for follow-up scientific research. China's unremitting efforts in preventing and controlling the COVID-19 not only wins precious time for other countries, but also "paves the way "for the international scientific community to jointly deal with the epidemic.
Feb. 25
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan at request, noting that the Chinese government has always acted with an open, transparent and responsible attitude, timely shared information, actively addressed the concerns of various parties, and boosted cooperation with the international community.
Xi said China will continue to take effective measures to safeguard the life and health of citizens of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and all other foreign nationals in the country, and stands ready to work with the UAE to maintain close communication on the latest development of the COVID-19 and share experience in epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed at request, noting that African countries and people's various support for China's battle against the COVID-19 outbreak has vividly illustrated the brotherly friendship of sharing weal and woe and helping each other between China and Africa. Xi said African countries are also facing many challenges in epidemic prevention and control, and China is willing to provide them with more medical supplies that are urgently needed, including test kits.
China also stands ready to accelerate the implementation of the health care initiative of the eight major initiatives unveiled during the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, promote the construction of the Africa CDC, and strengthen China-Africa cooperation in public health and disease prevention and control, Xi said.
¬∑ China's NHC shared updated technical guidelines on COVID-19 response with a number of countries and regional organizations.
¬∑ When meeting with Laurent Bili, the French ambassador to China, an official of the Chinese foreign ministry introduced the latest situation of China's notable achievements in fighting COVID-19, stressing that under the strong leadership of President Xi Jinping, the Chinese people are united and have full confidence, capacity and certainty to win the battle against the epidemic.
¬∑ A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said at a press briefing that China is willing to share information and experience with Japan and the Republic of Korea in fighting COVID-19 outbreak and offer support and assistance to them according to their needs.
Feb. 26
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. The meeting was briefed by the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control work of COVID-19 epidemic, analyzed the current situation and made arrangements for prevention and control measures in the near future.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing on the COVID-19 outbreak in prisons.
An official from the ministry of justice told the press that as of Feb.25, five prisons in Hubei, Zhejiang and Shandong provinces had reported 555 confirmed COVID-19 cases and another 19 suspected cases, four severe confirmed cases, adding that no inmates have thus far died of the virus.
¬∑ Experts from the China CDC participated in the WHO's informal expert consultation teleconference on COVID-19.
¬∑ At a regular press conference, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson briefed reporters on COVID-19 infection among foreigners in China.
Feb. 27
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping held talks with Mongolian President Khaltmaa Battulga in Beijing, stressing that by upholding the vision of a community with a shared future for humanity, China is making every effort not only to protect the lives and health of its own people but also to contribute to global public health security.
With an open, transparent and responsible attitude, the Chinese government has actively stepped up international cooperation to fight the outbreak, and China's efforts have been highly affirmed and recognized by the WHO and the international community, Xi said, adding China will continue to work with Mongolia and other countries to fight the epidemic and safeguard regional and global public health security.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the prevention and control work of the COVID-19 epidemic, making further arrangements to reduce mortality and ensure the sufficient supply of daily necessities, demanding more detailed prevention and control measures for vulnerable groups and urging strengthened international cooperation.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing, saying that upon the WHO's notice, COVID-19 cases had been reported in some other countries, and the epidemic is spreading quite quickly in a few countries. China would attach equal importance to joint control measures to effectively prevent imported and exported cases, and strengthen cooperation with relevant international organizations and countries to jointly contain the epidemic.
¬∑ The second China-EU special teleconference on COVID-19 was held for health experts from both sides to have in-depth exchanges on epidemic prevention and control measures, diagnosis and screening, and treatment guidelines.
Feb. 28
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel at request, stressing that by upholding the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind and with an attitude of openness, transparency and responsibility, China has timely shared information with the WHO and the international community, actively responded to the concerns of various sides, and strengthened international cooperation in the anti-epidemic fight to prevent it from spreading around the world.
The WHO and the international community have spoken highly of China's prevention and control work, Xi said, adding that China is willing to continue exchanges and cooperation with Cuba in the fields of medicine and epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Chilean President Sebastian Pinera at request, noting that the Chinese nation has experienced many ordeals in its history, but has never been overwhelmed.
Xi said the impact of the epidemic on China's economy is temporary and generally manageable, and the fundamentals of China's long-term sound economic growth remain unchanged.
While making unrelenting, solid and meticulous efforts in epidemic prevention and control, China will roll out a series of policies and measures to gradually restore orderly production and life and ensure realization of this year's economic and social development goals, Xi said.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Hubei Province on the progress of the epidemic prevention, control work and medical treatment in Hubei under the direction by the guidance team sent by the CPC Central Committee to the province.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the prevention, control work and treatment of COVID-19.
As revealed by the NHC at the press conference, the number of newly confirmed COVID-19 cases in Hubei outside Wuhan and that outside Hubei have both dropped to single-digit figures for the first time on Feb. 27. Efforts should not be slackened in prevention and control in communities, medical treatment and other aspects to prevent the epidemic from rebounding.
¬∑ China's NHC participated in the video conference of the Greater Mekong Sub-region's Working Group on Health Cooperation to discuss the challenges and technical needs of epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Research teams led by academicians Zhong Nanshan and Li Lanjuan, and researchers from Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital, the Central Hospital of Wuhan, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong and other institutions jointly published a paper on the New England Journal of Medicine, titled "Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China", analyzing the data of 1,099 COVID-19 patients' treatment.
¬∑ Research teams from Peking Union Medical College and the China CDC published a paper titled "The Pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 in hACE2 Transgenic Mice," which develops an animal model for COVID-19 and helps promote the development of vaccines and drugs.
Feb. 29
¬∑ Voluntary medical experts from the Red Cross Society of China arrived in Iran.
¬∑ The WHO-China Joint Mission published a report about its field study trip on COVID-19 in China. According to the report, in the face of a previously unknown virus, China has rolled out perhaps the most ambitious, agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history. As striking, has been the uncompromising rigor of strategy application that proved to be a hallmark in every setting and context where it was examined. Achieving China's exceptional coverage with and adherence to these containment measures has only been possible due to the deep commitment of the Chinese people to collective action in the face of this common threat. At a community level this is reflected in the remarkable solidarity of provinces and cities in support of the most vulnerable populations and communities.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the treatment of COVID-19 and the recovery of patients.
March 2020
March 1
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the effective prevention and control in accordance with the law of the imported COVID-19 cases.
March 2
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, made an inspection tour of the scientific research work for the prevention and control of the COVID-19 epidemic in Beijing.
Xi stressed the COVID-19 research must be taken as a major and pressing task, calling for pooling talents and resources of multiple fields under the united leadership and synergy, accelerating the research and development pace on the basis of adhering to science and ensuring safety, to overcome key and difficult issues in epidemic prevention and control as soon as possible to provide strong scientific and technological support for winning the anti-epidemic war. Xi's speech was published by the Qiushi Journal in its sixth issue of 2020.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on COVID-19 response work, making arrangements of prevention and control work for the next stage, to enhance the caring for the community workers at the response frontline and coordinate the work of epidemic prevention and control and spring farming.
¬∑ A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson answered questions on imported cases from Russia at a press conference.
March 3
¬∑ China's NHC unveiled the seventh version of guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19, which made modifications and improvements in the transmission routes, clinical features and diagnostic criteria, and emphasized the integration of traditional Chinese and western medicine in treating the disease.
¬∑ Received by China's NHC, Hala Zayed, Egyptian President's special envoy and Egypt's Minister of Health and Population, visited China and met Chen Zhu, vice chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress and president of the Red Cross Society of China.
March 4
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to analyze major tasks in preventing and controlling the COVID-19 epidemic while stabilizing economic and social development.
¬∑ China's NHC sent letters to the health authorities or organizations of Japan, Iran, the Republic of Korea, Italy, Singapore and Pakistan to express concerns on the current COVID-19 outbreak in these countries and hopes to enhance information sharing and technical cooperation.
¬∑ China's foreign ministry and NHC jointly held a multilateral video conference on COVID-19 with experts from six countries including Azerbaijan and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, to have in-depth exchanges on areas including prevention and control measures, diagnosis and screening, and laboratory testing.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a simultaneous press conference in Beijing and Wuhan, linking frontline Chinese experts in Wuhan who introduced the treatment of COVID-19 with reporters in Beijing via video. The whole meeting was in English.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about promoting production and ensuring supply of important medical treatment equipment for epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ A research team from Westlake Institute for Advanced Study published an article in the journal Science, titled "Structural Basis for the Recognition of the SARS-CoV-2 by Full-Length Human ACE2", which successfully analyzed for the first time the full-length three-dimensional structure of ACE2, the cellular receptor for the new coronavirus.
¬∑ Experts from China CDC participated in a COVID-19 response teleconference by the WHO's Global Preparedness Monitoring Board.
¬∑ Zhong Nanshan held a video conference with head of the European Respiratory Society to introduce China's anti-epidemic achievements and experience.
March 5
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on COVID-19 response work, ordering more targeted and effective prevention and control measures, demanding the implementation of solid measures to care for the medical personnel fighting on the frontline against COVID-19, and urging efforts to better guarantee the minimum living standard for those people in need.
¬∑ China's foreign ministry and NHC held a video conference with health experts from Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Armenia, Turkmenistan and the secretariat of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization to share China's anti-epidemic experience.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Beijing on international cooperation in combating the COVID-19 outbreak.
An NHC official told the press conference that China had conducted multiple exchanges with the heads of international and regional organizations such as the WHO and health departments of relevant countries, and received a special visit of Egypt's Minister of Health and Population, the special envoy of Egyptian President.
China has timely shared with the world the whole gene sequence, primers and probes of the coronavirus, and shared diagnosis and treatment guidelines and other technical documents with more than 100 countries and over 10 international and regional organizations around the world, said the official.
China has also carried out timely technical exchanges with international and regional organizations, such as the WHO, ASEAN and APEC, as well as Japan, Russia, Germany, the United States and other countries through expert discussions and teleconferences to share China's epidemic prevention and control experience and guidelines, said the official.
An official with Chinese foreign ministry introduced China's international cooperation in fighting the COVID-19 outbreak and answered questions from reporters.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the COVID-19 epidemic.
¬∑ As revealed by the NHC at the press conference, two imported cases of novel coronavirus infection were reported on the Chinese mainland on March 4, bringing the accumulated number of imported cases to 20.
From March 5, China began reporting on a daily basis the newly imported COVID-19 cases on the previous day and the total imported cases from overseas.
¬∑ A joint research team from Southern University of Science and Technology and the Third People's Hospital of Shenzhen published an article on bioRxiv, titled "Viral Architecture of SARS-CoV-2 with Post-Fusion Spike Revealed by Cryo-EM", revealing the overall structure of the novel coronavirus.
March 6
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, attended a symposium on securing a decisive victory in poverty alleviation in Beijing and made an important speech. Xi urged Party committees and governments at all levels to advance the fight against poverty in greater determination and intensity, overcome the impact of the COVID-19 to clinch a complete victory in eradicating poverty and accomplish the great cause that is of tremendous importance both for the Chinese nation and humanity. Xi's speech was published in full text on the same day.
¬∑ China shared with ASEAN, Japan, ROK, Yemen, Iran, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, EU and other countries and regions videos of press conferences of China's clinical experts.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Hubei Province on the progress of the prevention, control, and treatment of COVID-19.
"We made public the information of epidemic prevention and control timely to let the society see the truth," said Ding Xiangyang, deputy secretary-general of the State Council.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the latest situation of COVID-19 scientific and technological research and development.
¬∑ NHC spokesperson told the press that among 17 new confirmed cases of COVID-19 reported on March 5 on the Chinese mainland, 16 cases were imported from outside the mainland, warning that China faces rising risk of imported COVID-19 cases.
¬∑ China will continue to deepen international cooperation, timely share information and experience with the WHO and relevant countries, and jointly fight the epidemic, the spokesperson said.
¬∑ The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson answered questions of reporters, addressing some media's claim that the novel coronavirus is "made in China."
¬∑ According to the spokesperson, the traceability of the virus is still in progress. "Though the first case of COVID-19 was detected in China, it does not necessarily mean that it originated from China. We should jointly oppose 'information virus' and 'political virus.'"
March 7
¬∑ The NHC released the sixth version of guidelines on the prevention and control of COVID-19.
¬∑ A Chinese medical team dispatched by the Red Cross Society of China arrived in Iraq, carrying China-aided COVID-19 prevention supplies.
¬∑ China's NHC shared with Chile the latest version of the guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 and other technical information, expressing its willingness to conduct technical exchanges online. The commission also shared with key countries and regions the English version of the seventh version of the diagnosis and treatment guidelines.
¬∑ China announced a donation of 20 million U.S. dollars to the WHO to support its international cooperation in the fight against COVID-19.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Wuhan City at which members of the guidance group sent by the CPC Central Committee introduced the progress of the COVID-19 prevention and treatment.
March 8
¬∑ The NHC released a manual on prevention and control of COVID-19 for rural residents, which provides guidance and help for them to understand, prevent and control the coronavirus, and improve their self-prevention awareness and personal protection.
¬∑ The NHC instructed medical teams aiding foreign countries to carry out capacity-building in local areas, hold online training on the COVID-19 prevention and control for these teams, along with exercises on the epidemic prevention and control for the medical teams aiding Mozambique, Burkina Faso and Sierra Leone.
March 9
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the COVID-19 response work, making arrangements for deepening international cooperation on epidemic prevention and control, curbing the cross-border spread of the epidemic and pushing for substantial results in relevant work.
¬∑ Chen Zhu, vice chairman of the National People's Congress (NPC) Standing Committee and head of the Red Cross Society of China, held a China-Italy video seminar on the COVID-19 prevention and control at the emergency command center of the China CDC.
¬∑ A spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said at a routine press conference in Beijing that while overcoming its own difficulties, China is willing to provide masks and other medical protection materials to relevant countries to support them in fighting the COVID-19 epidemic and jointly deal with and eventually win the battle.
March 10
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, went to Wuhan to inspect the prevention and control work at the critical moment of fighting COVID-19.
Xi stressed that the epidemic prevention and control situation in Hubei and Wuhan has seen positive changes and achieved important results in stages through hard work, but the task of the epidemic prevention and control remains arduous.
Xi pointed out that the public must keep a clear mind and be more cautious at this moment, making persistent efforts and great achievements and continuing to take the epidemic prevention and control as the current top priority and the most important work.
Xi also stressed that the whole country must not be careless or weary, and should pay close attention to all kinds of prevention and control work to resolutely win the battles against the coronavirus in Hubei and Wuhan.
Xi's speech was published by the Qiushi Journal in its seventh issue of 2020.
¬∑ China's NHC and the foreign ministry held a TV and telephone conference with 10 South Pacific island countries to exchange the COVID-19 prevention and control technologies, organized experts to introduce China's prevention and control measures and phased achievements, shared disease information, prevention and control experience, and addressed foreign concerns.
¬∑ The NHC recommended experts to participate in the formulation of the WHO gene sequencing guidelines.
March 11
¬∑ The NHC and the foreign ministry jointly held the third China-EU teleconference on the exchange of the COVID-19 prevention and control technologies.
¬∑ The NHC coordinated experts to attend the WHO's conference in America to introduce China's experience in the COVID-19 prevention and control.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the COVID-19 epidemic.
As revealed at the press conference, China has seen the daily number of newly confirmed cases and newly suspected cases of COVID-19 ease to double-digit for five consecutive days. Apart from Wuhan, there were two newly confirmed cases in the last five days in China. The overall epidemic situation remained at a relatively low level and the prevention and control situation continued to improve.
However, there are still a large number of confirmed cases in Hubei and Wuhan, and the task of the epidemic prevention and control remains arduous. The rapid development of epidemic abroad also brings uncertainties, according to the press conference.
¬∑ A research team from the China CDC published a paper in the JAMA network, titled "Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical Specimens", discovering the cytokine change map and prognosis rule in patients infected with COVID-19 for the first time.
¬∑ Experts from the China CDC were invited to attend 2020 online Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections organized by the International Antiviral Society-USA.
March 12
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres at request, stressing that the hard work of the Chinese people has bought precious time and made important contributions to the prevention and control of the COVID-19 epidemic in countries in the world.
Xi noted that China is willing to share its prevention and control experience with relevant countries, carry out joint research and development of drugs and vaccines, and is providing assistance to some countries where the epidemic has spread.
Xi said China supports the UN and the WHO in mobilizing the international community to strengthen policy coordination and increase resource investment, especially to help developing countries with weak public health systems to prepare for prevention and response.
Xi also said China has announced a donation of 20 million U.S. dollars to the WHO to support its international efforts to combat the epidemic.
Xi stressed that the international community should step up its efforts to effectively carry out international cooperation in joint prevention and control, so as to pool strong synergy in the fight against the epidemic; and that the international community must foster a sense of community with a shared future for mankind, support each other, work together to deal with risks and challenges and build a better planet.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on COVID-19 response work, calling for better region-and category-based measures to prevent and control the COVID-19, ensure supplies according to the changing epidemic situation, and taking more precise and targeted measures to guard against imported and exported cases of infection across the border.
¬∑ The Second Sherpa Meeting of the G20 Riyadh Summit was held in Saudi Arabia, to discuss COVID-19 and its impact on people worldwide and the global economy. A special statement by the sherpas (personal representatives) of the leaders of the G20 on international response to the coronavirus pandemic was issued after the meeting.
¬∑ Heads of China, Japan and ROK CDCs held a conference call on the COVID-19 prevention and control technologies, during which the three parties introduced the current situation of the epidemic prevention and control in their respective countries and exchanged views on specific technical issues.
¬∑ China and the WHO held an international briefing via video chat in Beijing on China's experience in preventing and controlling COVID-19. Representatives of relevant countries' embassies in China and international organizations attended the briefing. Representatives of the WHO Western Pacific Region and relevant countries attended the meeting remotely via video chat.
China and the WHO jointly released the latest English versions of the diagnosis and treatment guidelines and prevention and control guidelines at the briefing.
¬∑ The first batch of Chinese medical experts carrying China-assisted medical supplies arrived in Italy to help with its epidemic prevention and control efforts.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the COVID-19, saying the epidemic peak in China has passed as a whole, with the number of new cases declining continuously, and the epidemic situation remaining at a relatively low level.
¬∑ A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said that China and Europe have maintained close communication and cooperation since the COVID-19 outbreak, and that China's NHC and CDC have set up a special joint expert group to deal with the epidemic with the European Commission's Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety and the ECDC.
March 13
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping sent messages to the European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, extending sincere sympathies to the EU and the people in all its member countries over the recent outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease.
China firmly supports the European side in combating the COVID-19 epidemic. China is willing to provide assistance to help the European side win the fight against the epidemic at an early date. Upholding the concept of a community with a shared future for mankind, China stands ready to strengthen coordination and cooperation with the European side within bilateral and international frameworks to jointly safeguard global and regional public health security and protect the lives and health of people of both sides and in other countries around the world, Xi said.
¬∑ China and the ROK established a joint prevention and control cooperation mechanism to deal with the epidemic and held the first video conference.
Led by the foreign ministries of these two countries, with the participation of health, education, customs, immigration, civil aviation and other departments, the mechanism aims to implement the important consensus of the heads of these two countries, strengthen communication and coordination between the two sides, carry out joint prevention and control, overcome the epidemic jointly, improve the health and well-being of these two countries' people, and safeguard and promote bilateral exchanges and cooperation.
¬∑ China and 17 central and eastern European countries (CEEC) held a video conference of experts on the COVID-19 prevention and control, during which officials of the China's foreign ministry, NHC, and Chinese experts in disease control, civil aviation, customs and other fields shared information on the fight against the epidemic and exchanging prevention and control experience with government officials and experts from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia and Czech Republic and other CEEC members.
¬∑ Experts from University of Science and Technology of China and its first affiliated hospital published an article, titled "Pathogenic T cells and inflammatory storm in severe COVID-19 patients."
March 14
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to Italian President Sergio Mattarella, expressing sincere sympathies on behalf of the Chinese government and people to the Italian government and people on the recent COVID-19 epidemic in Italy.
Xi stressed that the Chinese government and its people firmly support Italy's fight against the COVID-19 outbreak at this difficult time, and China is willing to cooperate with Italy and offer assistance.
Xi noted that mankind is a community with a shared future and that only through unity and coordination can humanity tackle various global risks and challenges.
Xi said as long as the two countries and the broader international community make joint efforts, they will certainly overcome the current difficulties and prevail over the epidemic at an early date, so as to protect the well-being of people in both countries and across the world.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, expressing heartfelt sympathies on behalf of the Chinese government and people to the Iranian government and people over the epidemic.
Xi noted that the Iranian government and people have provided sincere and friendly support and help for China's fight against the epidemic.
Meanwhile, to help Iran beat the disease, China has offered Iran a batch of anti-epidemic supplies and sent a team of voluntary health experts, Xi said.
Xi stressed that China stands ready to step up cooperation with Iran to contain the epidemic and will continue to provide as much assistance as it can for Iran in the latter's fight against the COVID-19 outbreak, adding he is confident that the Iranian government and people will surely win the battle against the outbreak.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to President of the Republic of Korea Moon Jae-in, expressing heartfelt sympathies on behalf of the Chinese government and people to the ROK government and people in ROK over the epidemic.
Xi noted that epidemics know no borders, and all countries worldwide are part of a community with a shared future, and the Chinese government and people empathize with the ROK in its struggle against the epidemic and related difficulties.
Xi said China will continue to provide as much assistance as it can to the ROK to support the latter's fight against the COVID-19 outbreak, the Chinese side stands ready to join hands with the ROK to win the fight against the epidemic at an early date, so as to protect the lives and health of the people of the two countries and the wider world.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the COVID-19 epidemic risk categorization, saying the vast majority of counties on the Chinese mainland have been thus far low-risk through the monitoring of high, medium and low-risk counties. Relevant provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions have published lists of high, medium and low-risk counties.
March 15
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing saying all the new local confirmed cases of COVID-19 came from Wuhan.
As revealed at the press conference, no new local confirmed cases have been reported in cities other than Wuhan for 10 consecutive days. The number of local new confirmed cases in provinces other than Hubei has been in single-digit since Feb. 27 and zero new local confirmed cases has been reported for three consecutive days.
March 16
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Giuseppe Conte, Italian Prime Minister at request. Xi pointed out that China is willing to work with Italy to contribute to international cooperation in fighting the epidemic and building a "healthy Silk Road," believing that the traditional friendship and mutual trust will be further deepened and the all-round cooperation between China and Italy will usher in a broader prospect through this joint fight against the epidemic.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on COVID-19 response work, making further arrangements to improve prevention and control measures and speed up work and manufacturing resumption in all aspects and restore normal economic and social order.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held press conferences in English simultaneously in Beijing and Wuhan. Experts from the medical team of Peking Union Medical College Hospital aiding Hubei answered questions from foreign media on issues related to the treatment of COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Hubei on the scientific treatment of COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing about the prevention and control measures China adopted according to law to guard against imported COVID-19 cases.
March 17
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping held talks with Pakistani President Arif Alvi in Beijing, noting that the COVID-19 epidemic is erupting in many places around the world at present, and all countries should join hands to fight the epidemic.
Upholding the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind, China has timely released the epidemic information and shared prevention and treatment experience openly, transparently and responsibly, Xi said, adding China is willing to make more contributions to prevent the spread of the epidemic worldwide and will continue to provide support and assistance to Pakistan.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez at request, stressing that China's prevention and control measures have achieved positive results and have stepped out of the most difficult and most arduous stage through the hard work of the whole country.
Xi said as the epidemic has spread in many countries, China is willing to carry out international cooperation with other countries and provide assistance within its capabilities.
Xi hoped that the international community will work together to turn crises into opportunities, resist the impact of the epidemic with open and cooperative practical actions, and jointly safeguard international health security.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing to introduce the latest research and development of vaccines and detection reagents.
¬∑ China, Japan, and the ROK held a teleconference among heads of their COVID-19 response departments. The three parties introduced the epidemic situation and measures in their respective countries and exchanged in-depth views on strengthening cooperation in the epidemic prevention and control. They believed that they should jointly prevent the spread of the epidemic and strengthen joint prevention and control.
¬∑ China began supplying 14 kinds of domestic test kits to 11 countries, with the first batch of test kits donated by China to Cambodia arrived in Phnom Penh.
March 18
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to analyze the situation of the COVID-19 epidemic prevention and control as well as the economy at home and abroad, and make arrangements for coordinating the epidemic prevention and control with key work of economic and social development.
Xi urged closer cooperation with the international community on epidemic prevention and control, stressing China will keep its close cooperation with the WHO to strengthen the analysis and prediction of the changes in the global epidemic situation, improve strategies and policies to cope with imported risks, boost exchanges and cooperation with other countries on epidemic response, and continue to offer assistance to the best of China's ability.
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang talked over phone with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, saying under the current circumstances, China stands firmly with the EU and supports its anti-epidemic efforts.
Li said China will facilitate its procurement of medical supplies through commercial channels, adding that China is also ready to actively carry out international cooperation to jointly protect the health of the humankind.
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang spoke over phone with Bulgarian Prime Minister Boiko Borisov at request.
Li said China is willing to enhance exchanges of anti-epidemic experience with Bulgaria, provide assistance within China's capability to help it contain the spread of COVID-19, and provide necessary facilitation to the Bulgarian side in its procurement of medical supplies through commercial channels.
¬∑ The second group of Chinese medical experts arrived in Italy, carrying nine tonnes of medical supplies donated by China, including ventilators, infusion pumps, monitors and testing reagents.
¬∑ China and Africa held a video conference on COVID-19 epidemic prevention and control. Attendees of the online meeting were about 300 officials, health experts from 24 African countries, including health ministers from Ethiopia, Kenya and Liberia, and WHO representatives in some countries.
¬∑ China and Mongolia held a video meeting on the COVID-19 epidemic, at which China shared its anti-epidemic technologies and experience in epidemic prevention and control, had in-depth exchanges in epidemic situation, prevention and control measures, screening and diagnosis, and treatment guidelines.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing that Chinese mainland reported for the first time on March 17 no new suspected domestic cases of COVID-19. Hubei Province had seen no new confirmed cases for 13 consecutive days in cities and prefectures outside Wuhan.
¬∑ Zhong Nanshan said at a press conference in Guangzhou that China has proved the effectiveness of containment measures in high outbreak regions and public prevention and control measures in other regions.
March 19
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke over phone with Russian President Vladimir Putin at request, reaffirming that China stands ready to work with Russia and other countries to step up international cooperation against the COVID-19 epidemic for the vision to build a community with a shared future for humanity.
Xi called for closer international cooperation in epidemic prevention and control, experience sharing on containment and treatment, and facilitation of joint research, to cope with the common threat and challenge, and safeguard global public health security.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the COVID-19 epidemic response, making arrangements to optimize prevention and control measures, precisely curb cross-border transmission of COVID-19, and actively promote the orderly resumption of work and production.
¬∑ An inspection team of the National Supervisory Commission released the report of an investigation into issues related to doctor Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist with the Central Hospital of Wuhan. Following the report, Wuhan Public Security Bureau decided to revoke the previous reprimand letter and apologized to Li's family over the mistake.
¬∑ China's foreign ministry and NHC jointly held a China-Europe video meeting with 18 European countries including Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Switzerland, introducing China's experience of COVID-19 outbreak prevention and control for European officials and medical specialists.
¬∑ The NHC held a meeting with the Embassy of Japan in China to exchange views in building clinical and epidemic prevention mechanism of joint response to COVID-19 epidemic.
Shanghai Municipal Health Commission and Health Commission of Anhui Province held video meetings with specialists from Costa Rica and South Sudan, respectively, to exchange on epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing saying that no new confirmed and suspected COVID-19 cases were reported for the first time on the Chinese mainland on March 18.
No new death was reported outside Hubei Province, and the number of severe cases dropped by two. No new confirmed local cases had been reported outside Hubei on the Chinese mainland for seven consecutive days, as revealed by the press conference.
The risk of imported COVID-19 cases was on the rise due to the rapid spread of the epidemic globally, thus the task to prevent imported risk must be implemented, according to the press conference.
¬∑ Specialists from the China CDC participated in a teleconference with the WHO and the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) to introduce China's experience on COVID-19 prevention and control.
¬∑ Zhong Nanshan attended an international sharing and exchange meeting on epidemic prevention and control experience, calling for high attention to 100 the spread of novel coronavirus in a number of countries, saying it's crucial to carry out early detection, early quarantine, early diagnosis and early treatment to control the epidemic.
March 20
¬∑ Upon the initiative of China, Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi held a special video conference on COVID-19 with ROK Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha and Japanese Foreign Minister Toshimitsu Motegi. They had an in-depth exchange of views on joint response to the epidemic.
¬∑ China's NHC and foreign ministry held a video meeting with 19 countries from Europe and Asia to provide a platform for specialists to exchange and share technologies for the prevention and control of the COVID-19 epidemic.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing, announcing that no new confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases were reported on the Chinese mainland on March 19. It was the first time of such zero report on the Chinese mainland since it started the nationwide battle against the coronavirus.
¬∑ Specialists from the China CDC attended a teleconference organized by the WHO on COVID-19 vaccine research.
March 21
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to Spanish King Felipe VI, expressing sincere sympathies on behalf of the Chinese government and people to the Spanish government and people over the recent COVID-19 outbreak in Spain.
Xi noted that China firmly supports Spain's efforts and measures in fighting the epidemic, and stands ready to share prevention and control experience as well as diagnostic and treatment guidelines, and provide assistance and support within its capacity.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic, expressing sincere sympathies on behalf of the Chinese government and people to the Serbian government and people over the recent COVID-19 outbreak in Serbia.
Xi stressed that China firmly supports Serbia's efforts against the epidemic, and will provide Serbia with assistance in protective equipment and medical instruments, and help it purchase urgently needed supplies in China.
China will also send a group of medical experts to help it better contain the COVID-19 epidemic, so as to protect the life, health and well-being of the Serbian people.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, stressing China firmly supports Germany's endeavor in combating the epidemic and is willing to provide assistance within its capacity if there is a need from the German side.
Xi noted by upholding the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China stands ready to continue sharing information and experience with Germany, and strengthening cooperation in such areas as epidemic prevention and control, treatment of patients, and vaccine research and development, so as to jointly protect the health and well-being of people not only in both countries but in the rest of the world.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping recently sent a message of sympathy to French President Emmanuel Macron, noting the Chinese government and people firmly support France's efforts against the COVID-19 epidemic, and stand ready to boost cooperation with France and jointly win the battle through mutual support and help.
Xi said China is willing to make concerted efforts with France to enhance international cooperation in epidemic prevention and control, support the UN and the WHO playing a core role in improving global public health governance, and build a community of common health for mankind.
March 22
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing underscoring the importance of implementing prevention and control measures in quarantine, transfer, treatment and isolation to curb the imported COVID-19 cases as the pandemic is affecting more than 180 countries and regions.
¬∑ A Chinese medical team carrying ventilators, medical masks, test kits and other medical materials arrived in Serbian to help it battle the novel coronavirus.
March 23
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with French President Emmanuel Macron, introducing upon request the situation of the COVID-19 epidemic prevention and control in China.
Xi stressed both China and France shoulder the arduous responsibility of safeguarding international and regional public health security, suggesting that both countries carry out sincere cooperation to promote joint research programs, strengthen cooperation in frontier health and quarantine inspection, support the work of the WHO, jointly help African countries enhance epidemic prevention and control, and strive to build a community of common health.
Xi said China stands ready to work with France to encourage all relevant parties to step up coordination and cooperation within such frameworks as the UN and G20, engage in joint prevention and containment, improve global health governance, help developing countries and other countries in need with capacity-building, and cushion the epidemic's impact on the world economy.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, noting facts have shown once again that mankind is a community that shares weal and woe. All countries must unite and work together to jointly cope with the COVID-19 epidemic.
Xi said by upholding the vision of a community with a shared future for humanity, China will work with other countries to step up international cooperation in epidemic prevention and control, jointly address common threats and challenges, and safeguard global public health security.
Noting that Egypt is also facing the urgent task of battling the epidemic, Xi said China is willing to share with Egypt the epidemic-related information, experience on prevention and treatment, and medical research results, and provide it with medical supplies to support its prevention and control efforts to jointly beat the disease.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, introducing upon request China's epidemic prevention and control measures. Xi stressed that China hopes Britain will enhance coordination with China to minimize the risk of the epidemic's spread while ensuring necessary flow of people and trade.
Xi called on all nations to push forward cooperation within the frameworks of the UN and G20, enhance the exchange and sharing of information and experience, boost collaboration in scientific research, support the WHO in playing its due role, improve global health governance, increase macro-economic policy coordination so as to stabilize the market, maintain economic growth, safeguard people's well-being, and keep the global supply chains open, stable and safe.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee on the COVID-19 epidemic response, making arrangements to prevent imported infections and COVID-19 rebound at home according to changes in the epidemic situation, actively advance the resumption of work and production in order while keep prevention and control effective.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing, announcing Hubei Province and Wuhan City had reported zero new confirmed and suspected case for five straight days, with the number of existing confirmed cases declining continuously. A health official told the press conference that zero report of new cases does not mean there is no risk, thus it's still arduous to prevent and control the epidemic.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Hubei, introducing the importance and effectiveness of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in treating COVID-19. Zhang Boli, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering noted that TCM had remarkably reduced the proportion of patients with mild symptoms turning to severe cases.
¬∑ A team of Chinese medical experts carrying a batch of medical materials aided by China arrived in Cambodia to help it fight the COVID-19.
March 24
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Kazakh President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, noting that in the battle against the current global public health crisis, the urgency and significance of building a community with a shared future for humanity have become even greater. Only with solidarity and cooperation can the international community prevail over the pandemic and safeguard the planet.
Xi said China is ready to work with Kazakhstan and other countries to strengthen international cooperation against the pandemic and safeguard global public health security.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Polish President Andrzej Duda, reiterating China's firm support to the Polish government and people in combating the COVID-19 epidemic. Xi noted China had held a video conference of health experts with Poland and other Central and Eastern European countries (CEECs) to timely share information and relevant measures on epidemic prevention and control.
Xi said by upholding the vision of a community with a shared future for humanity, China is willing to enhance cooperation with other countries to fight the epidemic and safeguard global public health security.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro at request, noting that the COVID-19 broke out in many parts of the world and was spreading rapidly and the top priority now is for countries to strengthen cooperation.
Xi said by upholding the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, and with an open, transparent and responsible attitude, China has timely released epidemic information and shared experience in prevention, control and treatment with the WHO and the international community without reserve, and doing its best to provide assistance for other parties.
Xi stressed that the international community has already recognized that China made enormous sacrifices in the fight against COVID-19 and bought precious time for the world.
¬∑ Chinese authorities and experts interacted via a video conference with health professionals across Latin America and the Caribbean states, sharing COVID-19 prevention and control experience. Attendees were about 200 officials and experts from 25 countries and representatives from the WHO, UNICEF, Pan American Health Organization and Inter-American Development Bank.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing with disease control specialists and medical experts introducing the COVID-19 prevention, control and clinical diagnosis information. As revealed at the press conference, spreading risks of sporadic COVID-19 cases and imported cases still exist, thus the prevention and control work should not be taken lightly.
March 25
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, presided over a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to hear reports of the epidemic prevention and control and the current economic situation, and study responsive measures.
The meeting decided to submit the measures to the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee for further review.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, stressing China firmly supports Germany in its fight against the COVID-19 epidemic and is willing to continue to provide assistance within China's capacity.
Xi said that the Chinese and German experts have already had video exchanges, and German experts have also travelled to China with the WHO expert team.
Xi said China is willing to share with Germany its experience in prevention, control and treatment, strengthen cooperation in vaccine and drug research and development, and contribute to the health and well-being of both peoples and global public health security.
In the battle against the outbreak, the strength of solidarity and cooperation between China and Germany, between China and the EU, have displayed positive energy, Xi said, adding China is ready to work with Germany and other sides to step up coordination and advocate the spirit of sharing the same boat and jointly fight the epidemic, so as to shore up confidence in the international community.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing asking for efforts to strictly prevent imported infections and epidemic rebound at home.
¬∑ A new PCR lab assisted and built by China was inaugurated in Baghdad, Iraq, to increase the testing capacity to contain COVID-19 in the war-torn country.
¬∑ Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health plans to sign with American pharmaceutical company Gilead Sciences on China-led evaluation research of medicine Remdesivir.
March 26
¬∑ Via video link in Beijing, Chinese President Xi Jinping delivered a speech titled "Working Together to Defeat the COVID-19 Outbreak "at the Extraordinary G20 Leaders' Summit.
Stressing the outbreak is spreading worldwide and the situation is disturbing and unsettling, Xi said it's imperative for the international community to strengthen confidence, act with unity and work together in a collective response to win the battle against such a major infectious disease for humanity.
Guided by the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China will be more than ready to share its good practices, provide assistance in its capacity to countries hit by the growing outbreak, and contribute to the stability of the world economy, Xi said.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping wrote in a reply letter to WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, saying China has always supported the global COVID-19 containment efforts with concrete actions, and has offered assistance to the WHO and other international organizations, as well as more than 80 countries. Xi said China will continue to provide support for the international community in combating COVID-19 epidemic.
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee COVID-19 response work, calling for strict implementation of measures to prevent the rebound of the epidemic within the country and efforts to step up measures to guard against risks of imported cases by land and water.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing that 23 provincial-level regions reported confirmed imported cases of COVID-19 on March 25.
As revealed by the press conference, pressure remains huge to prevent the spread of the epidemic, and people should prepare for more persistent prevention and control efforts.
¬∑ China's third medical team carrying ventilators, medical monitors, masks and other medical supplies arrived in Italy via chartered flight to help Italy fight the COVID-19 outbreak.
¬∑ China held a video meeting on COVID-19 pandemic with medical experts and health officials from the West Asian and North African countries. About 200 participants from the Gulf Cooperation Council and 16 countries including Egypt, Algeria, Palestine, Lebanon, Kuwait and Qatar joined the online meeting.
¬∑ According to the data of China International Development Cooperation Agency, China has thus far provided four batches of anti-pandemic aid for 89 countries and four international organizations, while the fifth batch of aid program was being developed.
March 27
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, chaired a meeting of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee to analyze the COVID-19 response and economic performance.
The meeting made new arrangements on coordinating the COVID-19 response and economic and social development.
China will deepen exchange and cooperation with the WHO and continue to provide assistance within its ability to other countries, according to the meeting.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, stressing viruses respect no national borders, and only by cooperation and with a collective response can the international community prevail over them.
Xi said the G20 major economies should uphold the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, and strengthen unity, coordination and cooperation to resolutely stem the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and stabilize the world economy with all their strength.
Xi noted that with the king's presiding, G20 leaders successfully held an extraordinary summit on COVID-19 on March 26, and reached important consensus on fighting the pandemic in solidarity and stabilizing the world economy, which has sent a positive signal to the international community.
Xi stressed that China is ready to maintain close communication with Saudi Arabia and strengthen the momentum of G20 cooperation.
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping talked over phone with U.S. President Donald Trump at request, stressing that China has been timely sharing information on COVID-19 in an open, transparent and responsible manner with the WHO and countries including the United States since the onset of the epidemic. China, Xi said, wasted no time in releasing such information as the genetic sequence of the coronavirus, and has also been sharing experience on COVID-19 prevention, containment and treatment without reserve, and providing as much support and assistance as it can for countries in need.
Xi said China will continue to do so, and work with the international community to prevail over the pandemic.
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang talked over phone at request over the COVID-19 pandemic with Croatian Prime Minister Andrej Plenkovic, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency, and with Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, respectively.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing that the number of the close contacts under medical observation had been increasing for seven consecutive days, with the number reported on March 26 jumping 78 percent than that on March 19.
The combination of emergency and normalized measures should be improved to accurately prevent and control the domestic epidemic and take strict precautions against the virus spreading.
¬∑ China's NHC head Ma Xiaowei attended a COVID-19 pandemic information briefing held by the WHO, sharing experience of fighting against the virus and answering questions from other countries. More than 500 people from the countries like Russia, Brazil, Egypt and Qatar attended the online meeting.
March 28
¬∑ A Chinese medical expert team carrying medical supplies arrived in Pakistan to help it fight COVID-19.
¬∑ Invited by the European Respiratory Society, Wang Chen, vice president of the Chinese Academy of Engineering and also a medical specialist of respiratory and critical disease, attended a video connection and shared the health policies of the COVID-19 prevention and control with European physicians and health administrators.
March 29
¬∑ Chinese President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, made an inspection tour for COVID-19 control and work resumption in east China's Zhejiang Province from March 29 to April 1, according to a Xinhua News Agency report.
Xi called for the full implementation of the decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee, while coordinating efforts for COVID-19 prevention and control, and economic and social development.
¬∑ Under the joint prevention and control mechanism of the State Council, a press conference was held in Beijing announcing that local transmission of COVID-19 has been basically blocked on the Chinese mainland, and China will continue efforts to guard against the dual risks of sporadic domestic cases and imported cases.
¬∑ A team of Chinese medical experts carrying medical supplies, such as treatment machines, protective materials, traditional Chinese and western medicines, arrived at Laos to assist the country's fight against the COVID-19 outbreak.
March 30
¬∑ Xinhua News Agency reported that Li Keqiang presided over a meeting of the leading group of the CPC Central Committee COVID-19 response work, urging efforts to consolidate prevention and control measures to focus on the prevention and control of cases of infections that show no symptoms.
¬∑ The International Department of CPC Central Committee and the secretariat of the International Conference of Asian Political Parties (ICAPP) standing committee co-hosted an online seminar about jointly fighting against the COVID-19, aiming to promote the exchange and dialogue among Asian political parties in epidemic prevention and control via online communication, and boosting experience sharing and cooperation among Asian countries.
¬∑A team of Chinese medical and scientific experts carrying test kits, medical protective equipment, medicines and other China-donated medical supplies arrived in Caracas, capital of Venezuela, to help fight COVID-19.
¬∑ Invited by the American College of Chest Physicians, Chinese medical experts attended a network forum of COVID-19 with their American counterparts and shared experience in fighting against the virus.
¬∑ Upgraded by Chinese enterprises, Zimbabwe's main COVID-19 quarantine and treatment center, Wilkins Hospital, was completed and delivered to Zimbabwe.
¬∑ China's NHC head Ma Xiaowei talked over phone with the U.S.secretary of health and human services Alex Azar on the implementation of principles agreed by the heads of state of China and the United States in a telephone conversation on March 27, sharing China's latest epidemic prevention and control situation and exchanging views for further cooperation.
March 31
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang talked over phone with Algerian Prime Minister Abdelaziz Djerad at request, saying the COVID-19 epidemic is spreading in the Middle East region and China feels keenly for it. Li said China stands firmly with Algeria, and is willing to provide support within its capacity and share its anti-virus experience.
¬∑ Chinese Premier Li Keqiang talked over phone with Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar at request, saying China firmly supports Ireland's efforts in the fight against the disease, and is willing to provide Ireland with necessary assistance within its capacity. Li said China is also ready to facilitate Ireland's procurement and transportation of medical supplies from China, enhance exchanges of experience on epidemic prevention and treatment, and carry out cooperation in medical research and development.
¬∑ The State Council Information Office held a press conference in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, and answered questions about the COVID-19 epidemic prevention and control, treatment of severe patients, resumption of normal medical order in the province and international cooperation of epidemic prevention and control.
¬∑ A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson told a press conference in Beijing that the Chinese government had provided material assistance including medical masks, N95 masks, protective suits, nucleic acid testing reagent and ventilators to 120 countries and four international organizations.
Local governments had donated medical supplies to more than 50 countries. And the Chinese enterprises donated medical supplies to more than 100 countries and international organizations.
China shares experience to combat COVID-19 via livestreaming with African countries last month. [Photo/Xinhua]
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/47/158630441438.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/65/158630441764.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-25 08:10
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 25
China
- Kashgar in Xinjiang to provide nucleic acid test for all residents after a new asymptomatic case detected there (Read more)

Oct 24
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 23, 2020.
- Czech health minister breaks virus rules, asked to resign (Read more)
- UK PM insists full national lockdown not 'right course' (Read more)
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 24, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 28 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 23
Outside China
- France's daily COVID-19 cases top 40,000
- Seven more US soldiers in South Korea tested positive for COVID-19
- Iran's total COVID-19 cases surpass 550,000; Morocco, Jordan see new records in daily infections
China
Chinese mainland reports 18 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 22
Outside China
- European countries set record COVID-19 daily numbers as Spain's total cases top 1 million (Read more)
- Algerian PM calls for respecting preventive measures following school reopening (Read more)
- Filipino tourists cautious despite eased intl travel rules (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 14 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 21
Outside China
- US first lady cancels campaign trip due to 'lingering cough' (Read more)
- US CDC says country has witnessed 300,000 more deaths than usual: report (Read more)
- Portugal sees first drop in active COVID-19 cases since mid-August (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 20
Outside China
- 184 countries and economies have joined COVAX: WHO chief (Read more)
- US COVID-19 deaths top 220,000: Johns Hopkins University
- Chilean govt says protests may cause potential spike in COVID-19 cases (Read more)
- UK hopes for vaccine within 6 months (Read more)
- Ireland declares highest-level response to COVID-19 

China

- Chinese mainland reports 19 new COVID-19 cases on Monday, all imported (Read more)

Oct 19
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 40 million: Johns Hopkins University
- Italy announces further anti-COVID-19 measures as new infections top 11,000 (Read more)
- Poland starts to build first field hospital for COVID-19 patients (Read more)
- Number of new COVID-19 cases in Israel continues to drop as lockdown lifted: health ministry (Read more)
China

- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 18
Outside China
- France reports 32,427 new COVID-19 infections, hitting another one-day high
- Global daily COVID-19 infections hit record high with nearly 400,000 new cases reported: WHO (Read more)
- Qingdao in East China's Shandong province set a world record by finishing testing on 10.8 million swab samples in 120 hours in the recent fight against the re-emergence of COVID-19 (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
- Living novel coronavirus isolated from packaging of imported frozen food in Qingdao: China CDC (Read more)
Oct 17
Outside China
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 8 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Global COVID-19 deaths surpass 1.1 mln: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
China
People visit the Temple of Heaven in Beijng, capital of China, Oct 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 16
Outside China
- CDC projects up to 240,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Nov 7 (Read more)
- COVID-19 test positivity rate falls below 5 percent in NY state focus areas (Read more)
- Italy added to UK's quarantine list as London raises alert level (Read more)

- Russia reports new daily record of confirmed COVID-19 cases
China
- Chinese mainland reports 24 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported (Read more)

- The COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao traced to two port workers, authorities say
Oct 15
Outside China
- Global tuberculosis progress mired by scarce funding, COVID-19: WHO report (Read more)
- Nearly 700,000 children in US test positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Italy sets new high for coronavirus infections (Read more)
- France to impose curfew to stem 2nd wave of coronavirus (Read more)
- South Africa adopts post-COVID energy plan (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday, 1 locally transmitted (Read more)
- Head of Qingdao health commission suspended, faces probe (Read more)
Oct 14
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 38 mln: Johns Hopkins University
- US drugmaker Eli Lilly pauses antibody trial over safety concerns (Read more)
- EU member states adopt common color code indicating COVID-19 risks (Read more)
- Russia's coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V could be launched in Russia by late October or early November (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 20 new COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 6 locally transmitted (Read more)
Oct 13
Outside China
- Herd immunity against COVID-19 "scientifically and ethically problematic": WHO chief (Read more)
- British government introduces 3-level COVID-19 alert system (Read more)
- Johnson & Johnson pauses COVID-19 vaccine trial over patient illness (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 13 new COVID-19 cases, 6 locally transmitted and 7 imported (Read more)
- No one tested positive for COVID-19 in Qingdao after more than 3 million swab samples taken as of 8 am Tuesday (Read more)
- 243 inbound and outbound flights cancelled at Qingdao Liuting Airport as of Tuesday morning
Oct 12
Outside China
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)
China
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported
- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)
Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/160358851027.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/37/160358851036.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/48/160358851054.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/160358851083.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/160358851111.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/160358851131.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160358851145.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/8/160358851158.jpeg
---
By Richard Cullen | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-07-08 09:14

[Photo/Xinhua]
Domestically and internationally, the United States has starkly deployed its political power in response to China's enactment of a plainly required national security law for the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Such a law has been absent since the birth of the SAR 23 years ago.
First, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo declared, "No reasonable person can assert today that Hong Kong maintains a high degree of autonomy from China." Then, an audaciously meddling law, the Hong Kong Autonomy Act, sailed through the US Senate and US House of Representatives in about 10 days. Next, the US is imposing and threatening to impose sanctions of various sorts.
Unconcealed is the blatant US interference in China's affairs. The US is taking more than a bullying stance on a rising China.
US commentators have critically analyzed what they call China's sharp power, apart from its soft power, which has been defined as the "ability to affect others by attraction and persuasion rather than through the hard power of coercion and payment".
In fact, the US has deployed all three powers, soft, sharp and hard, for many decades to shape transnational outcomes in America's own interest.
In 1985, American analyst George Scialabba said certain regimes following policies considered unacceptable to the US were "subjected to American hostility, subversion or even invasion".
More recently, writer and libertarian Dan Sanchez argued, after reviewing the careers of the brothers John Foster Dulles (US secretary of state from 1953 to 1959) and Allen Dulles (CIA director, 1953-61), that together they created a legacy for the US of perpetual war.
Building on this potent tradition, Washington, as typified by Pompeo, has developed a divergent, conspicuously muscular form of power diplomacy. In the case of China, the US seems strongly committed to a win-lose Sino strategy: For the US to win, China needs to lose.
In mid-April, Pompeo stipulated that Beijing should grant the US access to a Wuhan laboratory. "We are still asking the Chinese Communist Party to allow experts to get into the virology lab so we can determine precisely where this virus began." The essence of this approach is to say: We presume you are guilty, unless you can prove otherwise; and we decide if you have done so.
Most striking is the recent Australian decision to badger China on the need for an investigation into the COVID-19 virus origins. This Australian proposal came across as measurably associated with the US' ill-tempered, Wuhan-focused, inquiry demands, which were designed to further incite a blame-China narrative within US domestic politics.
As former Australian ambassador to China Geoff Raby said in June, "There are some people (in Australia) in the media, in think tanks ...who see a bad relationship with China as a badge of honor."
He added, "What is particularly pernicious is that commentators and even politicians are weaponizing the relationship and delegitimizing economic interests."
Interestingly, as Washington was ramping up its calls for a COVID-19 inquiry, New Zealand made it quite clear it was not interested in joining any sort of "witch hunt" over the COVID-19 crisis. Indeed, New Zealand's prime minister said in mid-May that New Zealand had learned from other countries, including China, adding that China was, "obviously the first to use lockdown, and I think that has saved lives globally".
How then has Australia careened into this spasm of Sino-confrontation? The reasons are complex and include a depressing lack of reflective impulse control (of New Zealand style) combined with local political opportunism.
Previous Australian foreign minister Gareth Evans has argued that excessive deference is being paid by both government and opposition to "the national security and intelligence community, now itself more collectively deferential to Washington than I can ever remember".
China does not purposefully threaten Australia in any serious way. It is an anxiously forceful US that does threaten Australia at a measurably more significant levelÔºçfirst, by hectoring diplomacy, encouraging intensified antipathy toward the trading partner that has done more to help remake Australian prosperity in the last 30 years than any other country; second, due to the serious hazard of being drawn into yet more US military adventuresÔºçpossibly involving certain levels of forceful confrontation with China.
This is not an imaginary risk. Former US president Jimmy Carter reminded us in 2019 that America is "the most warlike nation in the history of the world". It was the principal combatant in five major wars since World War II.
The author is a visiting professor on the faculty of law at Hong Kong University.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/25/159418133998.jpeg
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-02 05:12
Tributes paid to Wuhan residents for their resilience
In a clear rebuke to United States President Donald Trump, the World Health Organization, or WHO, reiterated on Friday that the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 disease originates in nature.
On Thursday Trump said he had seen strong evidence that the virus originated from a laboratory in Wuhan, despite a statement from the US intelligence community, concurring with the scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified.
"We listened again and again to numerous scientists who looked at the sequences and looked at this virus. And we are assured that this virus is natural in origin," Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, told a virtual press conference from Geneva.
He emphasized the importance of establishing the natural host of the virus, in order to better understand it, the interface between animals and humans, and how that barrier had been breached.
"The purpose of understanding that is that we can put in place the necessary prevention and public health measures to prevent that happening again anywhere," he said.
The International Health Regulations Emergency Committee on COVID-19, which met on Thursday, advised the WHO to work to identify the animal source of the coronavirus through international scientific collaborative work, alongside the World Organization for Animal Health and Food and Agriculture Organization. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the organization accepted this advice.
When asked by a reporter if the WHO regretted announcing the Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), the highest level of alert, too late, on Jan 30 rather than at its Jan 22-23 meeting, Tedros expressed that the declaration was made in a timely fashion, allowing enough time for the rest of the world to respond, because by Jan 30, there were only 82 cases and no deaths outside China. "The world had enough time to intervene," Tedros said.
His words were echoed by French scientist Didier Houssin, chairman of the Emergency Committee.
He said that previously, the WHO had been accused for declaring emergency too early before major disease outbreaks, such as the H1N1 outbreak in 2009, and later the Ebola virus. On Jan 23, there were only four cases outside China, and committee members were divided on declaring a PHEIC. However, the WHO still recommended a series of measures for countries to get prepared. Defending the Jan 30 declaration, Houssain said "WHO decided in a timely manner."
Trump has repeated the WHO of failing to warn the world early enough about the pandemic, an accusation widely viewed as a distraction from his own domestic mismanagement of the issue.
At Friday's conference, Maria Van Kerkhove, technical lead of WHO Health Emergencies Programme, said it was "very very welcome news" to hear that there were no more severe cases and no more patients of COVID-19 in Wuhan.
"China has worked very hard to bring the outbreak under control," said Van Kerkhove, a US scientist who spent two weeks in China during the peak of the outbreak. She said she was working directly with ministry officials and officials from all different sectors, such as hospitals and communities, to see what has been put in place to bring those numbers down.
She said the world has learned from China as it has learned from all countries over how they are dealing with COVID-19. It is necessary to continue to learn lessons from Wuhan, she said, such as how lockdown measures are being lifted and how to bring society back to normal, or establish a new normal, in terms of living with this virus going forward.
Van Kerkhove thanked healthcare workers who put themselves on the frontlines to care for patients, away from their own families, and preventing those infected with COVID-19 from dying.
During the outbreak, more than 40,000 healthcare workers were dispatched from all over China to Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital city.
"So nothing but admiration. And thanks for the tireless efforts of the people of Wuhan, not just healthcare workers, but the individuals who stayed in their homes, and who adhered to the public health measures for an extended period of time," she said.
"We take our hats off to you. We thank you for your commitment and your service, and for sharing with us and the world what you have been able to do. So congratulations to Wuhan on this achievement." However, she added that she expected people in the city to remain vigilant in case of any more cases. "This is far from over," she said.
---
By WANG XIAOYU | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-01-29 07:12

A medical worker at the hospital performs a nucleic acid test on a biosafety kit. [Photo by Wang Jing/China Daily]
Chinese researchers involved in identifying the pathogen that causes COVID-19 as the disease first began its rapid spread said they stress both speed and prudence in their work in order to provide quick and accurate information to aid the global fight against the virus.
After COVID-19 hit Wuhan, Hubei province, in late December 2019, they managed to isolate the virus on Jan 7, 2020 after about a week's work, breaking the record for the shortest time to get a grip on an emerging contagious illness, said Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Two days later, China shared its initial progress in determining the pathogen that caused the viral outbreak with the World Health Organization. Then on Jan 12, Chinese researchers from three institutions uploaded genome sequences of five viral strains to GISAIDÔºçthe global initiative on sharing all influenza dataÔºçan international genomic database.
"Lack of understanding about the pathogen is analogous to missing enemies on the battlefield," said Wu Guizhen, the chief expert on biosafety at the China CDC. She added that swift identification of the pathogen won precious time for global scientists to develop testing kits and vaccines, screen for effective treatment and trace the origin of the virus.
Zhou Peng, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, said technological advances have markedly shortened how long it takes scientists to sequence the genome of a viral sample.
By comparison, the full genome sequence of the virus that caused the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in 2003 was released by Canadian scientists six months after the first case was detected.
"Currently, a genome sequence can be obtained within 24 hours at the fastest. But when faced with an emerging new virus, it will certainly take longer to verify results and analyze which pathogen causes the disease," he said.
Among the first group of novel coronavirus genome sequences released publicly, three were mapped out by the emergency technical center under the China CDC's National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing.
Tan Wenjie, head of the center, said it took less than two days for laboratory workers to obtain the genetic makeup of the four viral samples from Wuhan that arrived on Jan 2.
To ensure the accuracy of the results, Tan said three generations of genome sequencing techniques were deployed to verify the results, and multiple units at the China CDC, including its P3-level biosafety laboratory and the China National Influenza Center, were mobilized to expedite the procedure.
The fast-paced search for the pathogen also played out at the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences' Institute of Pathogen Biology in Beijing, which contributed to sharing one genome sequence on Jan 12.
Ren Lili, a researcher at the institute, said the first hurdle in putting together a complete genome sequence was the low viral load in the samples available.
"Compared with the huge quantities of human genome and microbiome in viral samples, the virus genome only takes up a very small proportion," she said. "It is thus challenging to minimize effects from other genomes when handling clinical samples." A microbiome is a collection of the genetic material of all microbes in a human body.
In addition to laying out the genome sequence of the virus, Ren said it is crucial to parsing the genomic information to extrapolate whether it is a new or known pathogen that causes the patient to get sick, which requires extensive knowledge and a profound understanding of virology.
"Within 50 hours of receiving the sample, we had sequenced the virus' genome, verified our findings and compared it with known coronaviruses to point out differences," she said.
The National Health Commission said it had commissioned a handful of high-level laboratories in the country to isolate the virus and identify genome sequences independently and simultaneously.
Wu Zunyou, from the China CDC, said during a previous interview that the top health authority was not assured until results from all laboratories had unanimously suggested that a novel coronavirus was the pathogen. "High-level experts were also convened together again to verify the results and confirm the conclusion," he added.
"In terms of sequencing the virus," Ren said, "speed is not the sole purpose. It is equally important, if not more so, to ensure that the information and data that we produce is of high quality."
---
China Daily | Updated: 2020-06-01 07:27

MA XUEJING/CHINA DAILY
Editor's Note: The United States administration is blaming China for the novel coronavirus outbreak, in order to cover up its failure to control the spread of the virus in the country and limit the death tollÔºçwhich now is the highest in the world. Probably frustrated by their humungous failure, some US states and private organizations have filed lawsuits against China. But those lawsuits are flawed, both factually and legally. Following are the views of five Chinese experts on the issue, which were first published in People's Daily, Guangming Daily and Legal Daily:
No law to pin blame on China for outbreak
Since March, some lawmakers, government officials, media outlets, think tanks and NGOs in the US have been claiming that China is "responsible" for the coronavirus outbreak, and some US states and private organizations have filed lawsuits against the Chinese government seeking huge compensation for the human and economic losses they have suffered.
The filing of these lawsuits in US courts is not only a gross abuse of domestic laws but also an ugly manifestation of the US' pursuit of power politics and hegemonism. The lawsuits are not only untenable in international law but also against the world order established after the end of World War II with the United Nations at its core, and a violation of China's sovereignty.
The lawsuits are based on the so-called China-is-responsible theory. The "plaintiffs" presume that the novel coronavirus originated in China, and the Chinese government concealed the information about the outbreak, thereby allowing it to spread across the world. Therefore, they argue, China should bear responsibility for the global damage the virus has caused. This accusation has no basis in fact or law.
Although China was the first to report the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, neither the World Health Organization nor the international scientific community has traced the origin of novel coronavirus to Wuhan. Tracing the origin of the virus should be left to scientists, instead of being politicized.
More important, there is no international law which stipulates that a country where a virus originates needs to bear responsibility for any outbreaks in other countries, and thus there is no so-called state responsibility for the country that first reported the outbreak. So China does not assume any state responsibility for the pandemic under international law, especially because the origin of the virus has not been scientifically traced.
AIDS was first reported in the US in the 1980s and then the human immunodeficiency virus spread around the world, but the international community has never demanded that the US bear responsibility for spreading the virus and pay compensation to all the countries affected by HIV/AIDS.
As an early victim of the COVID-19 outbreak, China is keenly aware of the damage caused by the pandemic. Humankind is a community with a shared future, and the novel coronavirus is a common enemy of humankind. And only by working together and making concerted efforts can all the countries effectively contain the virus.
Huang Jin, a professor at the China University of Political Science and Law and president of the Chinese Society of International Law
A ploy to divert public attention from US failure
Human history, in part, is a history of human struggle against pestilence. The development of different countries and regions, including the rise and fall of great powers, the beginning, progress and end of wars and armed conflicts, and the development and changes in religions and cultures, have been often directly influenced by plagues. People can draw lessons and inspiration from history to contain epidemics; they can even predict the future by studying history.
The COVID-19 pandemic is a mirror that reflects the cognitive and specious strengths and weaknesses of different countries and regions, and shows us the direction in which we should make efforts to contain epidemics.
The fight against the novel coronavirus should be based on scientific methods, given that the virus does not discriminate against any ideology, social system, religion or ethnicity. Quarantine, including home quarantine, and "social distancing" are essential for preventing and controlling the spread of the virus, which China strictly followed and many other countries did not.
Besides, in less than a month, China identified the novel coronavirus as a new virus, notified the World Health Organization and other countries about it, and completed its genome sequencing. This is rare in world history.
Yet it is unscientific to conclude without any evidence that the virus originated in a particular place. Also, China was the country to sound the alarm against the imminent epidemicÔºçand has led the way in exploring epidemic risks and contributing to global research on the virus.
In the early stage of the epidemic, when the number of infections was not very high, some local government officials in China wanted some more time to watch the situation and then take strict measures against the outbreak, but the central government, without delay, dispatched an expert team to Wuhan to assess the situation and imposed a lockdown on Wuhan, a city with 11 million people, followed by a lockdown on its parent province of Hubei a few days later.
Subsequently, the central government took stringent measures across the country to prevent the spread of the virus, and thus made a remarkable contribution to the global fight against the pandemic.
But despite scientific tracing of the virus's origin not making due progress, some US politicians and legal activists have hastily filed lawsuits claiming compensation from China for the pandemic, which is a blatant violation of the sovereign immunity of other states that the US itself recognizes, in order to divert the American public's attention from the failure of the US administration to contain the virus.
Liu Huawen, director of the Institute of International Law, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
Outrageous misuse of American laws
The lawsuits filed in US courts seeking compensation from the Chinese government, government agencies or individuals who work for the government for the COVID-19 pandemic are nothing but a gross misuse of US domestic laws based on baseless accusations.
In accordance with the principle of sovereign immunity, China and its government are not subject to the jurisdiction of a court in another country and thus cannot be called to defend themselves in any legal proceedings. The principle of sovereign state immunity is not only a basic principle of international law but also a legal norm widely accepted by the judiciaries of all countries. The US is a country with comprehensive domestic legislation on sovereign immunity of states, and the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act it enacted in 1976 gives state immunity to sovereign states and governments from the jurisdiction of US courts.
From the point of view of cause of action, these litigations are nothing but an abuse of law to level false accusations against a foreign entity. Any litigation must have a legitimate ground, but the lawsuits filed in the US lack any legitimate grounds. Take the case filed by the Mississippi state as an example. The case against China, according to media reports, is based on claims such as the novel coronavirus originated in China, the defendant allowed the virus to spread, the defendant concealed the spread of the virus, the defendant's act caused damage to the "plaintiff", and the defendant stockpiled personal protective equipment for illegal gain. All these charges and causes of action are groundless, and untenable in law.
As for the origin of the novel coronavirus, the global consensus is that tracing the origin of the virus is a scientific issue that should be left to scientists to do. And before scientists trace the exact origin of the virus, any claim about its origin would be unscientific, rather fictive, and therefore cannot be used to seek compensation. The claim that China failed to notify the WHO in time and allowed the virus to spread, as well as other accusations against China are so devoid of facts that they don't even deserve rebuttal.
The coronavirus outbreak is the worst pandemic in a century, and the entire international community needs to join hands to effectively contain it. So, unscrupulous politicians in the US and other countries should refrain from filing such lawsuits against China in local courts, and that too without any evidence. These politicians are behind the lawsuits, which they assume will absolve them of their responsibilities, because they believe such moves will help them achieve their political goals, and divert public attention from their failure to contain the virus in their countries.
Xu Guojian, vice-president of China Society of Private International Law
US politicians' move aimed at achieving nefarious goals
The compensation claims are a planned political conspiracy by US politicians against China. In this US presidential election year, the politicians' move is aimed at achieving their domestic political goals. They are trying to pin the blame on China for the pandemic, so as to curb China's influence in the global arena and thus impeding its economic and political development.
But the law in every country is designed to protect only legitimate claims, and prohibits false accusations. So anyone trying to falsely accuse others can be held accountable for undermining justice, poisoning the social atmosphere and wasting judicial resources.
In the US, although the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act allows US victims to seek damages from a foreign state for personal injury, death, or property damage or loss in the US, it does not support any claim based on exercise and performance or nonexercise and non-performance of discretion, whether or not such discretion has been abused, nor does it support any claim arising from false accusation, abuse of procedure, libel, slander, distortion, deception or interference with contractual rights.
Besides, international law requires states to establish and exercise jurisdiction on the basis of the principle of territoriality and personal ownership, in order to minimize jurisdictional conflicts and to promote stability and harmony in international relations.
According to international law, sovereign states are free from the jurisdiction of other states, and unless a state waives immunity from jurisdiction, a court of another state cannot hear a case in which the state or the government of that state is the defendant or against the state property of that state; and unless the state expressly waives immunity from enforcement, the courts of other states cannot impose judicial enforcement measures against the state, its government or its property. Based on such principles, the US government and courts have an obligation to ensure that China's state immunity is not violated.
Huang Huikang, a member of the International Law Commission of the United Nations and distinguished professor at the Institute of International Law, Wuhan University
Spread of virus cannot be classified as an act of a state
Some "plaintiffs" have filed lawsuits in some countries against China seeking compensation for the novel coronavirus outbreak. But, judging by media reports, it is clear that these lawsuits are not based on facts or law and will therefore not get the support of the courts. The "plaintiffs" may even be held accountable for the adverse consequences of the lawsuits or face public criticisms.
In accordance with the principle of sovereign immunity under international law, a sovereign state is generally not subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of another sovereign state. The Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act, passed by the US Congress on Oct 21, 1976, also provides that a foreign country shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of US and its states' courts. According to the principle of sovereign state immunity, under the current legal framework, the courts of the US have no civil jurisdiction to sue other governments for claims related to the prevention and control of the COVID-19 epidemic.
Of course, there are exceptions to the principle of sovereign state immunityÔºçcommercial acts of a state directly harming US interests and improper acts by another state within the US. In these two cases, the government of another state can be sued in the courts of the US. But the lawsuits filed against China are all based on the argument that the Wuhan Institute of Virology and a seafood market in Wuhan are commercial venues that are in fact controlled by the Chinese government. Such an argument is inconsistent with the facts and will not be upheld by the courts.
Also, under the US Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act, economic losses and the business activities that caused these losses should have occurred within the US for the two exceptions to apply, but all the lawsuits are against something the "plaintiffs" claim happened in China.
In international law, the acts attributable to the state include only the acts of state organs and the acts of institutions or individuals authorized to exercise government power. The acts of other subjects cannot be attributed to the state.
And since the mainstream scientific community around the world is of the opinion that viruses originate in nature and there is no scientific evidence to prove that the novel coronavirus came from a laboratory, the spread of the virus among people cannot be classified as an act of a state.
Wang Zhengzhi, director of the Globe-Law Law Firm
The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/62/159097010113.jpeg
---
Beijing Review | Updated: 2020-04-20 11:40

An anti-COVID-19 medical team from China to Malaysia is received by Chinese Ambassador to Malaysia Bai Tian (second left, front) at the Kuala Lumpur International Airport on April 18 (XINHUA)
China well understands the grim and severe challenges the U.S. is facing in the pandemic. We share the worries and woes and extend our deep sympathies, and are providing support and assistance to the world, U.S. included for sure, to the best of our ability, despite China's own high demand for medical supplies at home as millions are returning to work, and concerns over imported cases and a COVID-19 resurgence persist.
By the same token, China does not want the world's general public to be misled by groundless accusations and stigmatization against China. Reason and civility need to be maintained at this critical juncture. We believe it's a fight of the whole world against the virus, not an in-fight among global villagers, least a bitter rift for selfish political calculations and gains. Global combat against COVID-19 should be a united battle and should have nothing to do with social system or geopolitics. To point the finger at others helps little with one's own country's virus containment. Sometimes, the only effects it generates are hatred and confrontation.
"First Report" ‚â† "Origin," Not Equate
Though COVID-19 was first reported in China, it does not mean that it originated from China. Ignorance needs to be overcome with science and prejudice with cooperation. The purpose of finding the virus source is to enable humans to defeat the virus and to avoid repeat of the same mistakes. Any attempt to put a label on the coronavirus is to despise science and common sense.
Up to date, even the scientific world has no conclusion where the virus came from. Someone has used invidious and inaccurate terms and acridly called the novel coronavirus "China virus." AIDS was first found in the U.S., does anyone label it as "America AIDS?" The H1NI virus broke out in North America and spread to the world in 2009. Does anyone call it "America virus?"
The influenza infection rate and mortality rate in the U.S. are both high. Global media outlets have constantly raised the question that the novel coronavirus epidemic and the influenza epidemic are not clearly distinguished in the U.S. The New York Times reported on April 8 that researchers suggested the coronavirus was circulating in New York in mid-February as genetic analysis showed that the virus came to the area mainly from Europe. A separate team at New York University Grossman School of Medicine came to strikingly similar conclusions, despite studying a different group of cases, said the report.
Peter Forster, a geneticist from Cambridge, published a paper on April 8 on Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) in the U.S., mapping out the early mutations of the deadly coronavirus. According to the calculation of Forster and his team, the first human infection of COVID-19, referred to as SARS-CoV-2 in the paper, took place between September 13 and December 7 in 2019. Forster's paper on PNAS creatively applied "phylogenetic network analysis," which he usually uses to analyze human origins, onto finding the virus origin. After mapping out 160 genetic samples from across the world, he found three major types of the SARS-CoV-2, namely A, B and C. The A type, being the first type to infect humans, are widely seen in Europe and America but not so common in East Asia. And the B type, popular in East Asia, seemed to be largely locked in the region, partly because people in other areas may have better resistance against this type. The C type is found in significant proportions outside East Asia, and that again is, in Europeans and Americans.
The scientific journal Nature Medicine published a report on the origins of the novel coronavirus, again referred to as SARS-CoV-2 in the article. Based on genomic data, it concluded that COVID-19 "is not a laboratory construct or a purposely manipulated virus." Scientists who were part of this study traced the novel coronavirus back to cases before Wuhan. Dr. Robert Garry, professor from the Tulane University School of Medicine and one of the co-authors in the research, told the ABC News while answering whether the virus originated from a market in Wuhan, that "our analyses, and others too, point to an earlier origin than that. There were definitely cases there, but that wasn't the origin of the virus."
The naming of diseases has always been as much about politics and the need to identify a scapegoat, as it has been about accurately labeling a new threat to life. Periodic attempts have been made to remove the subjective from the process. In 2015,the World Health Organization (WHO) came up with an updated set of guidelines for labeling infectious diseases, and warned against using language that associates viruses with a geographic location or ethnic group, in the hope that by halting politically inspired names, it would enhance public health. After all, the fallout from misnaming a disease can be devastating.
Who Is Spreading Disinformation and Who Should Be Held Accountable? Time Line Gives Clear Answer
The explosive spread of COVID-19 caught the world by surprise. However, China's handling and notification is extremely speedy, open, transparent and responsible, as has been clearly demonstrated by the following time line, especially taking into account that COVID-19 is a brand-new virus, it would naturally take some time for China to compass the right direction by making scientific and prudent assessment of its character, transmissibility and severity to stem the spread of the virus. "The speed and scale of China's move were rarely seen in the world," as appraised highly by WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.
On December 27, 2019, Zhang Jixian, director of the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care at Hubei Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, reported the first three suspected cases.
On December 29, 2019, centers for disease control and prevention and hospitals in Hubei and Wuhan carried out epidemiological investigation.
On December 30, 2019, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission issued an "urgent notice on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause."
On December 31, 2019, the National Health Commission sent an expert group to Wuhan to investigate on site.
On January 3, 2020, China started to send timely updates to WHO and other countries, including the U.S., covering the number of diagnosed, suspected, severe, cured, dead and quarantined.
On January 7, the virus was separated.
On January 8, the pathogen was preliminarily identified.
On January 11, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention uploaded five whole genome sequences of the novel coronavirus online and shared data with the world and WHO.
On January 23, the decision to seal off Wuhan, a city of 11 million, the first time in human history, took only a few days, and unprecedented, comprehensive, thorough and rigorous measures were adopted. These measures go beyond the requirement of International Health Regulations in many aspects. The government understood that life came before the economy. Its extraordinary and decisive leadership met with an equally extraordinary and proactive response from the people.
Based on the above chronological order, the time line of China's response has sorted out China's release of epidemic information to the world, showcasing China's sincerity in promoting international exchanges and cooperation on epidemic prevention and control.
Plus, on January 30, WHO declared the epidemic as a "public health emergency of international concern," and this again proved that there was no delay in China's notification.
Another case in point is, within 55 days, the number of new cases in Wuhan dropped to zero. According to a study in Science magazine, China's firm and speedy response cut the incidence by 96 percent than expected. Researchers in the United States, the United Kingdom and other countries emphasized that China's control measures have successfully broken the chain of transmission and bought other countries valuable time. WHO affirmed that countries like Singapore and the Republic of Korea have made full use of the precious time China bought for the world and taken necessary prevention and control measures to stem the spread of the looming crisis.
Wuhan and China have won for the world, and at China's own greatest loss and sacrifice, most valuable time to get both physically and psychologically prepared. Wuhan is a responsible city and China is a responsible major country, setting a model for cities and for countries around the world.
Yet within those 55 days, despite the available knowledge of the virus's trait from China and the repeated calls for better prevention from WHO, the number of confirmed cases for COVID-19 in the U.S. has soared from only about 10 on February 2 when the U.S. announced the denial of entry by foreigners who had visited China in the past 14 days, to more than 30,000! Skyrocketed 3,000 times!
What Has Happened and What Has Gone Wrong?
Richard Horton, Chief Editor of the respected medical publication The Lancet, pointed out the information that came from China at the end of January was "absolutely clear" and "we wasted February when we could have acted."
In its article on April 4 titled "70 Days of Denial, Delays and Dysfunction," The Washington Post emphasized that "from the White House to the CDC [U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention], political and institutional failures cascaded as the virus spread. Despite being better prepared than many countries, the U.S. saw opportunities to mitigate the crisis slip away." On April 12, The New York Times, in its article "Despite Timely Alerts, Trump Was Slow to Act," reported that President Donald Trump "finally took aggressive action to confront the danger the nation was facing" seven weeks after the first coronavirus case had been identified in the U.S. Nancy Pelosi, in her letter on April 14 said that the U.S. leader "was warned in January about this pandemic, ignored those warnings, took insufficient action and caused unnecessary death and disaster. One month later, we do not have appropriate testing. The failure to test is central to the spread of the virus and its impact on those most vulnerable in our society." Professor Martin Jacques observed in his article Chinese vs. Western Governance: the Case of COVID-19 that "now it is revealed to the world that Western governments wasted a minimum of two and a half months. Western governance has proven to be blinded by its own hubris, unable to learn from China until far too late, ill-equipped to grasp the kind of radical action that is required of it."
Dr. Helen Y. Chu, a whistle-blower in the U.S., sounded the alarm on COVID-19 in the U.S. back in January, and reported her testing results to U.S. regulators, only to be told to "cease and desist" and "stop testing." At the end of February, the White House still asked officials and health experts to get approval from the office of Vice President Mike Pence before making public statements on the epidemic. On March 2, the CDC stopped releasing data on tests and deaths. On March 2, Dr. McCarthy from the New York-Presbyterian Hospital said at a CNBC program that his hospital had to "plead" to health authorities to test suspected cases.
Dr. Anthony Fauci, the medical expert leading the White House effort to contain the coronavirus, reaffirmed in his interview with Science magazine that he refused to let others push him to say that China should warn the U.S. three months beforehand, because it just doesn't comport with facts.
Who has covered up facts and evaded its own responsibility? Who has selling cheap tricks in spreading disinformation? Who has played as indifferent onlookers, dismissed and ignored the threat as a "foreign virus," and indulged in fancy illusion that the virus only infected China and Asians, and wasted precious time till was deadly hit? The answer is crystal clear.
The World Owes China Big Thanks
China merits the world's gratitude and appreciation, for China's arduous efforts in going all out to save lives and minimize global transmission; for China's decisive, timely, efficient and effective measures in combating COVID-19, thereby injecting confidence, collecting experiences and enlightening the world that the disease is by and large curable; for China's graceful and kind heart in the manifestation of its swift and concrete actions in extending great assistance to the contagion-affected countries, in the humanitarian spirit of saving more lives and safeguarding global public health security; for China's advocate both in words and deeds that solidarity and cooperation are the only most powerful weapons in face of global challenges; and for China's persistent pursue of a community of shared future for mankind, despite slanders, smears and dirty attacks in return of gracious help.
China has provided assistance in large quantities, including respirators, medical masks, N95 masks, goggles, protective gowns, nucleic acid testing reagent and ventilators to more than 120 countries and several international organizations. Chinese doctors and health specialists are working hand in hand with their foreign counterparts, both online and on the ground, in sharing technical documents, including epidemic prevention and control measures, as well as diagnosis and treatment plans. Chinese medical teams are fighting the virus shoulder to shoulder with their colleagues in Italy, Iran and many other countries. Chinese local governments, charity organizations and business communities are also joining the efforts and making their contributions.
Why does China help? All its help is out of a grateful heart and out of humanitarian spirit. Helping those countries and international organizations at the latter's request is, on the one hand, reciprocating kindness and friendship extended to China in its hardest time during COVID-19 fight, and on the other hand, acting in line with international humanitarianism and the building of a community with a shared future for mankind. China would never stand by and leave its friends in difficulty. As President Xi Jinping emphasized at the Extraordinary G20 Leaders' Summit that "it is imperative for the international community to strengthen confidence, act with unity and work together in a collective response. We need to jointly keep the global industrial and supply chains stable." What China will do at this unprecedented moment, is to increase its supply of active pharmaceutical ingredients, daily necessities, and anti-epidemic and other supplies to the international community to jointly keep the global industrial and supply chains stable.
China's virtuous acts have, in the larger picture, won extensive gratitude and applause from the world. Cypriot President Nicos Anastasiades expressed his gratitude to China for providing Cyprus with medical supplies and sharing its scientific expertise in the common fight against COVID-19. Peter Pellegrini, Prime Minister of Slovakia, expressed gratitude to China on the social networking platform Instagram as a batch of medical supplies, including 1 million medical masks and 100,000 nucleic acid reagent test kits, arrived at Bratislava Airport on March 19. "We are grateful for China's support," said Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, as Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang announced that China would provide 2 million surgical masks, 200,000 N95 masks and 50,000 testing kits. Luigi Di Maio, Minister of Foreign Affairs in Italy, thanked the Chinese government for donating medical supplies and sending coronavirus specialists to Italy. Milos Zeman, President of the Czech Republic, Emmerson Dambudzo Mnangagwa, President of Zimbabwe, Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs in France, Seyyed Abbas Mousavi, Iranian Foreign Ministry Spokesman, among others, have all expressed thanks to China in one way or another for China's assistance in combating the pneumonia outbreak.
Yet at the same time, a bunch of media trolls, pundits, together with some politicians, in returning evil for good, have been sparing no efforts to vilify China.
It is meaningless to repeat their words and deeds, for those are only different tricks to pin blame on others, to shirk responsibility in blind self-entertainment that their lives would be better off if they create a scapegoat and common enemy. How interesting!
Facts and figures are more powerful than fabrications and accusations.
China's sacrifices, efforts and contributions have well protected its homeland, and contributed to the world. China has set a new standard for the world in fulfilling international obligations, as has been widely acknowledged and noted by WHO and the international community.
The ongoing battle is living proof of how much we all belong to a community with a shared future. To use the tragedy of the coronavirus pandemic, with all the deaths, illness and suffering that ensued, as a stick to beat others was nothing short of a disgrace. To throw malicious stones, pass the buck and divert domestic dissatisfaction, to make up lies and deceit, to seek excuses and scapegoats for a country's poor response and incompetence in handling and containing the severity of this viral outbreak, all these could by no means help with alleviating the hard situation of that country, least to support the international community's joint efforts against COVID-19.
Now, lives and health are at stake. Enough time has been wasted. Efforts should be spent on saving more lives, not on hysterical biting any more.
It takes a coordinated global effort to roll back a global scourge. What doesn't break you only makes you stronger. The international community must foster greater synergy and work in solidarity till the final victory is sealed.
The author is an op-ed contributor to Beijing Review and a senior expert on international studies
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/24/158736269519.jpeg
---
China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-17 07:20

SONG CHEN/CHINA DAILY
Editor's Note: In an essay, a senior research fellow at China Institute of International Studies has exposed Washington's problems in dealing with the novel coronavirus pandemic, saying the blame game won't cure the US' ills. Following is the full text:
By Friday, the United States had more than 5 million confirmed COVID-19 cases and over 163,000 deaths, both highest in the world. Stunned by the surging cases, people in the US and around the world can't help but wonder what has happened to the US and why. To that question, the White House and Republicans have an answer: It is China's fault.
But the China blame game is both undesirable and deadly.
US' favorite blame game
A punching bag for political forces in the US for decades, China is an easy target to pick during a health crisis in a presidential election year. In the past decade, China-bashing has taken on new intensity, and under President Donald Trump's watch, China has been increasingly viewed as a strategic competitor. Blaming China, in fact, has become part of a well-publicized Republican campaign strategy in the election year.
Some American politicians accuse China of covering up the epidemic, not sharing sufficient information timely, and underreporting the number of cases. They claim, explicitly or implicitly, that the novel coronavirus originated in a lab in Wuhan. They would even like to make China accountable for the losses the US has suffered in the pandemic. And the US president has accused the World Health Organization of being "China-centric", even pulled the US out of the WHO.
The Chinese side has refuted all these allegations.
The first three suspected cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in China were reported by Zhang Jixian, a doctor from Hubei province, on Dec 27, 2019. Then a sizable group of professionals from local centers for disease control and prevention and hospitals, as well as from China's National Health Commission scrambled to investigate how contagious the virus is and assess its destructive potential. This level of early alertness, awareness and quick response by Chinese medical experts could be attributed, to some degree, to their experiences of the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak and lessons learned thereafter.
Regular updates on pandemic situation
The first week after the disease was detected saw China beginning to send timely updates to the WHO, and other countries, including the US. As of Feb 3, China had given the US briefings on the epidemic and information on its prevention and control measures 30 times, almost on a daily basis. The WHO, too, has been providing frequent briefings and updates on the outbreak. According to various news sources, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has acknowledged that it first learned of a "cluster of 27 cases of pneumonia" of unexplained origin in Wuhan as early as Dec 31.
China has regularly updated the WHO, too, about the epidemic situation in the country, fulfilling its obligations of notifying the global health body under the framework of International Health Regulations. China also hosted a field visit by a WHO delegation to Wuhan on Jan 20-21, and the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 on Feb 16-24Ôºçtwo members of the mission were from the US.
China's intensity of action and interaction including exchange of information with the WHO and its member states shows that from the very beginning, the US administration has been regularly and well informed by the Chinese side and the WHO on the epidemic situation in China and the rest of the world.
In retrospect, even China's public announcement on COVID-19 to alert the whole nation on Jan 20 left the US nearly two months to make preparations for preventing and controlling the spread of the virus. Therefore, the perceived "delay" in China's response cannot serve as an excuse for the US administration's sluggish response.
The first couple of weeks also witnessed Chinese professionals deepening their understanding of the nature, scale and infectiousness of the disease and sharing their findings with the rest of the world in real time.
They wasted no time in conducting research on the cases available. Their successive findings and achievements over time include the identification of the pneumonia to be viral and caused by the novel coronavirus, development of testing kits, and submission to the WHO the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) as well as preliminary estimates of key epidemiological parameters of COVID-19Ôºçthe disease caused by SARS-CoV-2Ôºçsuch as the incubation period, case fatality ratio, the serial interval and the basic reproduction number (R0).
Richard Horton, editor of the prestigious medical journal Lancet, said: "Under immense pressure, as the epidemic exploded around them, they took time to write up their findings in a foreign language and seek publication in a medical journal thousands of miles away. Their rapid and rigorous work was an urgent warning to the world. We owe those scientists enormous thanks."
And Michael Head, a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton, stated: "The Chinese have been leading the way in publishing open-access evidence on case management, genomics and numerous areas of public health and epidemiology, which has been vital in informing the response in more or less every country."
Firm foundation for govt decision-making
These findings laid a firm foundation for government decision-making, leading to strict anti-epidemic measures nationwide ahead of the Spring Festival holiday, which affected hundreds of millions of people in China. This drastic and unprecedented move alone served as a strong message to the world about the nature and severity of COVID-19.
In his tweet on Jan 24, Trump praised China's efforts to control the spread of the virus thus: "China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency. It will all work out well." Since then and throughout late January and February, Trump repeatedly praised China's handling of the outbreak, acknowledging that China was "doing a very professional job" and was in touch with the WHO and the US CDC.
But when the numbers of infections and deaths in the US climbed to the top of the global list, the White House changed its attitude, and turned the pandemic into a battle against China, stoking nationalism by overstressing the fact that the virus was first detected and reported in China.
The US side has touted conspiracies without offering any evidence, and ignoring the counterarguments of leading scientists around the world including US scientists. It even began doubting China's data as if a much higher number of Chinese infections and deaths would have made American numbers look nicer to US voters, and US leaders less accountable for the high numbers of infections and deaths. That is the key to understanding the shift in the White House's narrative from acknowledging China's transparency and professionalism in containing the outbreak to blaming China for the US' problems.
Stringent anti-pandemic measures behind success
The fact is, China succeeded in "flattening the curve" by taking comprehensive and stringent measures, not by distorting data. The Chinese government has time and again stressed the importance of ensuring the data are accurate throughout the fight against the pandemic, and those who fail to follow the rules of reporting are disciplined.
Over 100 days, more than 3,000 press conferences were held by governments and health departments at the national, provincial and municipal levels, providing daily updates on the pandemic situation and answering related questions, and releasing information on both infections and deaths, so as to increase public awareness and assist in timely contact tracing.
With a cell phone in hand, every Chinese citizen has access to information that may alert them to risks of being physically close to infected people or suspected cases either in their neighborhoods, workplaces or in public transport vehicles. China has a policy of meticulous case and contact identification for COVID-19. In Wuhan alone, more than 1,800 epidemiologists, in a minimum of five-member teams, were tracing tens of thousands of contacts a day. Timely and accurate data on the pandemic are what they needed to make the fight successful.
Under such circumstances, any cover-up or deliberate underreporting of COVID-19 cases or the scale of the outbreak in China is beyond imagination, even punishable. No one in the world is more willing and eager than the Chinese government and people to get a clear understanding of the scale, nature and infectiousness of the virus in the country.
As for allegations that the novel coronavirus was made in the Wuhan Institute of Virology or spread through an accidental leak from the institute, the institute has unequivocally stated that the virus did not originate there. Peer-reviewed and esteemed journals such as the Lancet, Nature and Science have published articles dismissing such weird claims.
A representative voice is that of Peter Daszak, who has been working with the Wuhan institute for the past 15 years. In his interviews with CNN on April 26, and CBS' 60 Minutes on May 10, Daszak said the Wuhan P4 Laboratory didn't have the virus that led to COVID-19. In his words, "Nobody has the virus from bats that then led to COVID-19. We've not found it yet. We found close relatives, but it's not the same virus." Therefore, the virus could not have come from that lab.
As for those pursuing lawsuits against China based on their allegations that China is responsible for the global spread of the virus, there is no legal basis for any such lawsuits and no factual evidence to support their allegations against China.
White House fails to see big picture
"They've simply lost time they can't make up. You can't get back six weeks of blindness," Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development and a Barack Obama-era administration staffer involved in the government's response to the Ebola virus epidemic in Africa, told The Washington Post. "To the extent that there's someone to blame here, the blame is on poor, chaotic management from the White House and failure to acknowledge the big picture."
Numerous news reports of interviews with current and former US officials, internal emails, memorandums and other recently unearthed evidence from Washington indicate that the White House was being continuously warned of a coming pandemic and its possible consequences but chose to play down the seriousness of the virus. Trump even tweeted that, "We have it totally under control", and "USA in great shape!"
In addition to these missed early warnings, other major missteps and lost opportunities at the federal level also contributed to the surging cases, especially stalled testing issues. Testing is a key link in the chain of necessary measures of response. Had the US tracked the virus' earliest reach and identified hidden hot spots of community transmission, local quarantining might have been able to confine the disease, according to a report in The New York Times.
There are some root causes for the negligence and inaction, and the loopholes in dealing with the pandemic. First, the White House has engaged in a tug-of-war with scientists and experts over the anti-pandemic policy. As CNN, the NYT and other US and international media outlets have reported, the US administration is putting science aside in the battle against the virus.
Cuts in medical emergency funds fuelled US crisis
Second, the lack of attention to federal preparedness and coordination helps explain why the US administration has consistently botched its response to the pandemic. Fortune magazine has reported that over the past two years, the Trump administration has been systematically dismantling government agencies and cutting funds specifically designed to protect against pandemics such as the one raging now.
Third, the US administration is prioritizing politics over public health amid the worst public health crisis in the US in a century. Like it or not, in the election year voters will almost certainly choose sides based on how Trump and his administration have responded to the pandemic. Trump and his political strategists feel very comfortable with their familiar playbook of the 2016 campaign as he seeks a second term: blame the outsiders.
As for the Democrats, they would put all the blame on Trump, highlighting how he initially downplayed the pandemic, and underlining his subsequent follies. They would try to show voters that they can do a better job of governance.
A political battle leading to bigger and bitter polarization among Americans does not bode well for the fight against the pandemic. And blaming China won't solve the US' problems.
The US' blame game has further soured Sino-US relations and increased tensions between the two sides. As a result, the number of Americans holding a negative view about China is increasing, with Republicans being more likely than Democrats to view China unfavorably, according to a recent survey by Pew Research Center.
Serious strategic policy mistake
Besides, by making China the scapegoat for all its ills, the US will weaken its response to COVID-19 and harm cross-border cooperation in the fight against the pandemic, leading to loss of more lives. For instance, some Americans tend to view the coronavirus outbreak in China as a result of its unique political system, and China's vigorous response measures as being "draconian" and "totalitarian". The White House and many of its supporters also view China's interaction and cooperation with other countries through a prism of great power competition.
This line of ideology-driven logic has clouded some Americans' understanding and judgment of COVID-19, and their ability to act in proportion to the severity and nature of the pandemic.
When China is demonized and deemed untrustworthy, US opinion leaders tend to treat China as the "other", and believe it is politically incorrect to discuss the effectiveness of China's response to the outbreak. They may talk about how the Republic of Korea, Japan and Singapore have responded to the outbreak, without mentioning China, which has a far larger population and might offer equally, if not more, important references for the US.
Anti-China moves remind of the McCarthy era
Under such circumstances, reporting and discussing China's effectiveness in mitigating and containing COVID-19 are often viewed as parroting "Chinese propaganda", siding with China, and undercutting Trump's presidential campaign. No wonder former US ambassador to China Max Baucus said that the US administration's anti-China rhetoric reminded him of the McCarthy era.
In April, for example, the White House criticized the Voice of America, the US' official propaganda tool and foreign policy instrument, for running an Associated Press article referring to Wuhan's lockdown as a "model" for other countries battling the novel coronavirus. The White House statement asserted that in so doing, the VOA "amplified Beijing's propaganda" about COVID-19.
CNN and its journalists, who often give negative coverage to China, have recently been accused by the pro-Trump camp of "shielding China" because CNN.com ran an article indicating that the People's Liberation Army Navy has done a much better job of controlling the virus than the US Navy. On May 10, in a tweet, Trump accused CBS of "doing everything within their power" to "defend China", shortly after the network's 60 Minutes aired a story featuring virologist Daszak debunking false claims about the Wuhan lab.
The US administration and Republican strategists have determined that their best bet would be to turn the anti-virus fight into a political game, focusing on which countries and individuals can stand up to China, instead of who can better deal with the pandemic. According to news and information website Axios, a leading pro-Trump super political action committee has been testing a new ad campaign to paint Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden as being soft on China and redirecting criticism of Trump's coronavirus response.
So far, the US administration has chosen to intensify animosity with China, instead of playing a role in forging a global coalition against the coronavirus. After weeks of shifting blame to China, Trump has publicly threatened to cut off all ties with China. As Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, recently wrote, "It would be a major strategic error to make confronting China the organizing principle of US foreign policy. To do so would be to misread a world in which the most significant threats come from global problems such as disease, climate change, & terrorism."
A way out and forward
Since the COVID-19 outbreak, the Chinese government has acknowledged that prevention and control of the pandemic is a major test for China's medical system and governance capacity, which has helped it gather experiences and learn lessons. Despite the difficulties and shortcomings experienced in its initial encounter with COVID-19, China has made decisive progress in fighting the invisible enemy. Indeed, human beings make progress by learning from their mistakes. With a population of 1.4 billion, China has vowed to draw lessons from the ordeal and further improve its preparedness to deal with similar events in the future.
In the same vein, global governance has been put to test in the face of the pandemic. The coronavirus knows no border or nationality, nor does it believe in any faith. In medical terms, until a vaccine is ready, a cluster of cases in one country may pose a threat to people's health and safety in another country. And no country can weather the unprecedented pandemic crisis alone. As UN Secretary-General Ant√≥nio Guterres put it, "This is, above all, a human crisis that calls for solidarity." So world leaders must come together and offer urgent and coordinated global response.
As the world's two largest economies, the UN Security Council permanent members and major players in many multilateral institutions, the US and China have shared interests and responsibilities in prioritizing cooperation over competition and avoiding tensions and conflicts.
Collective, coordinated response need of the hour
Just imagine how consequential for the world it would be if the US and China join hands with other countries to work out a collective and coordinated response to ensure cross-border supplies of medical products and food, and collaborate in research on treatment and vaccines, as well as provide economic recovery packages.
As former US secretary of state Henry Kissinger recently argued, today's leaders should choose a path of cooperation that will lead toward improved international resilience. History shows that the US and China, despite their persistent differences, have worked together on major global issues, such as nuclear nonproliferation, counter-terrorism, climate change, energy security, the 2008 international financial crisis, and the Ebola virus outbreak.
Containing the coronavirus pandemic should be a point of rally rather than conflict for the US and China. There are a thousand reasons for the two countries to embark on a path of cooperation, but not a single one to drive bilateral relations astray.
To begin with, the US should stop the blame game.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/52/159763016749.jpeg
---
By PAN MENGQI | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-08-03 09:36
Name-calling seen as way of deflecting from mishandling of COVID-19 in US
Even as some US politicians continue to peddle the conspiracy theory that the coronavirus escaped from a Chinese laboratory in WuhanÔºçusing a US State Department cable from 2018 as evidence for their speculationÔºçglobally renowned medical experts have trashed these claims, saying they run counter to science.
Political analysts see the allegation as a way of shifting blame from the politicians' mishandling of the pandemic in their own country.
The cable said the Wuhan Institute of Virology in China "has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory", The Washington Post reported.
Commenting on the cable, Tom Inglesby, the director of the Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins University, emphasized that people should not read too much into the cable's claims, according to The Washington Post's report.
"It was written in January 2018, two years before when this pandemic is judged to have started, and a great deal of change can happen within a lab like this in two years time," he was quoted as saying.
"My judgment continues to be that (COVID-19) is consistent with a naturally occurring source," he said.
Ian Lipkin, the director of the Center for Infection and Immunity at Columbia University, told The Washington Post that there is no evidence to "support the idea that this (the virus) is released deliberately or inadvertently".
Studies on the origin of the virus have overwhelmingly shown that the novel coronavirus originated naturally rather than from any institution.
A study conducted at the US Food and Drug Administration's vector-borne viral diseases laboratory in Maryland suggested that the virus may have been well adapted in humans before the outbreak in Wuhan, the South China Morning Post reported.
The new study "may cast doubt on a theory that the virus originated in a Chinese laboratory", the report said.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry rejected the claim that the novel coronavirus originated in a laboratory in Wuhan. Spokesperson Wang Wenbin said: "The (Wuhan) laboratory has high-standard biosafety facilities and a strict management system. All the researchers must undergo systematic theoretical and operation training, and obtain the qualification and approval before entering the laboratory."
Wang said a few politicians in the US spread rumors and even claimed to have "a large amount of evidence" to support their so-called "truth," showing they have no morals.
"The contents disclosed by the relevant reports have enabled the world to see once again how little truth is in the so-called evidence and truth of the United States."
Victor Gao, chair professor at Soochow University and vice-president of the Center for China and Globalization think tank, said as the COVID-19 situation continues to worsen domestically, US politicians' smear campaign against China has become even more unscrupulous.
"Calling and blaming China 'the origin of the coronavirus', they are desperate to hold China accountable for the pandemic, and blackmail China to 'compensate' for the losses caused by COVID-19."
Scientific issue
Though it is widely acknowledged that the tracing of the virus' origin is a scientific issue and should be conducted by scientists and medical experts, the US politicians, with ulterior motives, tried their best to propagate a conspiracy theory that the coronavirus emanated from a research lab in Wuhan, Gao said.
"There are neither rational nor legal grounds for their accusations. It is only a groundless claim featuring typical US' governments' strategy of buck-passing."
Li Haidong, an international relations professor at China Foreign Affairs University, said the US administration is using conspiracy theories to blame China in order to win votes in elections in November.
Li also said that as the timeline on how the pandemic has unfolded in the US is understood clearly, the administration's irresponsibility in handling the pandemic will be increasingly exposed to the public.
Despite timely warnings from China and the World Health Organization, the US administration deliberately downplayed the severity of the pandemic and misinformed the public by repeatedly telling Americans to think of the coronavirus as the flu, Li said.
"Coining such labels as 'China virus', US politicians have carefully crafted their narrative to frame and defame China, in a bid to turn the war between humans and the coronavirus into a 'new Cold War' to suppress China."
Confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the United States have exceeded 4.6 million, with the death toll surpassing 154,000 as of Sunday, according to the Johns Hopkins University. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said at a summer camp in Georgia last month, at least 260 of 597 children contracted the coronavirus.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/28/159643492916.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-13 07:13
We provide the latest updates and crucial information on the global COVID-19 pandemic here.
Oct 12

Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Oct 12, 2020.
- Trump claims he is 'immune' from coronavirus (Read more)
- UK coronavirus cases top 600,000 as another 12,872 confirmed (Read more)
- Scientists voice concern, criticism as coronavirus resurges in multiple countries (Read more)

China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Oct 11, 2020.
-Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, all imported

- National Health Commission sends a team to Qingdao to supervise the epidemic prevention and control work(Read more)
Oct 11
Outside China
- Global COVID-19 cases surpass 37 million: Johns Hopkins University (Read more)
- Brazil's COVID-19 death toll tops 150,000 (Read more)
China
Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases, all imported (Read more)
East China city reports 3 asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 (Read more)
Oct 10
Outside China
- Fauci says White House hosted COVID-19 'super-spreader' event (Read more)
- Microsoft to let employees work from home permanently: report
- Surge in infections prompts Europe to tighten up steps against COVID-19 (Read more)
- Broadway shows in NYC to remain suspended until May 2021
China
People wearing masks walk on a street in Wan Chai, Hong Kong, on Oct 9, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese mainland reports 15 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported (Read more)
Oct 9
Outside China
- MIT peer reviews refute lab origin of coronavirus (Read more)
- Second Turkish hospital joins trials of Chinese vaccine (Read more)
- China makes commitment to world vaccine access (Read more)
- CDC forecasts up to 233,000 COVID-19 deaths in US by Oct 31
China
A worker wearing a face mask works on a production line packaging apples at the Darui Apple Industry Park in Yuexi county, Liangshan Yi autonomous prefecture, Sichuan province, on Sept 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reports 21 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
Oct 8
China
- Chinese mainland reported 11 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- US Marine Corps says assistant commandant tests positive for COVID-19 (Read more)
- Japan to ease travel restrictions for China, 11 other countries, regions next month (Read more)
Oct 7
China
Residents return home at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport on Tuesday as the eight-day National Day holiday draws to a close. [Photo by Luo Bin/for China Daily]
- Chinese mainland reports 7 new COVID-19 cases, all imported
Outside China
- Trump's top aide Stephen Miller tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- US COVID-19 cases surpass 7.5 million: Johns Hopkins University (read more)
Oct 6
China
People wearing masks are seen with luggage outside Beijing Railway Station, during the Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day holidays, on Oct 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 12 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 5, all imported
Outside China
- Trump returns to White House, removes mask and salutes (read more)
- New York governor closes schools in coronavirus hot spots (readmore)
- White House press secretary McEnany tests positive for COVID-19 (read more)
- Paris to close all bars for two weeks from Tuesday (read more)
Oct 5
Outside China
- Joe Biden tests negative for coronavirus
China
Women work in a laboratory of Chinese vaccine maker Sinovac Biotech, developing an experimental coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine in Beijing, on Sept 24, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
- Chinese mainland reported 20 new COVID-19 cases on Oct 4, all imported
Oct 4
Outside China
China
- Chinese mainland reported 16 new cases on Oct 3, all imported
Oct 3
Outside China
- Trump is given experimental drug to fight COVID (Read more)
-770 students test positive in major coronavirus outbreak at UK university (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 2
Outside China
- New Yorkers called to download app for COVID-19 alert (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 10 new COVID-19 cases on Friday, all imported
Oct 1
Outside China
- NYC's coronavirus positivity-test rate rises alarmingly (Read more)
China
- Chinese mainland reports 11 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday, all imported
-COVID-19 vaccine to be priced fairly, ministry says (Read more)

Click here to read previous reports on COVID-19
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/91/160254756891.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/13/160254757074.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/77/160254757097.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160254757308.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160254757423.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/160254757616.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/160254757646.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-09-24 09:47
Indeed, "cases could have been reduced by 66 percent, 86 percent and 95 percent respectively", if the response "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier," according to a study by the University of Southampton, the U.K, prompting some news reports to use headlines such as "China's 3-week delay in coronavirus response accelerated spread".
The question is, the study was released on March 13, 50 days after the Wuhan lockdown and 70 days after China notified WHO of the event of the viral pneumonia of unknown cause. So, it was a retrospective study based on data available from China and the world after weeks of fighting COVID-19. Simply no one in the world has a time machine to travel back in time "from the future" to late December or early January to tell the Chinese that they should lockdown a metropolitan city of 11 million people and cancel hundreds of millions of planned trips before the Spring Festival falling on January 24, the biggest and longest national holiday in China.
The first two weeks since the first report of three cases of pneumonia of unknown cause were spent by Chinese professionals, wasting no time, retrospectively speaking, to research the cases available, and their understanding of the disease increased with each passing day, as can be seen through their successive findings and achievements over time, including the identification of the pneumonia to be viral and of a novel coronavirus that causes the disease, development of testing kits, and submission to the WHO the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). The first three weeks also witnessed how Chinese professionals deepened their understanding of the nature, scale and infectiousness of the disease. First they suspected that the disease might be infectious like SARS, but found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission, then they believed that there might be limited human-to-human transmission, and finally they came to a conclusion and made it to the public that the previously unknown coronavirus "definitely spreads between people." During the first three weeks, scientists and other professionals also reported preliminary estimates of key epidemiologic parameters of COVID-19, such as the incubation period, case fatality ratio, and the serial interval and the basic reproduction number (R0).
These findings served as a foundation for government decision-making. As in all events of infectious disease, we all wish that those affected could respond to the outbreak earlier, and we all believe that an earlier warning could have saved many lives. In retrospect, local officials in Wuhan should have been more forthcoming and vigorous early on in their response to the emergence of the virus. But as in other countries, decision makers had to walk a fine line between alerting the public and avoiding panic, based on their knowledge and judgement of the nature and severity of the virus spread. If health officials raise the alarm prematurely, it can damage their credibility ‚Äî "like crying wolf" ‚Äîand cripple their ability to mobilize the public, said Benjamin Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, according to a news report by AP. "On the 20th, they sounded the alarm for the whole country, which is not an unreasonable delay," said Dr Ray Yip, the retired founding head of the US CDC's office in China, according to the same news report. Even the alarm sounded by China on January 20 left the US nearly two months to prepare for the pandemic. Therefore, the perceived "delay" of China's response could not serve as any excuse for the Trump administration's sluggish response.
As for allegations that COVID-19 was man-made in the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) or caused by an accidental leak from the institute, WIV has stated unequivocally that there's no way coronavirus originated there. So far world-renowned journals such as the Lancet, Nature, Science published articles and comments to dismiss these claims. A representative voice has been made by Peter Daszak who has been working with the WIV for the past 15 years. During his interviews with CNN on 26 April and CBS "60 Minutes" on May 10, he said that the Wuhan P4 Laboratory didn't have the virus that led to COVID-19. In his words, "Nobody has the virus from bats that then led to COVID-19. We've not found it yet. We found close relatives, but it's not the same virus." Therefore, it's not a possibility that the virus could have come from that lab. All scientists concerned with the coronavirus would like to trace its origins, but the research should be left to scientists without being politicized.
As for those who would pursue lawsuits or other means against China based on their allegations of the so-called China's responsibility for the global spread of COVID-19, there is no legal basis for any such lawsuits and no factual evidence to support their allegations against China. They will go nowhere. What matters is the attitude of American politicians toward the coronavirus outbreak in the US Are they willing to take responsibility for COVID-19 fight in their own country?
Whereas China faced a sudden surprise in the early stage of encounters with the unknown virus, the Trump administration has been on notice for weeks. The China blame game is going on as if weeks of warnings from China, Asia and Europe, and especially the lockdown of a Chinese city of 1.1 million people have not been strong enough a message to the White House and its supporters. Then exactly what kind of transparency, data, response and message on China's part would have been enough for the Trump administration to get serious and ready about the pandemic? Could the White House name a date in the timeline of Chinese response as the best possible moment for the US to get the right message from China or the WHO that might have prompted the US to engage in a timely, effective, comprehensive, coordinated national response?
"They've simply lost time they can't make up. You can't get back six weeks of blindness," Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development and an Obama-era administration staffer involved in the government's response to the spread of the Ebola virus, told the Washington Post. "To the extent that there's someone to blame here, the blame is on poor, chaotic management from the White House and failure to acknowledge the big picture."
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-07-29 07:31

Shi Zhengli works at a laboratory at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Shi Zhengli, a leading coronavirus scientist from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, dismissed conspiracy theories that her institute had leaked the COVID-19 virus, in an interview with the journal Science.
Conspiracy theories about the origin of the virus arose soon after the epidemic began. Though the global scientific consensus is that it could not have been lab-engineered, some pundits and politicians have blamed the institute as the source of the outbreak without citing evidence.
"US President (Donald) Trump's claim that SARS-CoV-2 was leaked from our institute totally contradicts the facts," she told Science in the written interview. "It jeopardizes and affects our academic work and personal life. He owes us an apology."
Shi said that her lab first encountered SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19, on Dec 30 when examining samples from patients with pneumonia of unknown origin. She said she believed the virus may have originated in bats and jumped to humans via an intermediate host, though she said the mechanism for that is still unknown.
Nevertheless, she said, "we have done bat virus surveillance in Hubei province for many years but have not found that bats in Wuhan or even the wider Hubei province carry any coronaviruses that are closely related to SARS-CoV-2".
There is also speculation that the novel coronavirus originated in a bat cave near the mining town of Tongguan in Yunnan province's Mojiang county. But, Shi said, "To date, none of the nearby residents is infected with coronaviruses. Thus the claim that the so-called patient zero was living near the mining area and then went to Wuhan is false."
At Wuhan's Huanan seafood market, where the outbreak was first reported, Shi said small traces of the virus' genetic material had been detected in environmental samples from sources such as door handles, the ground and sewage in the market.
But scientists did not detect the virus in frozen animal samples from the market, or from farmed animals and livestock from areas around Wuhan and Hubei province, she said. "The Huanan seafood market may just be a crowded location where a cluster of early novel coronavirus patients was found."
No staff members or students at the Wuhan institute have been infected by the novel coronavirus, Shi stressed in response to rumors that the "patient zero" of COVID-19 was a researcher from the institute.
Daniel Lucey, an infectious disease expert at Georgetown University, told Science that Shi's response is "a big contribution" and "there are a lot of new facts that I wasn't aware of. It's very exciting to hear this directly from her."
Kristian Andersen, an evolutionary biologist at Scripps Research, a nonprofit medical research facility in the United States, said Shi's answers are "logical, genuine and stick to the science, as one would have expected from a world-class scientist and one of the leading experts on coronaviruses".
Edward Holmes, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Sydney, said the answers are "a clear, comprehensive and believable account "of what occurred at the Wuhan institute.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/46/159598958124.jpeg
---
By AI HEPING in New York | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-02 01:30

The statement of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence of US. [Photo/Agencies]
US intelligence officials agree with "the wide scientific consensus that the novel coronavirus was not man-made or genetically modified", the White House's top intelligence agency said Thursday.
But the American intelligence community "will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan", the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the clearinghouse for the array of US spy agencies led by Richard Grenell, said in a statement.
China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang has reiterated that the origin of the virus should be determined by scientists and experts, and cannot be politicized.
US President Donald Trump and his allies have called for an investigation into the origins of the virus in an escalating campaign to place blame for the pandemic on China, which critics say is a White House effort to deflect attention from Trump's missteps in responding to the health crisis as he faces a tough re-election campaign.
On Wednesday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo suggested, without citing evidence, that the virus may have escaped from China's Wuhan Institute of Virology.
In a March 17 paper published by the journal Nature Medicine, five scientists from the US, the UK and Australia said scientific evidence shows the virus was not purposefully manipulated and that it most likely came from an animal.
"Everything I have heard in my 15 years of work with people in that lab has been absolutely normal with what you'd expect from virology labs," said zoologist Peter Daszak, president of EcoHealth Alliance, responding to the rumor that the virus might have come from a lab in Wuhan.
EcoHealth is a New York City-based nonprofit nongovernmental organization that mainly supports programs on global health. Daszak specializes in the study of zoonoses (diseases that can jump from animals to humans), and his research once helped identify the origins of the SARS outbreak.
During an interview with CNN's Fareed Zakaria GPS on Sunday, Daszak also clarified that most pandemics originate in animals, usually wildlife, often bats.
See Origin, page 5
From page 1
"Nobody has the virus from bats that led to COVID-19," said Daszak. "We've not found it yet. We've found close relatives, but it's not the same virus. So, to my mind, it's not a possibility."
In his capacity as a researcher, consultant and public expert for media inquiries on viral outbreaks, Daszak expressed disapproval of the tendency to politicize pandemics.
"We started to see the conspiracy theories, the pointing of the finger at China and just this sort of politicization. ... It is very unfortunate because what we need right now is open communication with scientists across the world," he said.
On Friday, several states, including Iowa, Maine, North Dakota, Alabama and Wyoming, will ease their lockdowns.
Federal guidelines encouraging people to curtail nearly all public activities expired Thursday after Trump indicated he didn't intend to extend them.
"They'll be fading out, because now the governors are doing it," Trump said Wednesday, referring to the restrictions.
While more states will ease restrictions Friday, California is going in the opposite direction, by closing Orange County's beaches.
California Governor Gavin Newsom on Thursday ordered the closure after a weekend in which tens of thousands in Southern California visited Newport Beach and other spots, with TV images showing many beachgoers disregarding social distancing guidelines.
Dr Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House Coronavirus Task Force, warned that premature action by states could lead to "a rebound to get us right back in the same boat that we were in a few weeks ago".
Most of the states that have reopened have mandatory regulations about wearing a face covering.
On Thursday, Vice-President Mike Pence wore a face mask as he toured a General Motors-Ventec ventilator production facility in Kokomo, Indiana, after he was criticized for not wearing one during a visit Tuesday to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, in violation of clinic policy.
Pence, who once served as governor of Indiana, leads the president's coronavirus task force. He previously has said he doesn't need to wear a protective covering because he is tested regularly for the coronavirus.
Xinhua contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/27/158835639964.jpeg
---
By Ian Goodrum | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-10 10:18

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr. Anthony Fauci attends a coronavirus response meeting between US President Donald Trump and Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards in the Oval Office at the White House in Washington, US, April 29, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
As COVID-19 maintains its devastating spread through the world, it has found an unlikely ally: The United States government.
Case and fatality counts in the US continue to rise ‚Äî nearly 1.5 million infected and over 75,000 dead as of May 8 ‚Äî but rather than take stock of its disastrous response and chart a new course, the US appears poised to double down on its cataclysmic policies by stoking acrimony toward countries who have successfully contained their own outbreaks. As is so often the case lately, the prime target is China.
More specifically the target is the Wuhan Institute of Virology, a Biosafety Level 4 lab working on the front lines of epidemic detection and prevention since its opening in 2015. It, along with other Chinese medical facilities, contributed to the sequencing and publication of the virus' genetic code. This allowed the world to begin research into the vaccines and treatments that will save countless lives. Despite the essential role it has played in combating the outbreak, the institute's work with bat coronaviruses has fallen under a great deal of scrutiny. This is because the natural reservoir of the novel coronavirus ‚Äî and by extension, the origin of the COVID-19 pandemic ‚Äî is almost assuredly bats.
An unfortunate coincidence ‚Äî and one that has thrown fuel on the conspiratorial fire. Crackpot theories that used to be the exclusive domain of the fringe are now finding purchase in the mainstream. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has been at the fore of this disinformation offensive, implying on several occasions that the institute has something to hide. He has not, of course, provided any evidence to back these charges. Perhaps as a former director of the Central Intelligence Agency he's grown used to lying every time he opens his mouth.
To no one's great surprise, this isn't the first time the WIV has been used as a political football. Earlier in the year ‚Äî when the outbreak was considered a "Chinese problem" and figures in the US gleefully predicted the country's demise ‚Äî a wildly inflammatory claim was floated by prominent hawks like Arkansas Senator Tom Cotton and former White House strategist Steve Bannon.
With vague, insinuating language, they began "just asking questions" about the institute and its role in the spread of the virus. Few mainstream outlets took the bait, and scientists were quick to dismiss the idea COVID-19 was created in a lab. As even the most basic level of analysis reveals no signs of human tampering or modification, the prevailing opinion among scientists worldwide is the virus is zoonotic, or of natural origin.
But that didn't stop the media-industrial complex in its ongoing efforts to shift culpability for the virus onto China. An alternative theory emerged, one which sounds more reasonable to the average person but has the same level of proof ‚Äî that is to say, none whatsoever. Hence the hubbub over a supposed "lab leak."
If Pompeo really had "enormous evidence" of a lab origin, as he declared in a recent interview, he would have released it already. Are we to believe Pompeo's State Department, which has spewed endless vitriol at China, would just sit on a smoking gun? The same goes for the vaunted "intelligence community", which has laundered baseless rumors through anonymous officials by telling reporters they have proof of X,Y or Z transgression from China ‚Äî again, without providing said proof or even a quote. Actual journalists would refuse to publish these obvious attempts at damage control, but that's not who's employed in the US stenography service that calls itself the "free press".
Through this diverse set of narratives, US pundits and politicians are taking advantage of widespread panic, anger and ignorance to deceive the public and deflect blame from their own country's disastrous mishandling of the outbreak. Just as allegations of a "cover-up" ignored the inevitable challenges any country would experience dealing with a brand new virus, the plausibility of this alternative line of attack depends on a profound scientific illiteracy.
Few familiar with the stringent safety and security protocols of a BSL-4 lab would make this accusation with a straight face. Field researchers wear full protective gear and instantly freeze the samples they collect with nitrogen. Any samples that made it back to the lab would have an inactivated virus, not a cultured specimen that could infect staff. These practices were followed strictly, in keeping with all international standards.
What's more, a "publish or perish" culture prevalent in world academia means the lab would have published its initial findings almost immediately, including the genetic sequence ‚Äî as was done mere days after the novel coronavirus was identified. No such records exist; bat coronavirus specialist Shi Zhengli pored over the WIV's data and found zero matches among samples collected for the institute's work.
Some might argue, wrongly, that the word of Chinese scientists can't be trusted. But they aren't the only ones speaking out. Epidemiologist Jonna Mazet, disease ecologist Peter Daszak and microbiologist Robert Garry were all quoted in a story for National Public Radio categorically denying the possibility of a lab-grown virus or accidental infection. Columbia University virologist Angela Rasmussen hit out at Washington Post reporter Josh Rogin on Twitter after his column dredging up an old State Department memo helped to mainstream the "leak" story.
This includes people with direct knowledge. Danielle Anderson, virologist at Singapore's Duke-NUS Medical School, said this to educational non-profit Health Feedback: "I have worked in this exact laboratory at various times for the past two years. I can personally attest to the strict control and containment measures implemented while working there. The staff at WIV are incredibly competent, hardworking, and are excellent scientists with superb track records."
I find it curious that the people ginning up this furor over the WIV are almost entirely journalists and politicians. I'm sure it's purely by chance many of them have had an axe to grind over China for years. On the other hand, medical professionals, virologists and epidemiologists ‚Äî people with years of training and firsthand experience in outbreak control ‚Äîhave, for the most part, been refuting the lies peddled by the media and political classes. The trouble is they don't have those groups' platforms or prestige.
A culture that habitually rejects science for conspiracy-mongering and sensationalism ‚Äî most notably in the proliferation of "vaccine skeptics" responsible for a resurgence of long-dormant diseases like measles ‚Äî means corporate media outlets and the politicians they cover dominate the conversation. These forces march in lockstep when it comes to anything involving China, and even ostensibly "left-wing" figures jump aboard the bandwagon. They talk a big game about peace and international cooperation, but when the time comes to fight the rhetoric of a new Cold War they're as bloodthirsty as their rightist counterparts.
If we're to have any hope of eradicating this pandemic, it's going to take a group effort. Countries that beat back the virus have much to teach the rest of the world ‚Äî but they can't force anyone to learn. If the US is determined to continue on this path, stubbornly sticking to its guns as thousands die each day, then the least it can do is stop trying to take others with it.
The author is a US writer with China Daily.
The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/158908341138.jpeg
---
By KARL WILSON in Sydney and YANG HAN in Hong Kong | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-08 10:29
Australian scientists, intelligence agencies and netizens have raised questions over claims by United States officials that the novel coronavirus was leaked from a laboratory in Wuhan.
"All evidence so far points to the fact that the COVID-19 is naturally derived and not man-made," said Nigel McMillan, director of the Infectious Disease and Immunology Program at Menzies Health Institute at Griffith University, Queensland.
"If you were going to design it in a lab the sequence changes make no sense, as all previous evidence would tell you it would make the virus worse. No system exists in the lab to make some of the changes found," said McMillan.
McMillan said the genetic changes in the virus can be found in two other coronaviruses from bats and pangolins and these are the source hosts.
Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison on May 1 said his government did not have strong evidence that connects a Wuhan laboratory with the virus.
There is no evidence that COVID-19 was man-made, said Edward Holmes, an evolutionary virologist and a member of the Charles Perkins Centre and the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Disease and Biosecurity at the University of Sydney.
Holmes told China Daily that coronaviruses like SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused COVID-19, are commonly found in wildlife species and frequently jump to new hosts. This is also the most likely explanation for the origin of SARS-CoV-2.
Multiple senior intelligence sources in Australia recently confirmed that Australia does not have any evidence that strongly suggests the Wuhan Institute of Virology was the source of the outbreak, according to a recent report by the Sydney Morning Herald, or SMH.
Senior members of the Australian intelligence community told SMH and The Age that most of the content in the research document shared in political circles under the "Five Eyes" network was based on news reports and contained no material from intelligence gathering.
Five Eyes is an intelligence-sharing alliance comprising the US,United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and Canada.
After finding that the research report was based entirely on open source material, Australian intelligence officials said the report was likely the same as a 15-page "dossier" that has been widely quoted to accuse China of covering up the virus.
Voice of disappointment
The SMH report dismissing the US claim has drawn a lot of views online. And one of the longest online messages responding to the report says that the US moves are aimed at trying to manipulate public opinion.
The message writer Sapiens said:"There is a story here and it is not the origin of this virus. The story is the manipulation of the press by the intelligence services. And if they are manipulating the press, what else are they doing? The courts?"
Netizen Pdixon23 said:"The evidence is on the shelf beside Saddam's WMDs." And JeanM commented: "Like they did for the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Remember that? 'Intelligence' is not all it's made out to be."
A message by netizen Avalon7 is more pessimistic: "Having been late into both the two world wars the US seems to be intent of making up for this by making up evidence to start new wars. God help us all."
Others also voiced disappointment with the US administration.
"The world has sadly learnt that if it comes from the Trump administration it will probably be a lie," wrote netizen "duncan", winning a high number of likes.
---
By Gu Mengyan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-08-27 17:30

People wearing masks walk out of a metro station in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China on Aug 13, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Hong Kong needs to brace itself for another coronavirus outbreak in winter by learning from mistakes made before and during the yet-to-be-controlled third wave of COVID-19 infections, a top local microbiologist said.
The third wave has taught us that stringent border controls, rules in mask-off settings like restaurants, and adequate testing capacity are three things the city should continue to push ahead with before the next local outbreak, said Yuen Kwok-yung, chair professor of the Department of Microbiology at the University of Hong Kong.
During an interview with China Daily on Tuesday, Yuen said an outbreak in winter, when holiday travel is at its peak, is inevitable in such an open economy, while its severity depends on whether the city can adhere to those three aspects.
Another safeguard against future outbreaks is sufficient quarantine and treatment facilities, he added, referring to two temporary facilities with a total of 1,800 beds that Chinese mainland authorities are helping to build on Lantau Island.
The 63-year-old doctor suggested Hong Kong people get into the habit of using their cellphones to record where they have been and the transport they have used, to help with contact tracing.
Hong Kong reported 24 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday ‚Äî all locally transmitted cases and 10 of unclear origin ‚Äî one of the lowest daily totals during the third wave.
But Yuen cautioned that the third wave has not yet been tamed, because multiple untraceable cases every day indicate that unknown transmission chains in the community still exist.
"In a few weeks' time, the third wave is going away. But don't be complacent. It could come back very easily if all these countermeasures against critical control points are not being instituted."
A citywide free coronavirus testing program, meant to find asymptomatic patients, will start from Tuesday, with online registration open on Saturday.
Yuen said he supports the testing program, which he believes can alleviate the anxiety of people who want to be tested for fear of exposure, although people would have been more enthusiastic about testing if the program had been introduced when daily cases were at their peak.
The free testing, he added, is also a move to reassure mainland cities and neighboring countries and regions that the Hong Kong government is doing its best to ensure the city is relatively free of COVID-19, so that travel restrictions may be loosened more easily.
In addition to isolating silent carriers left in the community, the results of the citywide testing will be of great value to further research, Yuen said.
"(The testing) is to find risk factors, (such as) which geographic location has a higher number of silent carriers? Why are they located there? What are their ages and genders? Where are they working? What are the occupations at risk?" he said.
After understanding the answers to all these questions, health experts can figure out what should be done in the winter to prevent high-risk groups from getting infected, he continued.
The mainland has been handling the pandemic "extremely well" overall after acknowledging mistakes it had made at the outset, said Yuen, who also co-directs the HKU's State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases.
The key to the mainland's success lies in its ability to mobilize healthcare workers and immobilize potentially infected people very efficiently, he noted. The massive testing and efficient contact tracing afterward ensure that any resurgence in the outbreak can be reined in.
The Chinese mainland has done much better than many developed countries in terms of caseload, death rate and economic recovery. Unfortunately, those countries have failed to learn from its experience, Yuen said.
There is an obvious bias from the West, he added. "In fact, this bias led to their failures to control their own pandemic problems."
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/27/159852985420.jpeg
---
By Bai Tian | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-21 09:20

CAI MENG/CHINA DAILY
This year began with the shocking news of the novel coronavirus outbreak in China. Yet what worries me more is the rapid spread of the virus across the world. As of Thursday, more than 160 countries and regions outside China were hit by the pandemic, accounting for more than 110,000 confirmed cases and over 6,000 deaths. On March 11, World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced that the COVID-19 outbreak "can be characterized as a pandemic", saying he is "deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity, as well as by the alarming levels of inaction (of some countries)".
Bruce Aylward, head of the WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-19, recently said: "Now that cases (outside China) are picking up, my phone is ringing much more. People are saying: how did China do that? What did they do exactly? What can we do?"
The answer is simple: China's measures to contain the outbreak can be replicated, but it will require speed, money, imagination and political courage.
China fulfilling duties as a major country
Since the outbreak in Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, the Chinese government has been decisive and resolute in taking the most stringent and comprehensive measures to curb the spread of the virus. It has taken a series of measures, fulfilling its responsibilities as a major country thanks to the professionalism and commitment of its medical workers, and the resilience and self-discipline of the Chinese people.
These measures include the quick and decisive lockdown of Wuhan, the epicenter of the epidemic in China, construction of makeshift hospitals in two weeks, nationwide coordination and dispatch of resources to Hubei province as well as monitoring of residential communities in other provinces and municipalities in accordance with their real situations. No wonder a report issued by the WHO-China Joint Mission on COVID-19 on Feb 24 said that, in combating the virus, China has adopted "the most ambitious, agile and aggressive measures ever taken in history, probably preventing at least tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands of cases, making itself the solid front line in defending mankind against this virus".
China has paid a huge price as a consequence of this, as it has suffered huge losses in terms of both human and material resources to ensure the rest of the world doesn't suffer a bigger loss and greater damage. Aylward, touched by the Chinese people's sacrifice, said, "to the people of Wuhan, it is recognized that the world is in your debt".
Discordant voices emerge from abroad
But while China is busy combating the virus, some unkind and discordant noises are coming from abroad. Some are playing the old game of naming and shaming China. Some Western politicians and media outlets have called the novel coronavirus the "Chinese virus" or "Wuhan pneumonia". And some biased US politicians have even cooked up a fancy story that the novel coronavirus is the biochemical weapon leaked from a laboratory in Wuhan, while The Wall Street Journal recently carried a report with the grossly racist headline, "China is Real Sick Man of Asia". Besides, German newspaper Der Spiegel had a cover story titled "Coronavirus, Made in China", and an American TV host claimed that since "the coronavirus originated from China", China should say sorry to the rest of the world.
Michael J. Rhan, executive director of WHO Health Emergencies Programme, pointed out that, "coronaviruses are a global phenomenon; they exist on a global basis. It's an unlucky accident of history or nature that they emerge in a certain place and it's really important that we don't start to ascribe blame to geographic origin and that we look at this in terms of how we respond, how we contain and how we stop this virus".
And Zhong Nanshan, an expert in respiratory diseases with the Chinese Academy of Engineering, said the fact that the epidemic broke out in China does not necessarily mean that it originated in China. No matter where this virus came from, China, like other affected countries, is also a victim of the pandemic, and is facing the same unprecedented challenge of fighting the disease.
Should US be blamed for 2009 H1N1 flu outbreak?
A group of 27 prominent public health scientists from different countries, including Lam Sai Kit, a renowned public health expert from Malaysia, have signed a statement strongly condemning conspiracy theories that suggest the novel coronavirus does not have a natural origin, making those who have invented such conspiracy theories a laughing stock for the world. Some media outlets have pointed out that the H1N1 flu outbreak started in the United States in 2009, and then spread to more than 214 countries and regions claiming thousands of lives. Should these countries and people ask the US to apologize for that?
Only the degenerates can take pleasure in China's misfortune. Some foreign media outlets, turning a blind eye to China's strenuous efforts and great sacrifices, have kept making disparaging remarks against China. Their use of apparently racist terms against China has aroused indignation among not only the Chinese people but also many people across the world.
Worse, some Western politicians, obsessed with the ossified political logic of "opposing whatever China does", keep pointing fingers at China even at this critical moment of the global fight against the pandemic. Interestingly, China was criticized for being clumsy and inefficient before the lockdown of Wuhan, and accused of violating human rights after the lockdown. In their world, China is wrong in everything it does.
Bias, hatred more vicious than novel coronavirus
Compared with the dreadful virus, the pride, prejudice and hatred, hidden deep in some people's minds, are more vicious than the novel coronavirus. As Philippine Foreign Minister Teodoro Locsin said, "We must deplore the lies spread by governments and people who are stooping so low as to use a threat against all humanity as an instrument of geopolitical strategy. Shame on them."
The pandemic is like a magic mirror, which tells true friends from false ones. What touched me most is the sincere concern and generous support given by people from different social circles of different countries. They have provided valuable and timely support in various forms to China, which the Chinese people will always remember and be grateful for.
In Malaysia, the government, social organizations and individuals have offered a helping hand to China and the Chinese people. Some have donated materials and money, while others have composed songs and made videos to boost the Chinese people's morale. The donation can be valued, yet the friendship it denotes is invaluable. Every call of "China, stay strong", every piece of aid coming from our Malaysian friends is a manifestation of true love and friendship, with the same spirit of the Malay idiom I like most: Bukit sama didaki, lurah sama dituruniÔºçwhich means to go through times, both good and bad, together.
China will help global fight against virus
There is a Chinese saying, "You spare a peach to me, I give you a white jade for friendship." This is exactly how Chinese treat friends. The Chinese people cherish friendship, appreciate kindness, and always remember the help and support they receive from others, especially in times of difficulties. China will continue to fight against the pandemic with perseverance and resolution, making its due contribution to the global fight against the novel coronavirus.
Now, China is sharing its experiences and the lessons it, along with WHO and other countries, has learned in the fight against the epidemic, including the medical treatment and measures to curb the spread of the virus.
China has also sent expert teams, medicines and medical protective gear, and reagent test kits to the most severely hit countries such as Iran, the Republic of Korea and Italy. Having the best knowledge of combating the epidemic, China has no hesitation in shouldering its responsibility as the backbone of the global coalition in the fight against the pandemic.
The author is China's ambassador to Malaysia. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/158475612202.jpeg
---
By Wang Zhan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-09-09 15:22

A medical professional puts on a pair of gloves at a makeshift testing site in the Queen Elizabeth Stadium in Hong Kong, Sept 1, 2020. [Photo by ANTHONY KWAN/POOL PHOTO VIA AP]
HONG KONG - Hong Kong reported six new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, the lowest daily increase since the city's third wave of infections started in early July, health officials said.
In a media briefing on Tuesday afternoon, a Centre for Health Protection official said the new infections included three local cases and three others from the Philippines and the Ukraine, pushing the city's overall tally to 4,895.
The CHP official added that two of the three local cases were detected under the city's Universal Community Testing Program.
According to the Hospital Authority, a 90-year-old man infected with the virus died at the Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital on Tuesday morning, taking the city's COVID death toll to 98.
The deceased, who was hospitalized on July 23, was a resident at Salvation Army Lung Hang Residence for Senior Citizens in Tai Wai, which is related to at least 15 confirmed cases.
A total of 220 confirmed patients are currently being treated in 19 public hospitals and a community treatment facility. They include 21 patients in critical condition, 11 in serious condition, and 188 patients in stable condition, according to the Hospital Authority.
The only case with unknown origin was found through the UCTP and it involved a housewife who lived in Tuen Mun and had her swab samples collected on Sept 5.
An infection cluster related to Transport City Building in Tai Wai saw two more patients on Tuesday as a 50-year-old female cleaner and a relative of previously confirmed patients were found to be infected.
As of 8 pm Tuesday, a total of about 1,310,000 persons have registered for testing under the UCTP since the program was launched on September 1.
A total of about 1,030,000 specimens collected under the UCTP had also been tested. Specimens that test positive for COVID-19 will be referred to the Department of Health's Public Health Laboratory Services Branch for confirmatory tests. Confirmed cases will be followed up and announced by the CHP.
---
By ELEANOR HUANG in Hong Kong | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-08-04 06:53

Staff members work on Saturday at a triage center for COVID-19 patients that has been set up at AsiaWorld-Expo in Hong Kong. The center is being assisted by Chinese mainland experts, and virus testing technicians from the mainland are being sent to help the city. CALVIN NG/CHINA DAILY
Team of mainland medical experts starts assisting SAR in combating virus
Hong Kong reported 80 new confirmed cases of COVID-19 on Monday, ending the city's 12-day streak of more than 100 daily new infections.
All of the 80 new infections were locally transmitted, and 24 of them were of unknown origin. The city's total number of infections stands at 3,589, with 37 related deaths.
Chuang Shuk-kwan from the city's Centre for Health Protection, however, said it is still too early to conclude that Hong Kong has passed the peak of the third-wave coronavirus outbreak from one day's numbers.
"A few more days of observations are still needed," she said during a daily news briefing, calling on residents not to let their guard down as 80 new infections in a day is still a high figure.
On the same day, a seven-member team of medical experts from the mainland started assisting the special administrative region in combating the outbreak. The team is part of the group of 60 medical technicians chosen from 20 public hospitals in Guangdong province to be sent to the special administrative region.
Anthony Wu Ting-yuk, chairman of BGI's genetic laboratory in Hong Kong, and several other laboratory technicians, are reported to have met with the mainland experts at Metropark Hotel Kowloon on Monday morning. BGI Group, Hybribio and KingMed Diagnostics are the three laboratories verified by the SAR government to conduct nucleic acid testing.
Yu Dewen, head of the group of mainland medical experts, said that it is tasked with assisting the Hong Kong SAR government in conducting large-scale nucleic acid tests.
With their professional assistance, Hong Kong's virus testing capacity could be massively scaled up in the month ahead, becoming able to conduct 100,000 to 200,000 tests a day or more, he said in an interview with Xinhua News Agency published on Monday.
Yu, who was also commander-in-chief of the Guangdong medical aid team that was sent to Wuhan in January, said the local testing capacity in Hong Kong cannot keep pace with the spread of the virus. Even with local private labs' assistance to beef up the testing capacity to 30,000 a day, this would be insufficient to meet the city's needs, Yu said.
"Hong Kong's battle with the coronavirus has reached a critical moment, given that large-scale community transmission is already taking place," Yu added. But he said he is confident that the mainland experts will be able to help the city combat the deadly disease. "Our team has gained valuable experience in Wuhan and Beijing," he added.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/22/159650014204.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-06-09 20:06

Police officers patrol near the Sydney Opera House following the implementation of stricter social-distancing and self-isolation rules to limit the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Sydney, Australia, April 6, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Australian Trade and Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said on Monday that the idea that Australia is an unsafe destination for visitors from China is one that does not stand up to scrutiny.
In an interview with Australia Broadcasting Company's Radio National, he defended Australia's image as "the most successful multicultural and migrant society in the world". Yet his remarks were anything but convincing, and he admitted there had been racist incidents in the country.
There is no denying that anti-Chinese sentiment has been on the rise in Australia, and it has been whipped up further recently as some media outlets and politicians have sought to blame China for the novel coronavirus outbreak, which has resulted in Chinese in Australia being insulted, spat at and assaulted.
The ill wind against China and Chinese people in Australia is now the strongest it has been in a decade, which is why after China's Culture and Tourism Ministry issued an alert on Friday advising Chinese nationals not to travel to Australia, the Education Ministry warned on Tuesday that Chinese students should consider whether to continue studying in Australia.
By issuing the alerts, the Chinese government has adopted a responsible attitude as the rampant hostility and political bias against Chinese pose a threat to their safety.
That the travel warning will dampen Chinese tourists' enthusiasm for visiting Australia is certain, but Canberra only has itself to blame, because it has single-handedly poisoned the atmosphere for bilateral ties and people-to-people exchanges.
Canberra has not only obediently followed Washington's lead in trying to suppress China's telecommunications company Huawei but also enthusiastically joined it in accusing China of being the origin of the novel coronavirus and enabling the pathogen to spread.
Yet the US embassy in Canberra was forced to clarify that the US State Department document that was used by some Australian newspapers to link COVID-19 to a laboratory in Wuhan was what is known in diplomatic circles as a "non-paper", a document with non-official status that in this case was intended to provide guidance for foreign governments on Washington's blame strategy targeting China.
Nonetheless, as is usual in such cases some of the mud thrown by the media stuck to those susceptible to such racially charged claims, and consequently Australia has experienced a spike in discrimination and racial abuse toward Chinese.
Under such circumstances, it is only natural that Chinese tourists' willingness to go to Australia will weaken and Chinese students may reconsider whether studying in the country is a good idea.
Given Australia's habitual practice of passing the buck to China each time China-Australia ties encounter difficulties, such an undesirable picture may be just the beginning unless Canberra changes course and joins hands with Beijing to improve ties.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/87/159171190072.jpeg
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-26 21:00

An undated transmission electron micrograph of a novel coronavirus particle, the virus which causes COVID-19, isolated from a patient. [Photo/Agencies]
The Wuhan Institute of Virology, the target of COVID-19 virus conspiracy theories, did not possess the novel coronavirus before the outbreak, nor did it have the intention or the ability to create the virus, a senior virologist told China Daily on the sidelines of the annual national legislative and political advisory sessions.
Hence the conspiracy theories claiming the virus had escaped the institute's high biosecurity lab, which was modeled after ones from Europe, is "pure fabrication", said Yuan Zhiming, president of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Wuhan Branch and head of the Wuhan National Biosafety Laboratory.
He also made it clear that no pathogen leaks or personnel infection accidents have ever occurred at the P4 lab.
Since the COVID-19 epidemic began, some foreign politicians and media outlets have made accusations with no evidence that the institute's biosafety level 4 lab, also known as the P4 lab, had manufactured the virus and accidentally released it to the world.
Yuan, also a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference National Committee, said such accusations constitute "unwarranted speculation that violates scientific consensus and most importantly, totally contradicts objective facts".
The institute first received samples of the coronavirus on Dec 30. On Jan 12, the institute was one of the entities authorized by the National Health Commission to publish the full genome sequence of the virus to the world, he said.
On Feb 19, The Lancet medical journal published a joint statement by 27 scientists from eight countries concluding that the novel coronavirus had a natural origin. On March 18, a paper published by the journal Nature Medicine, by virologists from the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia, also stated the coronavirus is "not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus".
"All analyses of the SARS-CoV-2 genome by global researchers have proved that it is entirely new and is different from already known viruses," Yuan said. "There is also no information within the novel coronavirus genome indicating it was man-made."
"With regard to designing and creating an entirely unknown virus, it is beyond the current capability of any laboratory of our institute. We have never engaged in, nor will we ever engage in trying to design and construct a new virus," he said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/159050240657.jpeg
---
By WANG MINGJIE in London | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-28 09:25

This undated transmission electron microscope image shows SARS-CoV-2, also known as novel coronavirus, the virus that causes COVID-19, isolated from a patient in the US. [Photo/Agencies]
Point of transmission from animals to humans a mystery, says academic
The novel coronavirus, which causes the COVID-19 respiratory disease, is "a naturally occurring animal virus" and does not look to have been "engineered in the laboratory", according to a British biological sciences expert who says the exact precursor of the pandemic may only be found as "a matter of chance".
Ian Jones, a professor of virology at the University of Reading, said he based his view on fundamental principles, including the fact that "the genetic sequence of the virus has been completed".
"It is possible to look at the sequence and to see whether or not particular areas have been changed and when you do that, you do not see that any particular area has been changed," he said. "There are changes throughout the genetic structure of the virus-what that indicates is that the virus is naturally evolved in some other host and it has now made the jump into people."
Jones pointed out that viruses transfer from animal to people all the time.
"It is just, in this case, we were unlucky and this virus has the ability to transmit between people and so we have a pandemic," he said.
Many coronaviruses are found in horseshoe bats, which is believed to be the origin of the novel coronavirus now infecting humans, Jones said. He added that the real issue is whether scientists will ever find "the particular intermediate that was in an animal before it transferred into man "because that transmission "could have been a very transient event".
He illustrated the idea with an example of a bat virus spilling over into intermediate animals, such as a pangolin, and then moving on to humans. But, because in this example the particular virus in the pangolin dies out, it becomes impossible for researchers to prove that was the exact precursor.
"Whether or not you will find the exact precursor is a matter of chance," Jones said. "Intermediate states are not very stable, so they tend to be displaced by something else relatively quickly. So, finding that exact immediate is a matter of luck, a matter of chance, as well as excellent scientific approaches."
The exact precursor of the SARS virus, for example, has not yet been discovered, he said.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic hit Wuhan, China, last December, more than 200 countries and territories have been plagued by the novel coronavirus and it has claimed more than 350,000 lives across the globe.
While some people have called for global efforts to find the exact tracking of the virus in order to prevent such a thing happening again, others have argued that it is more urgent to put in mitigation strategies to try to cure the problem.
Jones said the virus is here and there is no point now playing the blame game.
"The world is now having to deal with it and that will be the same situation wherever it occurred," he said. "In the past, the last influenza outbreak in 2009 started in Mexico, the mad cow disease occurred here in the United Kingdom, there is nothing about the particular circumstance of a virus arising; they will arise somewhere, so the notion of blaming a country is a mistake and it is not useful."
He said it is more important to look to the future.
"What we need to do is to learn from the outbreaks every time they occur and to try to put in screening strategies, so next time around, everybody acts a bit faster," he said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/38/159063174340.jpeg
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-04-15 08:54

Technicians conduct sample tests at a "Huo-Yan laboratory" established by genomics sequencing company BGI Group in Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, on Feb 6, 2020. [Photo/Asia News Photo]
Experts said it is unfair and unreasonable to say that China should have acted earlier and more decisively against the COVID-19 outbreak because it is a brand-new disease that scientists barely understand and existing knowledge is constantly evolving.
China has been taking concrete actions against the outbreak since it emerged based on the understanding of the virus at the time, they added. The nation has also frequently updated the international scientific community on new developments, and these efforts should be recognized, rather than smeared from the vantage point of hindsight.
As the COVID-19 pandemic spreads across the globe, some countries have recently accused China of misinforming the World Health Organization about the severity of outbreak when it began, thus luring the international community into a false sense of security and resulting in their lackluster response.
In response to such accusations, Wang Ting, director-general of the China Research Institute for Science Popularization, said that it takes time and great effort to research a new pathogen's capability, and "such is the pattern for any scientific inquiry that seeks to unravel the mystery of an unknown topic".
"No responsible institution or country should jump to conclusions when discussing the virus' characteristics without sufficient and solid evidence," he said in an interview with China Daily. "China is a country with 1.4 billion people, there are no grounds to blame it for being careful and meticulous when dealing with a new virus nobody could have anticipated."
Jin Qi, director of Pathogen Biology Institute of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, said that individual cases with pneumonia of an unknown origin were reported in Wuhan in late December, but it was not until Jan 8 that scientists were able to initially identify a new coronavirus as the cause of the epidemic, as more cases and studies were needed to discover the link between a new virus and a disease outbreak.
On Jan 3, China began regularly informing the WHO and the United States of the outbreak, and the heads of the two nations' centers for disease control and prevention spoke over the phone about the situation and their cooperation on Jan 8.
On Jan 9, Chinese scientists confirmed the outbreak was caused by a new coronavirus and informed the WHO, which issued online a comprehensive technical guidance package the next day with advice to all countries on how to detect and manage potential cases based on what was known at the time.
On Jan 12, about two weeks after the first case was reported, China shared the genetic sequence of the novel coronavirus with the WHO and the international scientific community.
In early and mid-January, the National Health Commission sent three teams of senior medical experts to Wuhan to research the outbreak. On Jan 20, the third team, led by noted respiratory disease expert Zhong Nanshan, confirmed that it could be transmitted between humans.
On Jan 22, experts from the WHO's China and Western Pacific regional offices, reaffirmed China's findings after a two-day inspection in Wuhan and said more investigation was needed to understand the full extent of its transmission.
Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Programme, said at a news conference that "there is an understandable confusion that occurs at the beginning of an epidemic".
"So we need to be careful to label misunderstanding versus misinformation; there's a difference. People can misunderstand and they can overreact."
Looking back at the whole chain of events, the local health authorities did publicly announce the appearance of the disease very early, which dispelled the notion that there was a cover-up, said Xue Lan, dean of Schwarzman College and the School of Public Policy and Management at Tsinghua University.
"When the problem was recognized, China's response was very decisive and quick," he said while attending an online panel about fighting COVID-19 organized by the Brookings Institution on April 3. "The challenge is how you can recognize the problem early enough."
Li Taisheng, a professor of infectious diseases at Peking Union Medical College Hospital, said it takes time for scientists to get more knowledge about a new virus, and it was very difficult to predict what would happen next.
"It is always easier to be wise after an event," he said. "But at the beginning of the outbreak, it was not feasible to make a huge decision hastily such as the lockdown of a big city when we had little knowledge of the virus, considering the huge social and economic impact of the decision."
Huang Yu, deputy director of the Department of Medical Genetics at Peking University, said that given the vast amount of scientific literature published globally by China on the epidemic since it began, "it is ludicrous to think the Chinese government is attempting to censor the facts and truths".
"The evidence is all in the journals; just because reporters and politicians don't read them does not mean China hasn't been forthright about the situation and its development," he said. "Some politicians' and media's blatant disregard of science and facts is unhelpful. In this challenging time, people should have more faith in science and the scientific method."
Evolving knowledge
Despite the emergence of the novel coronavirus four months ago, scientists still know surprisingly little about the pathogen, and many previous assumptions have been overturned.
For example, scientists initially believed the disease would mostly affect the elderly, which turned out to be false. Candidates for the intermediate hosts included snakes, pangolins and domestic pets such as cats and dogs, but all the current studies have proved to be inconclusive.
The latest piece of knowledge being contested is the virus' contagiousness. Last month, scientists estimated the R0 value of the novel coronavirus was around 2.2, meaning a single infected person would infect about 2.2 others on average. By comparison, influenza has an R0 of 1.3, and SARS is 3.
But an early access study from the Los Alamos National Laboratory in the US last week said the medium R0 value for the coronavirus could be 5.7Ôºçmore than double the previous estimate. This puts it on par with polio, smallpox and rubella, which have a R0 range of 5 to 7.
A Beijing biology professor who requested anonymity said if the latest US study is correct, "it is a very startling number, and may very well justify China's swift and sweeping measures in containing the virus".
It took "great political courage "to lock down a city of 11 million on Jan 23, and later the entire Hubei province, when there were around 600 reported cases nationwide right before the Spring Festival holidayÔºçthe nation's biggest travel and spending season, he said.
"If we had known the virus is this contagious from the very beginning, we may have quarantined the city earlier. But the reality is we didn't know and we can't foresee the future, we could only act with the information at our disposal at the time."
The assumption that the virus mostly attacks the lungs has also been augmented, as clinical evidence is showing that it can affect or damage other systems such as heart, kidney, liver and reproductive organs, said Mao Yonghui, a senior kidney doctor at Beijing Hospital who served in intensive care units at Tongji Hospital's Zhongfa Xincheng branch in Wuhan.
"Thousands of senior medical experts across different fields poured into Wuhan in early February and worked tirelessly in multidisciplinary teams," she said. "Having this holistic treatment plan is absolutely critical in lowering the death rate for severely ill patients given how the virus can impact so many parts of the body."
Mao said Chinese officials had told her and other doctors to place saving lives as the "paramount priority" and they would give them "maximum support". With these efforts, the fatality rate at her ICU wards was less than 3 percent, when the rate for critically ill patients in other parts of the world could be up to 78 percent.
She added that "if foreign media and politicians question the authenticity of our low casualty figure, they should ask themselves, have they gone to the extent that China did in supporting their doctors and patients?"
Wang Xiaodong contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/73/158692346180.jpeg
---
By ZHANG YANGFEI | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-04-03 09:58
The Chinese Academy of Sciences' resource center, which pools all genome sequence data and related information about the novel coronavirus, has proved popular with researchers worldwide.
The 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource Center offers free and open access for all researchers and health workers around the world to download the resources they need.
Since it began operating in late January, it has served more than 89,000 users from 158 countries and regions and has had data downloaded more than 5.1 million times, said the center's developer Bao Yiming, who is also a researcher at the China National Center for Bioinformation and National Genomics Data Center at the Beijing Institute of Genomics, a subsidiary of CAS.
In addition to being the earliest database dedicated to COVID-19, Bao said what makes this database stand out among other existing information resources is that it also provides comprehensive information, analysis and visualized graphics of the genome variations.
The monitoring of these variations can help scientists track the development of the coronavirusÔºçwhich is essential in testing the effectiveness of vaccines and antiviral drugsÔºçtrace its origin and better grasp its transmissibility and virulence, he added.
Many novel coronavirus genome sequences have been rapidly generated worldwide. However, the information is scattered in various databases, including a few in China, the National Center for Biotechnology Information in the United States and the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data in Germany. It is highly inconvenient for users to handpick coronavirus genome sequences from different places.
"So our first task is to collect all information related to the coronavirus and then provide users with this one-stop thematic resource," Bao said, adding that they also have a quality control system to detect and report low quality data.
Scientists can find a complete collection of publications on COVID-19, and the database has partnered with the Guangdong Laboratory and Computer Network Information Center, which has developed a cloud-based diagnosis system using artificial intelligence that can help doctors diagnose COVID-19 pneumonia by simply uploading the CT or X-ray images.
Bao said they have also established a data exchange mechanism with the National Center for Biotechnology Information so that submitted data will be shared more widely.
Bao said that when the database was launched, the majority of the users were from China. Now with the virus becoming a global issue, the number of overseas users has soared from less than 20 percent to more than 70 percent.
"It's also proof that our database is indeed serving the world in fighting the pandemic," he added.
Takashi Gojobori, a molecular biologist and distinguished professor at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia, said the resource is a "very impactful achievement in such a short period".
---
By Zhang Zhihao | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-12 08:10

An undated transmission electron micrograph of a novel coronavirus particle, the virus which causes COVID-19, isolated from a patient. [Photo/Agencies]
A senior researcher at the biosafety lab and virology institute in Wuhan, Hubei province, said that strict security protocols have made it impossible for a virus to escape from the lab.
"Our lab not only has a high level of biosafety infrastructure, we also have established a set of rigorous biosecurity protocols to ensure the lab operates safely and efficiently," said Yuan Zhiming, president of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Wuhan Branch and head of the Wuhan National Biosafety Laboratory. Yuan spoke in an interview with Science and Technology Daily that was published late Sunday.
The remarks were made in response to conspiracy theories hyped by some US media and politicians. For months, some foreign media organizations and politicians have speculated that the novel coronavirus had escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology or its Bio-Safety Level 4 Lab, also known as the P4 lab. The Sino-French-built lab is believed to be the only facility in Asia capable of studying the world's most deadly and contagious pathogens, including the Ebola and Marburg viruses.
The conspiracy theories resurfaced when some United States politicians, such as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, recently claimed they had evidence showing poor management of the facilities that led to an accidental leak of the virus. The US has not released such evidence.
Yuan said the P4 lab is a flagship facility run by the Wuhan National Biosafety Laboratory, which also operates two lower-level, P3 labs. These three labs, along with a number of P2 labs at the institute, form a bioresearch cluster dedicated to basic research in general virology.
He said the core facility of the P4 lab is completely sealed off with stainless steel enclosure walls and pressurized environments to ensure no virus can escape from the "box-in-box" confinement.
All exhaust from the rest of the lab must go through two powerful filters, and all wastewater must be boiled and properly treated, he said. Every piece of contaminated waste must be sterilized in high temperature pressure chambers before delivery to authorized institutions for disposal.
As for personnel, candidates for positions at the lab go through meticulous training and pass annual physical and psychological assessments, Yuan said. They have to be screened and approved by the lab's director before starting work.
Before entering the facility, all researchers have to report their health condition, wear full-body hazmat suits, and go through several steps of sanitization. They must strictly follow access procedures after entry.
To eliminate human error, the lab must have at least two scientists working at any given moment. "Nobody can enter the lab alone," he said.
The entire lab environment is rigorously monitored with security cameras and myriad biosensors that immediately alert the supervision center in case of an emergency, Yuan said. All physical equipment in the lab is examined annually by third-party institutions, and the lab's operation must pass scrutiny by the nation's regulatory bodies every year.
Since Dec 30, the P4 lab has been tasked with isolating the novel coronavirus, as well as cultivating the virus for research using animals, Yuan said. Now, the lab is working on evaluating plasma and antibody treatments, testing disinfectants, evaluating antiviral drugs' potency in animals and developing an inactivated vaccine with dead viruses.
"This work has provided the vital groundwork for studying the virus' contagiousness as well as evaluating various antiviral drugs and vaccines against the disease," he said.
Guan Wuxiang, deputy director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, said that the institute had fully sequenced the virus' genome and was one of the institutions authorized by the National Health Commission to release genetic data to the World Health Organization on Jan 11.
It partnered with medical companies in Guangdong province to create nucleic acids tests and antibody tests. The institute also found drug candidates, such as chloroquine phosphate and Favipiravir, that showed potential to inhibit the virus in vitro, Guan said.
Scientists worldwide have said on multiple occasions that current human technology cannot artificially create something as intricate as the novel coronavirus without leaving any trace of tampering with its genome or without knowing its full genetic makeup in advance. All available evidence shows that the virus is natural in origin, the World Health Organization has said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/56/158924224461.jpeg
---
By Hannay Richards | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-11 07:26

Luo Jie/China Daily
Writing about the bubonic plague in London in 1665, Daniel Defoe described people wearing charms or amulets bearing the word abracadabra on them to ward off the plague, as if the disease was "but a kind of a possession of an evil spirit".
The way some in the US administration speak about China, and not only in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic, you cannot help but wonder if they too bear such talismans about their persons, since they seem to believe that if not a wielder of sorcery, and so able to command malign spirits to do its bidding, then Beijing must be a bestower of the evil eye.
From the earliest times, people have had a tendency to blame evil spirits for misfortunes such as sickness and disease. The 2nd century medical treatise Liber Medicinalis describes how such abracadabra talismans were created. The word was written repeatedly below itself, each time omitting the final letter until only the single "a" remained, the arrangement forming an inverted pyramid. This was a later incarnation of the ancient oral spells whereby the influence of a malign deity manifest as sickness and disease was to be defeated by progressively reducing the word in speech until reaching complete silence.
It would be more pleasing to the ear if those in the US bad-mouthing China had reached such a point, unfortunately they have become increasingly strident in their bid to conflate people's fear of the virus with a fear of China.
Although suitably shrouded in mystery, the origin of the word abracadabra is likely the ancient Aramaic phrase avra kadavra, which literally means "I will create as I speak"Ôºçin other words, let it be as I say.
And in harping on their accusations that China is at least responsible for the scale of the pandemic, if not the originator, the US administration seems to be hoping it will have more success than it has had hitherto in persuading other countries to side with it against China, as well as convincing the US public that the blame for the country's chaotic response to the spread of the novel coronavirus has nothing to do with it not heeding the warnings it was given.
It is ever the jealous temper of mankind to censure rather than praise the work of others, and with China's success in controlling the contagion in stark contrast to the flawed response of the US, where the administration has been desperately playing catch-up with what is happening on the ground, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and others have intensified their attacks on China.
Given that conservative attitudes, fundamentalist thinking and religiosity have been found to be associated with a belief that evil spirits can be contagious and contaminating, it is perhaps not surprising that it has chosen to politicize the pandemic in this way.
Many of the US administration's pronouncements have been at odds with the science-based advice it has been receiving from medical advisers, and the denial of science is a hallmark of the administration.
Which is perhaps why it is still pushing the claim that the virus was engineered in a lab in Wuhan, despite it not standing up to scrutiny. A group of researchers compared the genome of the novel coronavirus with the seven other coronaviruses known to infect humans, and writing of the results of their comparisons in the journal Nature Medicine in March concluded that "it is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus".
There is no shortage of examples throughout history of how people imagined a relationship between evil and illness, and how those showing signs of evil influence in the form of disease would be isolated and shunned, even killed.
Whether it realizes it or not, the US administration's bid to portray China as a sickness is just an age-old practice in a new guise.
The author is a writer with China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/36/158915567990.jpeg
---
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff US Army Gen. Mark Milley describes how he cuts his own hair as he and Defense Secretary Mark Esper hold a news conference at the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia, US, April 14, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

WASHINGTON - Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley said on Tuesday that "we don't know" where the coronavirus originated.

"Did it come out of the virology lab in Wuhan, did it occur in the wet market there in Wuhan or did it occur somewhere else? And the answer to that is we don't know," the top US military officer told reporters in a Pentagon briefing when asked about the origin of COVID-19.

"Various agencies both civilian and US government are looking at that," he added.

Milley said that the weight of evidence indicated the coronavirus was "natural and not manmade" and was "probably not intentional."

Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, also noted in his Monday interview with National Geographic that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could not have been artificially or deliberately manipulated.

Asked about the possibility that the virus was found outside the lab, then brought back and escaped, Fauci said, "That means it (virus) was in the wild to begin with."

"That's why I don't get what they're talking about (and) why I don't spend a lot of time going in on this circular argument," he said.

The remarks of Milley and Fauci were in stark contrast to the claim made by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Sunday that "there is a significant amount of evidence" that the virus came from a lab in Wuhan.

US media reported last week that some US intelligence analysts had expressed concern that senior Trump administration officials' pressure to link the coronavirus with a Chinese lab will distort assessments about the virus and they could be used as a political weapon.

As COVID-19 deaths continue to increase in the United States, some individuals in the Trump administration have tried desperately to deflect criticisms about their blunders by blaming others.

As of Tuesday afternoon, the United States reported more than 1,194,000 COVID-19 cases with over 70,000 deaths, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.
---
US President Donald Trump departs on travel to the Camp David presidential retreat from the South Lawn at the White House in Washington, US, May 1, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

WASHINGTON - US President Donald Trump is receiving blowback after claiming on Tuesday that Asian Americans are angry at "what China has done" in the epidemic, a move criticized by many as racist and blame-shifting.

US Congresswoman Grace Meng from New York said that Asian Americans are in fact "very angry at" Trump.

"You use racism to disguise your lack of responsiveness and responsibility," Meng tweeted. "American lives of all backgrounds have been lost. Your words have led to increased discrimination against asian Americans which will outlast the coronavirus."

Andrew Yang, a former Democratic presidential contender, tweeted that they are angry that people are dying and the United States is leading in coronavirus cases and deaths "due to a chaotic and uncoordinated response."

According to a count by Johns Hopkins University, more than 1.3 million people in the United States have infected with the coronavirus, or COVID-19, with over 82,000 deaths. Both numbers are far higher than those in any other country or region.

The much-criticized tweet was posted a day after Trump stirred controversy by telling an Asian American reporter to "ask China" when pressed on why he continues to bring up the US coronavirus testing capacity.

"Why is this a global competition to you if every day Americans are still losing their lives and we're still seeing more cases every day?" CBS White House correspondent Weijia Jiang asked Trump during a press conference in the Rose Garden.

"Don't ask me, ask China that question," Trump responded. "They're losing their lives everywhere in the world and maybe that's a question you should ask China."

Jiang, a Chinese-born American citizen, challenged the response.

"Sir, why are you saying that to me specifically?" she asked.

Trump said he is not saying it "specifically to anybody" but saying it to "anybody who would ask a nasty question like that," before leaving the press conference abruptly.

US Congressman Ted Lieu slammed the president's remarks on Monday.

"Asian Americans are Americans. Some of us served on active duty in the US military. Some are on the frontlines fighting this pandemic as paramedics and health care workers," Lieu tweeted. "Stop dividing our nation."

As the coronavirus pandemic continues to impact the United States, Federal law enforcement has reportedly warned of an increase in hate crimes against Asian Americans.

"The FBI assesses hate crime incidents against Asian Americans likely will surge across the United States, due to the spread of coronavirus disease ... endangering Asian American communities," according to an FBI analysis obtained by ABC News.

Eugene Gu, who is helping to treat coronavirus patients, tweeted on Tuesday that Trump "doesn't speak for Asian Americans like me nor millions of others in this country who have been horrified by his cruel and blatant racism."

"Chinese Americans, like many Americans of every other race, are far more angry at Trump for botching the response to the coronavirus pandemic," Gu wrote. "Scapegoating Asian Americans and dismissing a Chinese American reporter by telling her to go "ask China" is a shameful attack on us all."

The recent incidents occurred against the backdrop that some Trump administration officials are aggressively pushing a debunked conspiracy theory that the coronavirus originated in a Chinese lab, despite wide scientific consensus that the virus was not man-made or genetically modified.

Shooting down the conspiracy theory, Anthony Fauci, director of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told National Geographic last week that the best evidence shows the coronavirus behind the pandemic was not made in a lab.

"If you look at the evolution of the virus in bats and what's out there now, (the scientific evidence) is very, very strongly leaning toward this could not have been artificially or deliberately manipulated," Fauci said.

Based on the scientific evidence, the key member of the White House coronavirus task force does not entertain an alternate theory either that someone found the coronavirus in the wild, brought it to a lab, and then it accidentally escaped.

Eric Ward, executive director at the Western States Center, a civil rights organization, said in a statement that the White House "has made a sport of recklessly demonizing China and spreading conspiracy theories about the pandemic's origin."

"The predictable result is that anti-Asian hate is boiling over in the form of online and verbal harassment and hate crimes," Ward added.
---
In an open letter, 77 American Nobel laureates urged the US government to launch an investigation into the decision by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to cancel a grant for a study of how the novel coronavirus moves from animals to humans.

"We believe that this action sets a dangerous precedent by interfering in the conduct of science and jeopardizes public trust in the process of awarding federal funds for research," says the letter, which was released May 21 and composed by pre-eminent scientists in medicine, chemistry and physics.

The grant in question was awarded to disease ecologist Peter Daszak, who leads EcoHealth Alliance, a New York-based international nonprofit devoted to the study of emerging infectious diseases.

For many years, the group has been a key collaborator with the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which became the focal point of a conspiracy theory pushed by some in the Trump administration that claims the coronavirus was accidentally released by the lab, causing the current COVID-19 pandemic.

According to the Nobel recipients' letter, the grant was revoked April 24 after President Donald Trump responded to a question from a reporter who erroneously claimed that the grant awarded millions of dollars to investigators in Wuhan.

Despite the misrepresentation of Daszak's grant and the high relevance of his study to the current pandemic, the NIH informed Daszak and his colleagues that the grant was being terminated because the "NIH does not believe that the current project outcomes align with the program goals and agency priorities."

Such explanations are "preposterous" under the circumstances, the letter said.

The open letter, which was addressed to Alex Azar II, secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, and NIH head Francis Collins, also highlighted the importance of international collaboration in scientific research, including Daszak's work.

"Their work depends on productive collaborations with scientists in other countries, including scientists in Wuhan, China, where the current pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus arose. Now is precisely the time we need to support this kind of research if we aim to control the pandemic and prevent subsequent ones," the letter continued.

In a statement posted on its website, EcoHealth Alliance said the research terminated by the NIH helped in designing vaccines and drugs to protect people from COVID-19 and other coronavirus threats.

The genetic sequences of two bat coronaviruses that researchers discovered with this grant have been used to test the Daszak breakthrough antiviral drug remdesivir, the statement said.

In an interview with CBS News, Daszak said that the $3.7 million grant was not given to the Wuhan institute but to EcoHealth Alliance.

Gerald Keusch, a former director of NIH's Fogarty International Center, told the journal Science that the NIH's move is counterproductive to the understanding of the current pandemic and avoiding future viral outbreaks.

"This is cutting off your nose to spite your face. This is the worst kind of thing that political interference can cause in a democracy," Keusch said.

The Nobelists' letter came just a day after the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB), one of the largest molecular life science societies in the world, published a similar letter of protest directed to the NIH.

In the letter, the ASBMB, which represents "tens of thousands of members of the American biomedical research enterprise", said the decision by the NIH politicizes science and seems to be a reaction to a theory about the origins of the COVID-19 virus, which the US intelligence community has publicly repudiated.

"EcoHealth Alliance at one point collaborated with a lab in Wuhan, China, which has recently been at the center of rumors about the origin of the pandemic. The overall goal of EcoHealth Alliance's research project is to study coronavirus transmission from species to species. But the purpose of the research project has been conflated with these rumors. This is worrisome," the letter said.

"International collaboration has propelled the American research enterprise to achieve vital innovations and discoveries; it is the gold standard for the scientific community. The United States is a beacon for the best and brightest minds, consistently attracting top scientists from around the world. However, with this incident, international collaboration is being portrayed as a threat," it added.

"Our aim with this effort is to stand up for a scientific enterprise that should be free of political influence on sound scientific research. This grant was peer reviewed, led to research that has numerous publications in scholarly journals, and was competitively renewed just last year," said Benjamin Corb, public affairs director for the ASBMB, in a statement.

"The continued politicization of science during this pandemic crisis is an alarming trend that is risking not only the integrity of science, but also the lives of citizens. Scientific research must remain clear of the partisanship that divides the nation and must be the foundation for sound policymaking during and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic," Corb added.
---
Attempts by the United States to distract attention from its incompetence during the COVID-19 pandemic by blaming China and the World Health Organization are baseless, unhelpful and cannot fool the international community, said members of China's top political advisory body.

On May 13, US senators introduced the COVID-19 Accountability Act, accusing China of mishandling the outbreak and withholding information that resulted in the dire situation in the US. The act would enable US President Donald Trump to impose new sanctions on China and ask for compensation.

Some US politicians have frequently claimed that Wuhan in Hubei province is the origin of the novel coronavirus, or that the virus was made in the biosafety level 4 lab, also known as the P4 lab, of the Wuhan Institute of Virology. President Trump has also accused the WHO of colluding with China and recently threatened to cut its US funding permanently and even quit the organization.

China Daily interviewed several prominent members of the 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference to share their views on the situation. The following are excerpts from these interviews:

Huang Luqi, president of the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, member of the CPPCC National Committee. [Photo/China Daily]

Accusations are baseless

Huang Luqi, president of the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, member of the CPPCC National Committee

The accusations by the US are completely baseless. I was one of the first doctors to arrive in Wuhan when the epidemic started. I know that, on Dec 31, the local health authority had already issued a statement on the cases of atypical pneumonia. On Jan 3, China provided updates of the situation to the WHO, the US and other countries, as well as to regions such as Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan.

China has promptly published its information in an honest, transparent and responsible fashion. The New York Times reported that most coronavirus cases in New York City came from Europe. Data from several major provinces in Canada showed that their cases came from US travelers. Australia's health department data said the nation's ratio of imported cases from Northeast Asia was very low.

When I have discussed the COVID-19 situation with US counterparts, they are willing to speak with me and respect objective facts. Now it is some US politicians who are blaming China, hoping to shift their responsibility to appease their voters and the stock market.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-31 19:38
It is no surprise those in the West who hoped to find evidence of guilt in the findings have felt disappointed about the World Health Organization report on its joint mission with China to trace the origins of the novel coronavirus.
The report, released late Tuesday and a product of a joint research trip by the WHO and Chinese scientists to Wuhan last month, shed some light on the potential pathways of the virus.
Among other things, the 123-page report described the likelihood of the virus being introduced to humans via an intermediate animal host as "likely to very likely", that of it reaching humans via cold food chain products as "possible", that of it directly infecting humans as "possible to likely", and that of it being spread to humans through a lab accident as "extremely unlikely".
In other words, the report gives no credence to the unfounded speculation that the pandemic was caused by a leak from a lab in Wuhan. And it highlights the significance of international collaboration on origin-tracing research in a global context.
It also stands as a powerful repudiation of the shameless lies some Western politicians and pundits have churned out to slander China over the months, and a sobering reminder that more hard work is needed to determine the pandemic's history.
Now that science has spoken, the international community needs to take it as an opportunity to recognize COVID-19 origin-tracing for what it is: scientific research, not a political game.
These are crucial initial findings that may help clear the ground and pave the way for future probes. But just as WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said, "No single research trip can provide all the answers."
Of course, the findings are not extensive, or conclusive enough. It is commonsense and a broad consensus in the medical science community that identifying the origin of a virus takes time, possibly years, perhaps decades. Therefore, the report the expert team just submitted is the beginning, by no means the end of that process.
Countries around the world need to reach a consensus that origin-tracing missions should not be probes that are based on the presumption of guilt. The aim of the missions should be about getting to know the virus better and understanding how it has evolved so as to help beat the virus at an early date as well as prevent future disease outbreaks.
But a conspicuous ramification of the origin- tracing research so far has been its rampant politicization, which has not only seriously disrupted scientific endeavors aimed at finding the true origin of the virus, but also undermined international collaboration in the fight against the pandemic.
Some Western politicians and media have incubated and spread the political virus targeting China. As COVID-19 origin-tracing is underway, this political virus should be traced back to the perpetrators so that the malice behind it can be clearly seen and science can prevail.
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-05 04:11

File photo: Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme. [Photo/Agencies]
Top medics play down 'speculative' US allegations
The World Health Organization, or WHO, said on Monday that allegations by the United States government that it had seen strong evidence that the novel coronavirus originated in a lab in Wuhan were "speculative".
In recent days both President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have claimed to have seen strong evidence that the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 came from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, but have failed to provide any specific evidence.
Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, said that the organization has not received any data or specific evidence from the US government relating to the purported origin of the virus.
"From our perspective, this remains speculative," he told a virtual news conference from Geneva. "Like any evidence-based organization, we will be very willing to receive any information that purports to the origin of the virus."
He said that if that data and evidence is available, then it will be for the US government to decide whether and when it can be shared. He added that in that specific regard, it is difficult for the WHO to operate in an information vacuum.
Ryan emphasized that on the basis of all the evidence and advice the WHO has received, the virus is of natural origin.
Maria Van Kerkhove, technical lead of the WHO program, echoed this view, saying that some 15,000 available genome sequences all support that belief.
"What we really need to understand is the intermediate host, the animal that was infected by a bat and that infected people in some of the early cases," said Van Kerkhove, a US scientist who spent two weeks working in China during the outbreak.
That was also the advice from the International Health Regulations Emergency Committee on COVID-19 which met twice in late January, and again last week.
Both Van Kerkhove and Ryan said that understanding that intermediate host and animal-human interface is important to help prevent such a pandemic from happening again in the future.
Ryan said that the investigation will be similar to the WHO mission to China in February, when Chinese and international scientists conducted studies together in several Chinese cities.
"We need to understand that we can learn from Chinese scientists, we can learn from each other, we can exchange knowledge, and we can find the answers together," he said.
Trump and Pompeo have been blaming both China and the WHO for the spread of COVID-19, a move seen by many as a deflection of the widespread criticism of US government mismanagement of the pandemic crisis at home. The US saw its worst death toll of 2,909 on Friday, putting enormous pressure on Trump ahead of the November presidential election.
Ryan said that if it is projected as an aggressive investigation of wrongdoing, that is more difficult to do. "That's a political issue. That is not a science issue," he said.
He expressed that Chinese scientists have been communicating and collaborating around the world throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
"We would like to see that spirit continue. We would like to see scientists at the center of the exploration of the source of this," he said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/47/158865135328.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-04-01 07:05

Liang Wannian, a Tsinghua University professor who heads the Chinese team of the joint mission. [Photo provided to China Daily]
China dismissed on Wednesday claims that it withheld raw data from international experts studying the origin of the novel coronavirus, stressing that data sharing throughout the mission convened by the World Health Organization has been thorough and comprehensive.
Liang Wannian, a Tsinghua University professor who heads the Chinese team of the joint mission, said Chinese and foreign experts had the same access to data, and their research in Wuhan, Hubei province, from late January to early February, was "tightly integrated".
"There is no difference between what we had obtained and what foreign team members had on hand," he said at a news conference in Beijing. "The hypothesis that China did not share raw data is unfounded."
Liang added that some data that concerned the privacy of patients was not allowed to be taken overseas or photographed based on Chinese laws and international rules, but they were available to the entire team during their on-site visits.
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said on Wednesday that after a work plan guiding the mission was formulated in July between China and the WHO, hundreds of domestic scientists devoted all-out efforts to collecting, organizing and conducting initial analysis of data based on advice put forward by international experts.
"Each piece of raw data that is worth special attention was made available to international experts participating in the mission one by one," she said. "They had said multiple times that they had comprehensive and frank discussions with the Chinese side on the issue of data."
Liang said preliminary data aggregation and analysis work undertaken by Chinese researchers is necessary because the sheer amount of original data can be overwhelming.
"It is unrealistic and unnecessary from the point of view of a scientist to go through every single entry in original records," he said. "We must first establish a database that can be further examined."
Liang said the 120-page report published by the joint mission on Tuesday is of great value to understanding the virus and other emerging infectious diseases.
"The report will withstand the test of history," he said. "The team is confident that the report is based on all available documents and evidence on hand."
The report said that the virus most likely jumped from an animal, potentially a bat or pangolin, to humans through an intermediary species.
It said the theory that the virus originated in a lab is "extremely unlikely". Two other pathwaysÔºçdirect transmission from animals to humans and the virus spreading through cold-chain logisticsÔºçwere deemed possible.
Liang said tracing the origin of the novel coronavirus is a work in progress and should be a globe-spanning effort.
The report suggested establishing a global database integrating information including genome sequencing, epidemiology, animal and environmental monitoring data.
It also urged expanding the scope of the search to possible early infections as well as potential animal hosts of the virus across the world. The role of cold-chain and cold products in aiding transmission was also seen as worth exploring.
"To pinpoint the origin of virus is extremely complicated, because a pathogen's introduction into the human population is a highly accidental event," Liang said, adding that the high rates of asymptomatic COVID-19 cases have compounded the difficulties.
"The first reported case in Wuhan dated to Dec 8, 2019. But the case is not necessarily the zero patient that we are looking for," he said. "Scientists have reached the consensus that the region that reported the first case is not necessarily where the virus first emerged."
He said whether more origin tracing teams will be dispatched to China should be determined by practical and science-based evaluations.
"It is false to believe that origin-tracing work should be limited to China. We must pursue a wider perspective," he said. "It is very clear that Chinese scientists and governments are willing to contribute more in finding the virus' origin in the future."
In response to doubt cast on the outcome of the joint mission, Liang said a scientific attitude always prevailed when team members on the mission found themselves debating each other during on-site visits or when formulating the final report.
"Chinese and international experts were able to arrive at consensus through arguing, with the shared goal of examining more evidence and improving the research," Liang said.
"The report was delayed because we were striving to ensure its high quality, to make it more science-based and well-rounded," he added.
Hua, from the Foreign Ministry, denounced the accusation that the Chinese government had intervened in the joint mission as baseless and deeply irresponsible.
"All parties should respect science and respect conclusions and suggestions put forward by scientists," she said.
---
By ANGUS McNEICE in London | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-10-15 09:27

A vial with potential vaccine for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is pictured at the Imperial College London, London, June 10, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Experts are warning that widespread belief in COVID-19 conspiracy theories could make vaccination campaigns less effective when treatments become available.
An international study led by Cambridge University psychologists and social scientists revealed that conspiracy theories linked to the pandemic are widespread, and that people who believe in such misinformation might be less likely to get vaccinated against the novel coronavirus.
"Certain misinformation claims are consistently seen as reliable by substantial sections of the public," said Sander van der Linden, who is director of the Cambridge Social Decision-Making Lab and co-author on the paper. "We find a clear link between believing coronavirus conspiracies and hesitancy around any future vaccine."
The study, which was published this week in the journal Royal Society Open Science, surveyed a total of 5,000 respondents in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, the United States, and Mexico to gauge public perception over the reliability of COVID-19 origin stories, some of which were not evidence-based.
In Mexico, 22 percent of respondents believed that the pandemic is "part of a plot to enforce global vaccination" along with 18 percent in Ireland, Spain and the US, and 13 percent in the UK.
The conspiracy theory that electromagnetic fields from 5G telecommunications towers make COVID-19 symptoms worse was also held by a sizable minority in each nationÔºç16 percent in Mexico and Spain, 12 percent in Ireland, and 8 percent in both the UK and the US.
A damaging and frequently debunked rumor that the novel coronavirus was engineered in a lab in Wuhan, China, was deemed the most valid conspiracy theory among respondents.
In Spain, 37 percent of those surveyed said this claim was "reliable", compared with 33 percent in Mexico, 26 percent in Ireland, and between 22 and 23 percent in the UK and the US.
"As well as flagging false claims, governments and technology companies should explore ways to increase digital media literacy in the population," said van der Linden. "Otherwise, developing a working vaccine might not be enough."
The researchers asked participants to rate the reliability of COVID-19 conspiracy theories on a scale of one to seven. Respondents were also asked about their attitudes to a future COVID-19 vaccine.
The study found that, on average, an increase by one-seventh in perceived reliability of misinformation is associated with a drop of 23 percent in the likelihood they will agree to get vaccinated.
Achieving and maintaining widespread immunity is vital to the eradication or control of disease. Depending on how infectious a disease is, herd immunity can only be achieved if between 50 and 90 percent of a population is immune through natural infection or vaccination, according to the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
The Cambridge researchers called on governments to up efforts to confront the spread of misinformation surrounding the novel coronavirus.
Cambridge University has partnered with the UK government on the development of an online game to educate people about the pandemic.
Released this week on the web, Go Viral! drops users into the world of misinformation, and players must then expose the tactics used by malicious actors to spread false claims.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/70/160273457010.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-02 10:02

A 3D scan of COVID-19 virus created by design lab Nanographics is seen in this handout released in Vienna, Austria, Jan 20, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
The US cable news channel CNN recently published a report on the COVID-19 pandemic, in which it pointed to what it labeled as China's missteps in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic when it first emerged.
CNN said in the report that Chinese authorities notified the World Health Organization about a cluster of pneumonia cases on Dec 31, 2019, but China did not specify how many were sick, "or what kind of virus it might be."
Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, noted that China reported information to the World Health Organization regarding the outbreak and shared the gene sequences of the novel coronavirus with other countries in a timely manner.
China has always been open, transparent and responsible in responding to COVID-19, and Chinese authorities have promptly released relevant information, shared the anti-pandemic experience and promoted international cooperation, he said.
Experts said the Chinese health system first identified pneumonia cases of unknown origin in the early stage of the pandemic and raised the alarm. Like anything new and unknown in medicine, its secrets needed to be unlocked and revealed through scientific research.
The health authority of Wuhan, Hubei province, reported the pneumonia cases of unknown cause late December 2019, and the National Health Commission soon sent a working group and an expert team to Wuhan to guide epidemic response and conduct on-site investigations.
Except for informing the WHO, China has since Jan 3, 2020 been informing relevant countries and regions about the pneumonia outbreak and response measures on a regular basis.
A Chinese team of experts initially identified novel coronavirus as the cause of the viral pneumonia in Wuhan on Jan 9, then China informed the WHO of the findings and also shared the information with other countries immediately.
China also submitted to the WHO the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus on Jan 12, which was published by the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data and shared globally.
From Jan 20 to 21, a WHO delegation conducted a field visit to Wuhan. On Feb 16, a China-WHO joint expert team with 25 experts, including two from the US, started a nine-day field visit in China and inspected Beijing, Sichuan, Guangdong and Hubei.
The joint team said on Feb 24 that China's unprecedented public health responses to the novel coronavirus outbreak have yielded notable results in blocking human-to-human transmission of the virus, preventing or at least delaying hundreds of thousands of cases.
China has also played a crucial role in protecting the international community, buying precious time for countries to adopt active prevention and control measures and providing them with worthwhile experience, the 25-member team said.
Those experts have noted that the novel coronavirus was a new pathogen and more information was needed to better understand the transmission and severity of the disease it caused.
---
HK EDITION | Updated: 2020-07-08 11:10  Hong Kong residents raise a toast during a rally to celebrate the 23rd anniversary of the establishment of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and the approval of the national security law for the SAR on June 30. [Photo/Agencies]
Much has been written recently about so-called China's "Wolf Warrior" diplomacy. Western-based commentators have widely criticized what they see as a more assertive, some say, bullying stance taken by a number of Chinese foreign affairs specialists including diplomats based around the globe, who are actually often on the defense.
As it happens, we can apply the same sort of assertiveness-metric to foreign affairs management in the West. It is profitable to consider the US and Australia and, briefly, New Zealand.
The clear dominance of American military, economic and political power after WW II provided the means for the US to oversee an era of extended peace ‚Äì and also to shape transnational outcomes in America's own interest to a remarkable extent. Soft power, a term coined by Joseph Nye in 1990, has been defined as "[T]he ability to affect others by attraction and persuasion rather than through the hard power of coercion and payment." More recently, certain US commentators have critically analyzed what they call China's sharp power.
In fact, the US has deployed all three powers, soft, sharp and hard, for many decades. In 1985, a respected American analyst, George Scialabba, noted that certain regimes following policies considered unacceptable to the US were "subjected to American hostility, subversion or even invasion", adding that, "rhetoric aside, promoting democracy, self-determination and human rights has little to do with American foreign policy."
More recently, Dan Sanchez, argued, after reviewing the remarkable careers of the brothers, John Foster Dulles (US Secretary of State, 1953‚Äì59) and Allen Dulles (CIA Director, 1953‚Äì61), that together they created a legacy, for the US, of perpetual war.
Building on this potent tradition, Washington has, under the current Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, developed a divergent, conspicuously muscular form of power-diplomacy. In some cases, as with Iran, it can take the form of violent coercion. In the case of China, the US is now firmly committed to a win-lose Sino-strategy: for the US to win, China needs to lose.
Very recently, US political power has been starkly deployed (domestically and internationally) in response to China's plan to enact a plainly required, new national security regime for the HKSAR. Yet another audaciously meddling law was recently passed in the US Senate and House of Representatives, shortly after Secretary Pompeo declared that, "No reasonable person can assert today that Hong Kong maintains a high degree of autonomy from China". Presumptuous sanctions of various sorts were threatened. The assumed right to interfere is unconcealed.
In mid-April, meanwhile, Mr Pompeo stipulated that Beijing should grant the US access to a Wuhan laboratory: "We are still asking the Chinese Communist Party to allow experts to get into the virology lab so we can determine precisely where this virus began." The essence of this megaphone approach is to say: we presume you are guilty, unless you can prove otherwise; and we decide if you have done so. There are closer resonances here with the Spanish Inquisition than with Common Law presumption of innocence principles.
And what of Australia?
Most striking is the recent Australian decision to badger China on the need for an investigation - conducted independently of the WHO - into the COVID-19 virus origins. This proposal came across as measurably associated with the ill-tempered American, Wuhan-focused, inquisitorial demands, which were designed to further incite a blame-China narrative within US domestic politics.
A respected, previous Australian Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, recently observed that, "[T]he signs of strident Sinophobia [in Australia] are now everywhere to be seen [including in] the government's ill-thought rush to single out China for international blame over COVID-19 [and in] Foreign Minister Marise Payne's ever more unbalanced statements."
Further acute observations were offered by a former Australian Ambassador to China, Geoff Raby, in June. He noted that, "There are some people [in Australia] in the media, in think tanks‚Ä¶.who see a bad relationship with China as a badge of honor" adding that, "what is particularly pernicious is that commentators and even politicians are weaponizing the relationship and delegitimizing economic interests."
Australia has tended to cast itself as a victim as this quarrel has developed. It considers that it has been getting a taste of undeserved, Wolf Warrior pressure from China related, for example, to certain exports, tourism and onshore international education. How apt, though, is this viewpoint?
When Beijing issued warnings to Chinese tourists and students to be alert to increased race-based risks in Australia Marise Payne accused China of spreading disinformation about the danger of racist attacks in Australia. Awkwardly, hundreds of race-targeted attacks against Chinese people have been widely reported in the Australia media, some of which have involved actual violence. There has also been cross-party condemnation, in the parliament, of increased anti-Asian racism in Australia. These problems have intensified with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a harmful signaling-impact, too, arising from the government's misguided, forceful reproaches: those launching abuse feel more empowered to do so within the context of the repeated, conspicuous government disputation directed at Beijing.
Interestingly, as Washington was ramping up its calls for a COVID inquisition, New Zealand made it quite clear it was not interested in joining any sort of "witch hunt" over the COVID crisis. Indeed the New Zealand Prime Minister noted, in mid-May, that New Zealand had learned from other countries, including China, adding that China was, "obviously the first to use lockdown and I think that has saved lives globally".
Australia has, more recently, made much of perceived Chinese threats to its national security. But, as Geoff Raby suggests, seriously undermining Australia's bilateral economic ties with China presents a fast-track route to jeopardizing Australia's national security. Without economic security, national security is made far more vulnerable.
Australia has the most China-dependent economy in the developed world and it has benefitted hugely from this. From 1991 to 2019, Australia experienced 28 years of uninterrupted growth ‚Äì a record in the OECD. China has played a pivotal role in this achievement. China was also crucial in helping Australia to maintain growth during the Global Financial Crisis around a decade ago, an achievement matched by few others.
How then has Australia careened into this spasm of Sino-confrontation? The reasons are complex and include a depressing lack of reflective (New Zealand style) impulse control combined with local political opportunism. Gareth Evans has, though, put his finger on what may be the pivotal explanatory factor. He argues that excessive deference is being paid by both government and opposition to "the national security and intelligence community, now itself more collectively deferential to Washington (notwithstanding its catastrophically dysfunctional current leadership) than I can ever remember."
Like Hong Kong, Australia has a huge vested (win-win) interest in seeing the rise of China maintained and enhanced. Late last year I wrote that China, as an extraordinary advancing power within the Asia-Pacific, clearly raises distinctive challenges for Australia's foreign policy posture. These need to be managed, firmly and carefully in Canberra.
Still, China does not, I said, purposefully threaten Australian in any serious way. An anxiously forceful US, on the other hand does threaten Australia at a measurably more significant level: first, by hectoring diplomacy, encouraging intensified antipathy towards the trading partner who has done more to help remake Australian prosperity in the last thirty years than any other country; and secondly, due to the serious hazard of being drawn into yet more US military adventures ‚Äì possibly involving certain levels of forceful confrontation with China. This is not an imaginary risk: the former US President, Jimmy Carter, reminded us, in 2019, that America is, "the most warlike nation in the history of the world". It was the principal combatant in five major wars since WW-II.
I argued last year that, examined rationally, the strategic position for Australia was very clear - but foolish decisions, influenced by the US, might still be made in Canberra. It gives me scant pleasure, now, to say that my earlier concern has been substantially confirmed.
The author is a visiting professor in the Faculty of Law, Hong Kong University.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/25/159418134783.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-05 08:12

File photo: the emblem of the WHO. [Photo/Agencies]
WHO says Wuhan may not be where COVID-19 first transmitted to humans
Wuhan, Hubei province, may not be the place where the COVID-19 virus crossed from animals into humans, despite the first clusters of infections having been reported in the city, said Michael Ryan, executive director of the Health Emergencies Program of the World Health Organization.
The city had a surveillance system designed specifically for picking up atypical pneumonia cases, he said at a routine news briefing on Monday."It was there for a very specific purpose. And the fact that the fire alarm was triggered doesn't necessarily mean that is where the disease crossed from animals into humans."
When commenting on the future joint investigation, Ryan said Chinese scientists have done a lot of great work and provided valuable preliminary data. A more extensive epidemiological study to look at the first cases and clusters in Wuhan will begin with the participation of scientists from around the globe, according to the WHO.
Two WHO experts were in China to conduct groundwork for an investigation into the animal origins of the novel coronavirus from July 11 to Sunday, according to information released by China's National Health Commission on Monday.
During their stay in China, they held many talks with their Chinese counterparts on scientific research, including the route of transmission and animal origin of the virus, and exchanged ideas on future scientific study plans.
WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said WHO and Chinese experts have drafted the terms for the studies and the program for an international team led by the WHO. "The international team will include leading scientists and researchers from China and around the world," he said.
The origin of the novel coronavirus has puzzled scientists since its discovery. According to a study published in late July in the journal Nature Microbiology, scientists now have further proof that the coronavirus evolved in the wild and may have been circulating in bats for more than 40 years.
The study, conducted by scientists from China and Europe, said the virus may have been poised to jump to humans for some time. Meanwhile, this discovery discredits conspiracy theories that the coronavirus was bioengineered or escaped from a lab, it added.
The researchers compared the genetic makeup of the novel coronavirus with that of a close relative in batsÔºça virus called RaTG13. The latter was discovered by noted Chinese virologist Shi Zhengli in Yunnan province in 2013, according to the journal Science.
Pangolin role doubted
As a result, RaTG13 has been the centerpiece of many conspiracy theories claiming Shi's team had genetically manipulated it to create the novel coronavirus. Shi rebutted all the accusations in an interview with Science last month.
The latest study found the two viruses shared a common ancestor, but their evolutionary path diverged some 40 to 70 years ago. The long divergence period suggests that there may be other undiscovered strains of bat coronaviruses that may cause disease in humans.
Unlike previous research had suggested, the study did not find evidence supporting pangolins playing a role in the evolution of the novel coronavirus or being the intermediate host. Instead, pangolins may have picked up the virus through contact with other wild animals, the study said.
David Robertson, a professor of viral genetics at the University of Glasgow in the United Kingdom and one of the key researchers behind the study, said the novel coronavirus is a "generalist virus" that can infect multiple species of animals.
"Current evidence suggests that the novel coronavirus acquired its significant traits from evolving in bats, not in some intermediate hosts," he said in an online seminar last month. This may help explain why the intermediate host has eluded scientists to this day because it may not have played a big role in the virus' evolution, he said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/93/159659358123.jpeg
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-03 07:07

A staff member takes out samples of the COVID-19 inactivated vaccine at a vaccine production plant of Sinopharm in Beijing, on April 11, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
China's speedy COVID-19 vaccine development is the result of drawing inspiration from past public health challenges, rapid but meticulous mobilization of talent and resources and rigorously upholding strict scientific and medical standards during every step of research, experts said.
As of Oct 20, there were 44 vaccine candidates in human trials around the world, 15 of which were developed by China or with Chinese partners, according to the World Health Organization. China has four vaccine candidates in phase three clinical trials. These include three inactivated vaccines and an adenoviral vector-based, or AdV5, vaccine.
Lu Shan, a member of China's COVID-19 vaccine development task force, said the nation's scientific community was swift to respond to the new public health threat, as evident from the Ministry of Science and Technology holding its first interdepartmental meeting on research on the pathogen on Jan 21.
Many noted scientists, from those studying the origin of the virus to those who develop various types of vaccines, were present at the meeting, Lu told Science and Technology Daily, a newspaper operated by the ministry.
New research projects and talent have been constantly incorporated into the research effort as scientists began to learn more about the virus, and "a new project's funding often arrives on the same day it was approved", she added.
"Developing a vaccine has a high chance of failure, and we didn't know which technical route may yield a safe and effective vaccine," Lu said. "But over the years, we have accumulated the talent and resources to try all five routes. The reason for that decision is to guarantee success."
The five technical routes for vaccines are: inactivated vaccines, attenuated influenza vaccines, the two nucleic acid-basedÔºçDNA and mRNAÔºçtypes of vaccines and adenoviral vector-based vaccines. As of last month, all five routes had vaccines that had started or were ready to begin human trials soon, according to the National Medical Products Administration.
Xu Penghui, a biotech researcher at the ministry's Department of Science and Technology for Social Development, said China's rapid progress in COVID-19 vaccine development is rooted in the nation's vast professional and administrative knowledge gained from creating new drugs and handling past public health risks.
"For years, we have been keeping a close eye on various research teams across the country. We know exactly who leads the research and what their accomplishments and their capabilities are," he said.
When a new public threat arises, the ministry could act as a "chief of staff for scientists" and quickly mobilize researchers based on their specialties to jointly tackle the new challenge, he added.
These research teams are also proactively communicating and collaborating with each other, sharing know-how and ensuring better allocation of resources.
For example, the ministry first tasked China National Biotec Group and Sinovac Biotech with creating the inactivated vaccine, but later a research team from the Institute of Medical Biology of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences joined the undertaking.
The ministry also devoted dedicated staff to serve scientists' basic research needs, such as procuring and transferring lab test animals as well as redirecting lab resources at the nation's limited number of biosafety level 3 laboratories to support vaccine development.
Bai He, an expert on biological products at the National Medical Products Administration, said China has a capable expert committee tasked with supervising every key step of vaccine development to ensure the research is conducted rigorously, which can reduce the time needed for correcting mistakes.
"If vaccine development is like driving a car, our researchers are pushing the accelerator, and the committee is at the steering wheel and correcting course if needed," she said.
During an inspection of a biotech company in late March, experts discovered that the company's animal model experiment was poorly designed, so they provided advice for revisions on the spot and helped the company save at least two weeks of research time, Bai said.
Yang Xiaoming, president of China National Biotec Group, told reporters in September that despite the global need and urgency for developing an effective vaccine, the company is prohibited from cutting corners on any research steps.
"Our core principle is not skipping a single step in the research and not lowering a single point in safety standards. Only on this basis can we go all out and seize every moment for research," he said.
When the pandemic began, the company immediately allocated 1 billion yuan ($149.5 million) for vaccine development. Based on its resources and expertise, the company ultimately focused on creating inactivated and nucleic acid-based vaccines. Three of its subsidiaries doing research concurrently allowed the company to quickly overcome key challenges in vaccine development and production, he added.
Progress in trials
In the past few months, China has pledged to make a Chinese vaccine accessible to countries in Southeast Asia, Africa and Latin America. On Oct 9, China announced that it had joined the COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access Facility, or COVAX, an initiative co-led by the WHO that aims to promote equitable access to vaccines, especially for vulnerable people and healthcare workers in developing countries.
Liu Jingzhen, chairman of China National Pharmaceutical Group Co, often called Sinopharm, the parent company of China National Biotec Group, said on Oct 20 that third-stage clinical trials of its two inactivated vaccine candidates were being conducted in 10 foreign countries, including the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Argentina, Egypt and Peru.
"The current feedback is very satisfactory and we have received wide recognition from the international community," Liu said.
Eduardo Spitzer, scientific director of Laboratorio Elea Phoenix in Buenos Aires, told the journal Nature in early October that expectations of a successful Chinese vaccine are high in Argentina. Sinopharm's large-scale trials in the country began in September and received widespread media coverage, he added.
Sao Paulo's Butantan Institute, one of Brazil's leading biomedical research centers, which is carrying out phase three tests of the inactivated vaccine made by Sinovac Biotech, said last week that the Chinese vaccine had been shown to be safe in tests involving 9,000 volunteers.
"The first results of the clinical study conducted in Brazil proved that among all the vaccines tested in the country, CoronaVac is the safest (and) the one with the best and most promising rates," Sao Paulo Governor Joao Doria told reporters regarding the company's vaccine.
Promising prospects
The Lancet, one of the world's premier medical journals, published a commentary on Oct 15 calling the inactivated vaccine created by China National Biotec Group "promising", but said more research is needed to check the vaccine's effects on older and more medically vulnerable people, as well as in understanding the duration and strength of its protection.
Existing clinical results show that the inactivated vaccine candidates from China are generally safe and are relatively better tolerated by recipients compared with other vaccines in late-stage human trials, the journal Nature said in a study in late September.
However, the Chinese vaccines' efficacy is still unknown. Moreover, assuming the inactivated vaccines will require two doses per personÔºçthe same dosage used in the clinical trialsÔºçit will be a monumental task to distribute them globally, given that the supply of syringes, glass vials and related equipment might create a bottleneck, it said.
"It is very likely that AdV5-based and inactivated vaccines produced in ChinaÔºças well as other vaccine candidates produced in India and elsewhereÔºçwill have a major role in satisfying the global demand for vaccines against SARS-CoV-2," the study said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/34/160436226039.jpeg
---
fmprc.gov.cn | Updated: 2020-04-30 15:43

Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Le Yucheng spoke with Janis Mackey Frayer of the National Broadcasting Company (NBC). [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]
Janis Frayer: The US intelligence has suggested that China has artificially lowered the case numbers and the deaths and there were multiple revisions to the way that China was counting for coronavirus cases. So is it understandable that there is some skepticism about the numbers that China has been reporting and whether they are real?
Le Yucheng: You mentioned US intelligence services. As is known to all, for more than once what they said caused disasters to the world. It was the US intelligence which claimed that Iraq had "weapons of mass destruction", yet till this day those weapons are nowhere to be found.
China has been open, transparent, with good faith, and truthful when it comes to the release of data. We bear in mind our responsibility to history, to the people and to the lives lost to COVID-19. What we've done can stand scrutiny. There is no need for cover-ups. This is all about real people. It is literally impossible to hide anything. On the contrary, some countries once said that COVID-19 was just a common flu, and in fact that is cover-up. Now we are restoring economic activities across the board and have lifted travel restrictions on Wuhan. How could we have been confident in so doing if the case numbers were artificially lowered and not real?
The revision of the case numbers was done out of a sense of responsibility. It is also a common international practice. To my knowledge, New York also revised its local case numbers recently. Challenging the truthfulness of the numbers of confirmed and fatal cases China has reported is highly disrespectful to the 1.4 billion Chinese people, especially millions of Chinese medical workers. The numbers we have released point only to the effectiveness of China's response efforts. What they reflect is China's experience, not China's cover-ups.
Janis Frayer: So Americans can be one hundred percent confident in the numbers?
Le Yucheng: Yes, absolutely.
Janis Frayer: There are a lot of questions that are swirling about the origin of the virus. A lot of theories about the origin of the virus. How willing is China to allow an independent international investigation into where and how the coronavirus started?
Le Yucheng: Some say that, for thousands of years, mankind has been battling against all kinds of viruses, but never seems to be able to claim an ultimate victory. Viruses can be really cunning. Their source is a serious and complex matter of science that must be studied by scientists and medical experts. Something strange now is that a few political figures, who supposedly are economists and intelligence people, are giving sensational accounts of the source of COVID-19. It is widely confirmed by experts that COVID-19 is not from labs. But some politicians are so insistent on the assertion of COVID-19 coming from a lab in Wuhan. Don't you think this is preposterous? A joint statement by 27 professional experts published at the Lancet, a world-class medical journal, also reaffirms that COVID-19 has a natural origin, and is not artificially synthesized. We need to listen to experts, rather than politicians. We need to respect science and refrain from resorting to conspiracy theories.
You mentioned international investigation. We are candid, and we are open. We support professional exchanges between scientists, including exchanges for reviewing and summarizing experiences. What we oppose, however, is unfounded charges against China. One should not accuse China first and then run so-called international investigations just to make up the evidence. This is arbitrary investigation based on the presumption of guilt. That is what we firmly oppose. As I said just now, the WHO-led expert group visited Wuhan timely. As for the Wuhan Institute of Virology, it is open to international communication. Ever since its establishment, it has received visits by many international scientists, including those from the United States. Just recently, the head of the Institute took an interview with a foreign media, and made it clear that the Institute has neither the intention nor the capacity to engineer any kind of virus.
Janis Frayer: But could a science-based investigation satisfy some of these questions and expectations we have apparently on China's part? And perhaps help countries that are still currently fighting COVID-19, help them adapt their responses in real time?
Le Yucheng: The international investigation, if there is any, should have a solid basis. Why is this investigation only targeted at China? Is there any evidence to show that China does have problems? Why isn't there any investigation of other countries? Even for the sake of reviewing for improvement, then science-wise, don't those countries with rapid spread and surge of confirmed and fatal cases have their own problems? We oppose politically-driven investigation for the purpose of stigmatizing China.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/10/158824156948.jpeg
---
By Ma Chi | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-02-19 19:34

Medical staff from Shanghai are busy with their work in Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital. [Photo provided by Xinmin Evening News WeChat account]
In an open letter published in the British medical journal Lancet on Tuesday, a group of health experts from across the world condemned conspiracy theories surrounding the contagious novel coronavirus, which broke out in Central China's Wuhan, and voiced support for Chinese health workers.
"We sign this statement in solidarity with all scientists and health professionals in China who continue to save lives and protect global health during the challenge of the COVID-19 outbreak," read the letter.
In the letter the health experts condemned conspiracy theories suggesting that the novel coronavirus pneumonia, or COVID-19, does not have a natural origin.
It said "scientists from multiple countries have published and analyzed genomes of the causative agent, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2), and they overwhelmingly conclude that this coronavirus originated in wildlife, as have many other emerging pathogens."
Since the outbreak of novel coronavirus pneunomia, which has been named COVID-19 by the World Health Organization, rumors and disinformation have shrouded truth about the disease.
One of the widely-circulated rumors was seen in a Washington Times article on Jan 24, which claimed the virus was part of Chinese biological weapons program based at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
The institute is home to China's first biosafety level-IV lab, which studies world's most dangerous pathogens including Ebola, Lassa fever and Marburg virus.
There was also an Indian article claiming scientists had artificially inserted genes from the HIV virus into the coronavirus, thus making it susceptible to anti-HIV treatments.
The article was widely cited by conspiracy media outlets as proof that Chinese scientists had engineered the virus and that it had escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
The letter was signed by 27 health experts from eight countries, including Jeremy Farrar, a British medical researcher, and Jim Hughes, an infectious disease expert formerly working for the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The letter said Chinese scientists and health professionals "have worked diligently and effectively to rapidly identify the pathogen behind the outbreak, put in place significant measures to reduce its impact, and share their results transparently with the global health community."
"Rapid, open and transparent sharing of data on the outbreak is being threatened by rumors and misinformation around its origins", read the letter.
A petition to spread awareness of the letter and its agenda began on Change.org on Wednesday and it has been close to reaching its goal of 500 signatories as of 6:30pm the same day.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/158211500110.jpeg
---
By Ai Heping in New York and Chen Weihua in Brussels | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-04 07:46

Paramedics take a patient into the emergency center at Maimonides Medical Center during the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in the Brooklyn borough of New York, US, April 14, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The US government reacted too slowly to contain the COVID-19 pandemic as the virus was spreading from Europe, which led to the surge of infections and deaths in the country, a top official at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said.
Anne Schuchat, second in command at the CDC, said that limited testing and delayed travel alerts contributed to the rapid spread of the novel coronavirus across the United States.
An article published by the CDC on Friday, which was written by Schuchat, re-examined the US government's response to the coronavirus and suggested that the country's top public health agencies missed chances to contain the spread of the disease.
Schuchat said in the article that nearly 2 million travelers from Italy and other European countries arrived in the US in February, fueling the spread of the virus, while the US government didn't halt travel from European countries until March 11.
"The extensive travel from Europe, once Europe was having outbreaks, really accelerated our importations and the rapid spread," she told The Associated Press. "I think the timing of our travel alerts should have been earlier."
She also noted in the article that over 100 people who had been on nine separate Nile River cruises during February and early March had come to the US and tested positive for the virus, which nearly doubled the number of confirmed cases in the US at that time.
The explosive effect of some mass gatherings in late February has also caused a jump in the number of coronavirus cases, including a scientific conference in Boston and a funeral in Georgia.
Schuchat said that in retrospect, taking action earlier could have delayed further amplification of the novel coronavirus outbreak in the US, or delayed the speed of it.
As of Saturday, there were more than 65,000 deaths due to the COVID-19 disease in the US and more than 1.1 million confirmed cases, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The US is currently the worst-hit country by the virus.
Globally, there have been 3,272,202 confirmed cases of COVID-19 as of Saturday, including 230,104 deaths, according to the World Health Organization.
The WHO reiterated on Friday that the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 disease originates from nature.
US President Donald Trump said on Thursday that he had seen strong evidence that the virus originated from a lab in Wuhan, despite a statement by the US intelligence community that it concurs with the scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made nor genetically modified.
"We listened again and again to numerous scientists who looked at the sequences and looked at this virus. And we are assured that this virus is natural in origin," said Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, during a virtual news conference.
Ryan emphasized the importance of better understanding the virus and understanding the animal-human interface and how the barrier between them was breached.
"The purpose of understanding that is that we can put in place the necessary prevention and public health measures to prevent that happening again anywhere," he said.
At the Friday conference, Maria Van Kerkhove, technical lead of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, said it is "very very welcome news" to hear that there are no more severe cases and no more patients of COVID-19 in Wuhan.
"China has worked very hard to bring the outbreak under control," said Van Kerkhove, a US scientist who spent two weeks in China during the peak of the outbreak.
She said the world has learned from China as it has learned from all countries as they are dealing with COVID-19.
US grocery store owners are being urged to do more to protect employees during the coronavirus pandemic after at least 72 workers died and thousands were infected with the virus.
Chen Yingqun in Beijing, Belinda Robinson in New York and agencies contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/83/158855779527.jpeg
---
By Sun Xiaoyu | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-06-24 14:21

[Luo Jie/China Daily]
The world political spotlight has fallen on White House trade adviser Peter Navarro once again, as he revived the stigmatization of China by linking the novel coronavirus to the Chinese government. Such a shameful display put Navarro's perpetual Pinocchio act in full view.
It was not the first time Navarro, a fierce China hawk, and other allies of US President Donald Trump have floated the unsubstantiated theory COVID-19 originated or was leaked from a Chinese lab.
Such groundless accusations from some US officials go against the principles of international organizations. The World Health Organization reiterated the origin of the novel coronavirus has not been confirmed yet, and hoped to not associate the term with any region or country.
As for Navarro's fallacies, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said at a daily news briefing Navarro is a liar, and must stop any deliberate stigmatization of China. She also advised Navarro to take time to read a white paper on fighting COVID-19 released by the State Council Information Office in early June, which shares with the world China's experience in fighting the disease and shows how China raced to beat the virus and keep the world informed at every step of the way.
As WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has said, "We should work across party lines, across religious lines. We shouldn't waste time pointing fingers".
The COVID-19 pandemic should not be politicized, as unity is the only way to defeat the disease. Navarro and other Trump allies must stop attacking China. The top priority for the United States should be to learn from China's experience, take effective measures to control its COVID-19 epidemic and participate in international cooperation against the virus.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/45/159298644283.jpeg
---
By Tom Harper | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-06-10 08:51

A 3D-printed coronavirus model is seen in front of the words coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on display in this illustration taken March 25, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
As parts of the world begin the long process of opening up after lockdown, the media blame game is already well under way.
The outbreak has demonstrated the resilience of the Chinese system and the efforts of the Chinese people in combating the pandemic. It is these developments that have influenced the course of the media coverage, shifting from contempt to ignoring China's progress, before reaching the current political blame game.
This development has most recently been expressed by calls for an inquiry into the outbreak by several Western nations, most notably the United States and Australia, alongside the proliferation of the conspiracy theory that COVID-19 originated from a lab in Wuhan.
This is motivated by a desire by Western politicians to deflect attention away from the incompetent handling of the outbreak in their own countries.
Over the past few weeks, the lab theory has been promoted by US politicians alongside media outlets, aimed at blaming China for the outbreak.
This has been made clear by Republican strategist Brett O'Donnell's memo, which advised senior Republicans to focus on attacking China rather than defending the Trump administration's handling of the outbreak.
These developments have also seen the dossier that came from the "Five Eyes" network being held up as evidence of China's culpability for the outbreak. The network is made up of the US, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand intelligence agencies.
Rather than presenting any conclusive intelligence, the document has been found to be a summary of news headlines pushing the lab theory.
It has already failed to convince even the staunchest US allies. The most telling sign of this has been the reaction of Australian intelligence agencies, which have questioned the claims made by the report, citing a lack of evidence to support them.
This isn't the first time that the Trump administration has made such a request of its allies, as demonstrated by the prior case of Huawei, which was recently raised by the remarks made by former Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, that Australia's ban on the firm was based upon a hypothetical situation and that there was no conclusive evidence to support this case.
The precedent of Huawei suggests these efforts will also fail in that accusations based upon flimsy evidence are flimsy themselves, based on the strength of the evidence, or rather the lack of it. Nevertheless, flimsy accusations can do a lot of damage.
The damage that the lab theory can potentially wreak was demonstrated by the lead-up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003, a parallel that has been drawn by observers such as Nassim Nicholas Taleb, who warned of the dangers of believing this.
Possibly the most direct parallel between the two events has been the dossier promoted by hawks to build the case for the invasion of Iraq. The dossier claimed that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction, which was seized upon to push for war.
While Iraq's WMDs failed to materialize, what did materialize was the further destabilization of the Middle East and a terrible human cost. Now the Trump administration and its allies are pushing another dossier to push for further tensions with China.
Nevertheless, there is a case for optimism in how few states have been supportive of these moves, even from those that had once been all too willing to heed Washington's calls. It is this refusal to join in this blame game that shows the UK is taking the correct path.
While it is inevitable that an inquiry into COVID-19 will take place, it should be one based on wider cooperation between states rather than seeking to attribute blame for it. In addition, it is therefore better that this probe is led by scientific professionals rather than politicians to expose the myths and conspiracy theories behind the virus.
By doing so, we can avoid the adverse consequences of the wider blame game and further foster a community based on international cooperation.
This would appear to be the outcome, with the adoption of a draft resolution at the 73rd session of the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the World Health Organization, on the origins of the virus, which appears to reject the blame game that Western nations had hoped for. It is this resolution that illustrates the future of the global struggle against the outbreak.
The author is an assistant professor at Neijiang Normal University in Sichuan province. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/70/159175485056.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-27 08:14
Attempts by the United States to distract attention from its incompetence during the COVID-19 pandemic by blaming China and the World Health Organization are baseless, unhelpful and cannot fool the international community, said members of China's top political advisory body.
On May 13, US senators introduced the COVID-19 Accountability Act, accusing China of mishandling the outbreak and withholding information that resulted in the dire situation in the US. The act would enable US President Donald Trump to impose new sanctions on China and ask for compensation.
Some US politicians have frequently claimed that Wuhan in Hubei province is the origin of the novel coronavirus, or that the virus was made in the biosafety level 4 lab, also known as the P4 lab, of the Wuhan Institute of Virology. President Trump has also accused the WHO of colluding with China and recently threatened to cut its US funding permanently and even quit the organization.
China Daily interviewed several prominent members of the 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference to share their views on the situation. The following are excerpts from these interviews:
Huang Luqi, president of the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, member of the CPPCC National Committee. [Photo/China Daily]
Accusations are baseless
Huang Luqi, president of the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, member of the CPPCC National Committee
The accusations by the US are completely baseless. I was one of the first doctors to arrive in Wuhan when the epidemic started. I know that, on Dec 31, the local health authority had already issued a statement on the cases of atypical pneumonia. On Jan 3, China provided updates of the situation to the WHO, the US and other countries, as well as to regions such as Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan.
China has promptly published its information in an honest, transparent and responsible fashion. The New York Times reported that most coronavirus cases in New York City came from Europe. Data from several major provinces in Canada showed that their cases came from US travelers. Australia's health department data said the nation's ratio of imported cases from Northeast Asia was very low.
When I have discussed the COVID-19 situation with US counterparts, they are willing to speak with me and respect objective facts. Now it is some US politicians who are blaming China, hoping to shift their responsibility to appease their voters and the stock market.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/159055233986.jpeg
---
By JIM SCHNELL | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-11 09:41

LI MIN/CHINA DAILY
Those trying to assign blame for COVID-19 are weaponizing the pandemic for their own ends
Roughly 530 years ago the Italian explorer Christopher Columbus, funded by Spain, traveled across the Atlantic Ocean and made contact with the indigenous people in what we now know as the Americas. One of the realities of those initial encounters is that they did not impose social distance, wear masks or self-quarantine for two weeks, and so Columbus and his crew introduced the indigenous population to diseases to which they had no immunity and which killed off well over 50 percent of them in short order.
Yet history does not assign malicious intent to Columbus and his crew for the deaths that resulted from their arrival in the region. It is merely viewed as an unfortunate reality that occasionally occurs as the result of international exchanges.
Fast forward through the years to today and the current outbreak of a novel coronavirus of unclear origins, which has infected millions of people and resulted in thousands of deaths worldwide, and the situation is different as there are some attempting to weaponize the virus by assigning blame for where the virus originated from. As if there needs to be some sort of reckoning in relation to the disruptive spread of the virus, with the "guilty party"Ôºças identified by those weaponizing the virusÔºçto be punished for their alleged transgression and made to pay for it.
But trying to assign blame to some specific party for the pandemic is akin to trying to assign blame for the weather. The creation and spread of such a virus cannot be comprehensively controlled any more than the weather can be comprehensively controlled. Nature functions and evolves in a variety of ways and with a variety of effects. To think we can comprehensively control such natural phenomena is folly and to assign blame for such phenomena is folly, as well.
It has been said that the novel coronavirus originated from bats. As such it is part of nature's functioning. It is highly unlikely that a group of bats congregated to maliciously create a circumstance whereby thousands of human beings would die as a result of their hosting the virus. If this can be proven then let us hurl critical commentary at bats and condemn their undesirable habits that unleashed COVID-19. If we go down that path then we should also practice penance for human habits that have been known to negatively impact bats. But it is not only bats that should be absolved of any malicious intent, we should also not assign blame to a particular group of people for the pandemic. It has been determined that the virus has not been engineered in a lab. No one maliciously created the virus. People have merely inadvertently spread the virus.
Unfortunate events like this have occurred throughout the history of the world and they will continue to occur. To use this as opportunity to criticize perceived adversariesÔºçto weaponize the virusÔºçdoes nothing to help remedy this most challenging disease outbreak. If anything it is counterproductive. Throughout the history of the world there have been natural disasters that have resulted in the death of millions. COVID-19, in essence, is one of those situations and its cause should be recognized for what it isÔºça virus.
It should also be recognized for what it is not. It is not a reason to hate, attack, criticize or stigmatize any group of people. All nations are suffering from the virus and all nations support the desire to put an end to the pandemic. We should be putting our energies into finding a cure and combating the effects of the virus rather than engaging in meanspirited finger-pointing. To attempt to assign blame is to punish the victim. And in this case we are all victims. It should be reassuring to know we can all be beneficiaries, as well. After this virus has been conquered we will all reap the benefits of living in a world that is wiser with regard to what such a virus is, how the effects can be minimized and how such a pandemic can be avoided in the future. And we can proceed with the awareness and assurance that comes from us joining together in meaningful ways so as to jointly approach such a challenge. There are benefits to be realized.
Moving ahead, we as a global community should interpret attempts to assign blame for the existence of the virus as a form of bullying. Bullying often grows out of the irrational assignment to a victim of meanings that are without merit. And such assignment is often used as rationale for persecution. Just as with bullying that occurs among children we often have adults who will diffuse such situations. In this case we need more people, and nations, to respond in mature ways and shed light on those ill-intentioned individuals who seek to benefit themselves and/or their cause by employing such hateful barbs.
The pandemic has challenged us in many ways. It will take a while for us to address the situation and get back on our feet but I am confident we will in due time. And, as with overcoming other challenges, we will be better for it and more confident going forward. That enhanced confidence will benefit us when we are confronted with our next global challengeÔºçand there certainly will be future challenges that confront humanity. When we address such global challenges we should proceed with grace and goodwill toward all living thingsÔºçeven bats.
The author is a faculty member at Cleveland State University (Cleveland, Ohio) and a visiting scholar at Fudan Development Institute. The author contributed this article to China Watch, a think tank powered by China Daily. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/66/158916271452.jpeg
---
By Kuoyou Watson | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-29 15:18
While much of the world is still fighting COVID-19 and in need of solidarity more than ever, it is distressing to see US politicians mudslinging at China, claiming the latter is responsible for the epidemic because it had not been transparent in sharing information. Adding to the fire is a conspiracy theory swirling around some quarters suggesting that the virus was created in a Chinese lab. As if this did not provide enough distraction, lawsuits were filed recently in US federal district courts seeking damages for deaths, injuries and losses caused by COVID-19. Similar rumblings have been reportedly heard in the United Kingdom and Australia.
Such an outburst of negative energy is puzzling because it represents a shift in tone with respect to China's handling of the outbreak. Back in February, the US administration had nothing but praise for China's effort to contain the epidemic and its openness in sharing information. CNN even made a count of how many times the country's hard work, transparency and capability were acknowledged and appreciated ‚Äì a dozen times in February alone.
The US administration wasn't being generous back then; they were simply acknowledging the facts. Since the epidemic broke out in Wuhan late last December, China quickly isolated the pathogen, completed its genome sequencing, developed treatment manuals and testing kits and created and updated guidelines for prevention and control measures. To choke human-to-human transmission, the country took the drastic measure of locking down the city on Jan 23. By late January, medical teams and resources were arriving from across the country to help fight the epidemic. New hospitals were built in a matter of days to accommodate patients. By mid-March, phased, measured reopening of the economy began.
And China had been transparent, sharing information with the rest of the world while battling on the ground. The country notified the WHO of the outbreak on Dec 31. Its prompt sharing of the virus's genetic sequence enabled other countries to diagnose patients quickly. Throughout February and March, the Chinese leadership talked over the phone with leaders of France, Germany, Russia, the UK, and other countries from Europe, Asia, Latin America and Africa, updating them on the latest situation, exchanging information and practices and exploring areas for cooperation. A detail worth noting is that over a period of a month starting Jan 3, China briefed the United States 30 times on the outbreak and its response. In fact, by as early as Feb 7, key players charged with US public health decision-making ‚Äì from Director of the US Centers for Disease Control Robert Redfield, Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar and Director of the US NIAID Anthony Fauci to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo ‚Äì all had been in contact with the Chinese, exchanging information and talking about cooperation in epidemic prevention and control.
The Chinese government's unreserved openness in keeping the rest of the world informed was matched by the valuable contribution Chinese researchers made toward our understanding of the novel coronavirus through dozens of published papers, analyses and reports, and the forthright sharing of experience by Chinese health officials and experts at scores of multilateral gatherings.
China's fight against COVID-19 did not stop at home. From Feb 29 to March 30, China sent groups of experts to Iran, Iraq, Italy, Serbia, Cambodia, Pakistan, Laos and Venezuela to help fight coronavirus in these countries. It supported many others by donating or supplying medical equipment and supplies as ventilators, testing kits, gowns, gloves and masks.
Given China's open, transparent and responsible handling of the epidemic both within and beyond its borders, how to account for the US administration's about-face? In a Fox News interview on Monday, Pompeo again accused China of failing to be transparent and cooperate concerning COVID-19. A look at the context offers some clue. In February, China was "not in good shape", and politicians felt they could spare some sympathy. By mid-March, however, the pendulum had swung the other way, with cases of infection skyrocketing in New York City. Soon people were dying so fast that refrigeration trucks were called in to serve as temporary morgues. Shortages of testing kits, PPE, hospital beds and frontline workers hampered response efforts. For close to two months, Americans had been told the novel coronavirus was just like the common flu and the situation was under control. On March 13, a national emergency was declared. By April 27, cumulative cases had topped one million, making the United States the most infected country.
A world in the throes of a pandemic needs cooperation and a coordinated response to humanity's common enemy, not a witch hunt to help politicians deflect criticism. It's time to quit playing the blame game, stop spreading the lab origin conspiracy theory already discredited by the country's own top epidemiologist, and cease filing lawsuits that lack any ground in jurisprudence.
Here, Canada can play a new role. For years Canada has followed the US in relations with China. This policy has not always served Canada's interests well, as the US beggar-thy-neighbor behavior in recent NAFTA renegotiations, the Huawei investigation and the current pandemic reminds us. At a time of profound, rapid change only those with vision and courage will endure and thrive. It is refreshing to see Canada beginning to chart an independent course. Let's hope it will grow into a distinct voice amidst all the noise.
The author has a master's degree in international relations from the University of Cambridge. He currently teaches in Canada and contributes to the press on current events.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/89/158814779183.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | China Daily | Updated: 2020-02-13 09:02
A medical worker tests novel coronavirus samples at the Fire Eye lab in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Feb 6, 2020. [Photo by Zhou Chao/for chinadaily.com.cn]
Chinese scientists are divided on the official scientific name of the novel coronavirus, with supporters saying the name is descriptive and follows typical classification practices and others claiming it could easily be misunderstood and abused to cause unnecessary fears.
The name for the virus is called Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2, or SARS-CoV-2. It was released on Tuesday in the nonpeer reviewed journal database BioRxiv by the Coronavirus Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Virus.
The ICTV group said the new pathogen is a sister strain parallel to the SARS virus from 2003, and both viruses fall under the species of SARS-related coronavirus.
The rationale behind the classification is to "highlight the need to study the entire virus species to complement research focused on individual pathogenic viruses of immediate significance".
The present outbreak is the third spillover in two decades of an animal coronavirus to humans resulting in a major epidemic. Therefore, "the research will improve our understanding of virus-host interactions in an ever-changing environment and enhance our preparedness for future outbreaks," it said.
The new name has received mix reception since it was published. Mebratu A. Bitew, a biology PhD candidate at the University of Melbourne, said on his Twitter account that he favored the new name over the previous 2019-nCoV title, which implies a novel coronavirus discovered in 2019.
He said the word "novel" was a "confusing jargon" because neither the disease nor the host range can be used to reliably determine a virus's novelty, since a few mutations can turn a virus deadly or switch to another host.
The new title has also followed traditional naming conventions, such as those used in naming Dengue fever. According to the ICTV, the mosquito-borne tropical virus has four serotypes with similar hosts, symptoms and transmission methods, and thus its variants are named DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4.
The virus for the SARS epidemic in 2003 was named SARS-CoV. Since the latest coronavirus also originates from bats, uses the same receptor to infect cells and shares nearly 80 percent of its genetic material with the SARS virus, it is natural for scientists to add a numeral behind it to signify their relation.
However, to the untrained eye, simply adding a '2' behind the SARS virus may lead the public to perceive the new virus as a direct descendant, rather than a close relative, to the pathogen that caused China's first major viral outbreak in the 21st century, according to The Intellectual, a public WeChat account founded by renowned scientists including neuroscientist Rao Yi.
SARS's visible symptoms are also more serious, and it has a higher death rate, around 9.6 percent, than the novel coronavirus, which is estimated to be around 2 to 4 percent, according to the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Therefore, the SARS virus still strikes a sensitive nerve in the Chinese public, and scientists have been very careful when comparing the two coronaviruses.
On Sunday, virologist Chen Huanchun made a public apology for mistakenly saying the novel coronavirus is a type of SARS virus, which caused panic on Chinese social media as the public thought that the novel virus and the SARS virus were the same. It led to prominent scientists scrambling to debunk the claim.
The Intellectual reported that many Chinese scientists are dissatisfied with the formal name for the virus, including Shi Zhengli, the virologist who discovered the new virus's bat origin. She said they are giving suggestions to the study group to possibly amend the name.
Other names for the virus have been discussed recently in the Chinese scientific community, including TARS-CoV, HARS-CoV, CARSCoV and PARS-CoV. The "ARS "represent acute respiratory syndrome, with T standing for transmissible, H for human, C for contagious and P for pneumonia.
It is unclear whether the ICTV will take these suggestions into consideration.
Also on Tuesday, the WHO named the disease caused by the virus COVID-19, meaning coronavirus disease discovered in 2019. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the name is neutral, pronounceable and related to the disease.
"Having a name matters to prevent the use of other names that can be inaccurate or stigmatizing," he said. "It also gives us a standard format to use for any future coronavirus outbreaks."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/40/158158915042.jpeg
---
By Zhao Huanxin in Washington and Pan Mengqi in Beijing | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-07 02:42

File photo: Cui Tiankai, Chinese ambassador to the US. [Photo/Agencies]
Beijing's top envoy in Washington expressed solidarity on Monday with people in the United States, saying China is doing its best to support the US and other countries in their battle against the COVID-19 pandemic.
"In the fight against the virus, we stand together with the people of New York and America," Cui Tiankai, Chinese ambassador to the US, said in an opinion piece published in The New York Times on Sunday.
"We are facilitating the US government's purchase of personal protective equipment made in China."
Cui's comments echoed remarks made on Friday by US Ambassador to China Terry Branstad, who said his embassy was "working closely" with Chinese government officials to facilitate the shipment of crucial supplies of protective equipment from China.
In addition, Branstad said, "No one country can fight this battle alone, and I am confident that our two countries will continue to find ways to jointly cooperate to combat this common enemy that threatens the lives of all of us."
In his opinion piece, Cui conceded that there has been "unpleasant talk" between the two nations about the disease. He apparently was referring to the politicizing of the pandemic issue and the blame game regarding origin of the virus.
"But this is not the time for finger-pointing," he said. "This is a time for solidarity, collaboration and mutual support."
The Chinese embassy in the US said on Monday that it had conducted a survey regarding arrangements for charter flights to bring home Chinese students studying abroad, and a decision was taken to give priority to primary and secondary school students.
According to the announcement on the embassy's website, primary and secondary Chinese students younger than age 18 who have stayed in the US either short- or long-term without their parents are now able to register for flights home.
Around 1.6 million Chinese students are studying abroad, and 410,000 of them are in the US, according to the Ministry of Education. An earlier survey found that over 60 percent of the Chinese students in the US would like to return immediately due to the growing number of infections reported in the US.
With summer vacation approaching, it is likely that an increasing number of Chinese students would like to come home, the embassy said.
The US reported more than 330,000 infections, with the death toll creeping toward 10,000 on Sunday.
US President Donald Trump has warned the country to brace for a "horrific" next few weeks.
"The next week and a half, two weeks, I think they're going to be very difficult," Trump said.
US Surgeon General Jerome Adams warned on Sunday, "This is going to be our Pearl Harbor moment, our 9/11 moment."
Trump, who made his remark during the White House Coronavirus Task Force news briefing, also said that by Tuesday, 3,000 military and public health workers would be deployed across the nation to cope with the pandemic.
The federal government will send around 600,000 N95 respirator masks on Monday to the state of New York, the national epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak.
The US also is stepping up the development of treatments for COVID-19 patients, including experimenting with the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine and blood-related therapies.
At the same briefing, US Vice-President Mike Pence said hydroxychloroquine will be used in a trial covering 3,000 patients at a hospital in Detroit, Michigan, and the results will be tracked in a formal study.
Last week, Trump said hydroxychloroquine was being administered to 1,100 patients in New York along with the antibiotic azithromycin.
Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said at the White House briefing on Saturday that there was no "definitive information to be able to make any comment" on whether hydroxychloroquine can be effective in treating the novel coronavirus.
Fauci also said on Sunday that it is possible that COVID-19 will stick around.
"Unless we get this globally under control, there is a very good chance that it'll assume a seasonal nature," Fauci told CBS' Face The Nation. "Hopefully, if in fact we do see that resurgence, we will have interventions that we did not have in the beginning of the situation that we're in right now," he said.
Fauci said he expected new cases to escalate this week, with the national peak eight to nine days away. When new cases start to stabilize, as they have in New York, it is "the first sign of that plateau and coming down", Fauci said.
US Defense Secretary Mark Esper defended the Navy's decision to remove the commander of a coronavirus-stricken aircraft carrier, who was reported on Sunday to have tested positive for the virus, as the number of the infected crew members on board surpassed 150.
Captain Brett Crozier started showing symptoms of the virus before he was relieved of his command of the USS Theodore Roosevelt on Thursday, and he has tested positive, The New York Times reported, citing two of Crozier's Naval Academy classmates.
Meanwhile, a tiger at the Bronx Zoo in New York has tested positive for the new coronavirus, in what is believed to be the first known infection in an animal in the US or a tiger anywhere, federal officials and the zoo said on Sunday.
The finding raises new questions about transmission of the virus in animals. The US Department of Agriculture, which confirmed the tiger's test result at its veterinary lab, said there were no known cases of the virus in US pets or livestock.
"There doesn't appear to be, at this time, any evidence that suggests that the animals can spread the virus to people or that they can be a source of the infection in the United States," Jane Rooney, a veterinarian and USDA official, said in an interview.
William Hennelly in New York and Xinhua contributed to this story.
Contact the writers at huanxinzhao@chinadailyusa.com 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/74/158620354562.jpeg
---
By Philip J. Cunningham | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-24 08:27
A stealthy, highly contagious virus has caused a precipitous drop in the United States' stock market and sent shudders down the spine of a stalled economy. With factories and stores closing down, lights being dimmed from Broadway to Las Vegas, and hospitals overwhelmed with critically ill patients, the American mood is confused, resentful and laced with fear. Lockdowns of hard-hit areas and shelter-in-place orders for major cities are essential to contain the outbreak but add to the growing psychological stress.
Sadly for the human record, scapegoating often emerges from reaction to disaster. After the devastating Great Kanto earthquake of 1923, ethnic Korean residents of Tokyo were rumored to be a cause of trouble and were massacred in the thousands. The punishing economic conditions of Germany after World War I are frequently cited as a key factor leading to a rise in anti-Semitism so toxic and pervasive that they led to genocide.
There is hardly a nation on earth that has not been hit with the novel coronavirus, so international cooperation is essential. However, the tribal fears invoked in border barriers, lockdowns, shutdowns and quarantines have put the very project of globalization on the defensive. Thousands of planes have been idled, trains run empty and highways are free of cars, while the world's great tourist sites have turned into ghost towns.
Barriers of minds nastier than physical boundaries
Although there is a documented benefit to be found in social distancing and reduced flow of traffic, the introduction of border controls, travel shutdowns and the rise of physical barriers have been mirrored by the barriers developed in the minds and the wild imaginations of worried people everywhere.
Only scientists can definitively answer questions about the origin of the novel coronavirus, but the city of Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, is indelibly tied to public awareness of the disease because the first wave of the epidemic in China erupted there. Leaving aside the thorny question of where the microscopic novel coronavirus came from, most scientists consider it to have been a freaky but otherwise natural zoonotic transfer of virus from animal to man.
Wuhan was the first city to be hit by the microscopic invader on a massive scale. With more than 3,000 dead and tens of thousands ill, and millions more confined to their homes for the duration, the suffering and anguish of the people have been palpable.
Yet the regrettable human tendency to discriminate quickly gelled and took root, and the initial reaction of some people in China was to be wary of compatriots from Wuhan. By the same weak leap of logic, when the disease also emerged in Thailand, Japan, the Republic of Korea and other neighboring countries, the world began to turn a jaundiced eye to China.
Politicians have their own agendas and prejudices
A virus carries no passportÔºçscientists and medical doctors know that better than anyone elseÔºçbut politicians have their own agendas, and popular prejudice cannot be waved away with a magic wand. That's why international organizations such as the World Health Organization called on experienced medical professionals to assign a name to the disease that did not reflect on race or location.
COVID-19 is not a catchy term, but it contains information about the year of the outbreak and categorizes the pathogen as a new coronavirus.
By the time the official moniker was coined, the more general term "coronavirus" was in such widespread use that it has remained the default term for describing the novel coronavirus. Even if it lacks the precision of the official name, it is unobjectionable in social terms.
However, far from China's shores, other names were being concocted to describe the perilous pathogen, and terms such as "Wuhan flu" and "Wuhan coronavirus" (which was used by The New York Times) began to be bandied about. US Senator Tom Cotton from Arkansas throughout the crisis has made statements designed to inflame and arouse anti-China sentiment by blaming China for the virus. Although Cotton's hatred for China predates the outbreak and is rooted in a rigid anti-communist worldview, he has exploited the epidemic by conflating his political enemy with the hated virus.
Manipulative populism at play in United States
Despite the incendiary rhetoric of a few hot heads, references to the virus designed to indict China as a co-conspirator faded in February, and the mainstream media, The New York Times included, was careful to stick to the scientific term COVID-19 or the more general term, coronavirus. But in early March a new wave of stigmatizing language entered the American discourse by close associates of US President Donald Trump. Manipulative populism and playing to the hidden prejudice of a conservative political base came into play. It was no longer loud-mouth radio hosts and redneck politicians talking that way, and as such could not be easily dismissed.
US top diplomat, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, started to use the terms "Wuhan virus" and "Chinese coronavirus" in official statements in the first week of March, giving political cover to closet racists anxious to pin blame on China.
Trump's two-month long pretense that the virus was nothing more than the common flu was finally shaken by an undeniable outbreak in the US.
Unwilling to take blame, Trump found it useful to deflect criticism away from his own negligence by making withering use of the term "foreign virus". This incendiary term came short of tagging China directly, but by then the narrative of presumptive guilt had been well established and his own supporters were bad-mouthing China with increasing frequency.
The US leader's use of the term "foreign virus" on March 11 was eagerly picked up by his political base, and social media use of the term "surged into the tens of millions" according to the Atlantic Council's Digital Forensic Research Lab.
Anti-Asian abuse and violence on the rise
Elsewhere, prejudice was becoming more overt. A White House aide joked about the China connection, telling CBS White House reporter Weijia Jiang that it was the "Kung Flu". Around the same time, reports on social media and elsewhere described an uptick in anti-Asian abuse and violence.
New Yorker writer Jiayang Fan reported in a tweet that she was accosted by a stranger using vile, racist language when she stepped out of her front door to take out the garbage. It left her feeling afraid to even walk down the street to go shopping.
Dozens, if not hundreds of such reports are now circulating on social media.
And it's only getting worse. The US president, for reasons best known to him, has been a credible defender of China on certain policy points and has generally resisted the vocal deprecations used by intemperate political advisers such as Stephen Miller, Peter Navarro, and Steve Bannon.
But looking weary in the face of mounting criticism of his failure to lead a national response to the pandemic, Trump suddenly joined the chorus of China-blamers as seen in this March 18 tweet from his official account:
"I always treated the Chinese Virus very seriously, and have done a very good job from the beginning, including my very early decision to close the 'borders' from ChinaÔºçagainst the wishes of almost all. Many lives were saved. The Fake News new narrative is disgraceful& false!"
When questioned about his injudicious use of "Chinese Virus" at a press conference later in the day, Trump doubled down in his use of the term. When Yamiche Alcindor of PBS asked him if using the term "Chinese virus" puts Asian-Americans at risk, Trump bristled: "No. Not at all. I think they would probably agree with it 100 percent. It comes from China."
The die is now cast for racial tensions to follow. Reasonable people can disagree with Beijing and its policies. Not everyone has to like Chinese food or Chinese culture. But it is inexcusable to blame a disease that knows no boundaries and afflicts all humans regardless of race or an ethnic group or a faraway nation.
This is intellectually dishonest, and it is a cheap shot to deflect blame and arouse populist support.
It is racist, it is wrong and ruling US politicians owe us all an apology.
The author is a media researcher covering Asia issues.
The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/52/158501532590.jpeg
---
[Photo/Sipaphoto]

You usually don't hear people in Washington quote America's Founding Fathers very often these days. But J. Stapleton Roy, a veteran US diplomat, insisted that anytime he offers remarks, he quotes from The Federalist Papers.

"So, today I thought I would quote from James Madison in Federalist 63, where he said that, independently of the merits of any particular plan or measure, it is desirable, on various accounts, that it should appear to other nations as the offspring of a wise and honorable policy," Roy told a US-China Policy Foundation (USCPF) panel discussion, "The Outlook on US-China Relations", last week.

Roy, who served as Washington's top envoy in Beijing from 1991 to 1995, said he found it hard to believe that the US approach toward the world's second-largest economy reflected "a fair and wise" policy.

He first offered insight on a slew of intertwined issues in China-US relations, including "decoupling" of the two economies, the coronavirus outbreak and the signing of the phase one trade deal, which keeps in place high tariffs on about $360 billion worth of Chinese imports.

"Many believe that we are seeking to decouple our trade relationship with China, and we end up disrupting international supply chains," Roy said, adding that the coronavirus crisis, which has affected at least 1,660 in the US as of Thursday night, is giving Americans "a foretaste" of what it might mean to decouple international supply chains.

"It turns out that in order to deal with the coronavirus crisis that we think originated in China, China makes all the equipment you need in order to deal with it," Roy said, careful of his wording about the origin of the virus, which remains a mystery.

"But at the moment, the supply chains are not working the way they're intended to work," he said.

As to the signing of the first-phase trade agreement with China nearly two months ago, the deal laid the groundwork for avoiding an even worse trade crisis with China during the remainder of this year, or at least through the US presidential elections in November, he observed.

Ever since punitive duties began to be slapped on billions of dollars' worth of Chinese goods in early 2018, many US companies as well as industry groups have called for the US administration to roll back or remove the tariffs, which they said are in fact taxes on American businesses and consumers.

On Jan 31, the Advanced Medical Technology Association sent a letter to the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR), urging it to lift tariffs on products "critical to helping to contain the coronavirus in the US and in China". The association said that including medical technology products on the USTR tariff list is "troubling" from a public health perspective, The Washington Post reported.

But a remedy did arrive. Due to rising demand amid the fasts-preading

COVID-19 outbreak in the US, the USTR announced March 5 it would exempt from import tariffs on at least 100 medical items imported from China, including medical gowns and protective masks.

The US approach on tariffs after the phase one trade deal was also a factor that led Craig Allen, president of the US-China Business Council, to believe it may not augur well for the upcoming talks.

"I think that phase one agreement was a good step forward," Allen told USCPF attendees. "But I think given the election process and that the tariffs currently in place will probably remain in place for some time, the phase two can't come soon enough."

During Roy's presentation, the former ambassador noted that some recent US legislation — seen as designed to contain and compete with China, such as the Asian Reassurance Initiative Act of 2018 — had gained bipartisan support.

"For these and other reasons, there are many uncertainties associated with the future of our relationship with what could be the world's largest consumer market," Roy said.

Roy noted that some in the US policy community have defaulted to confrontation as a preferred method for limiting China's rise.

"(President Donald Trump) refuses to be bound within the policy statements of his own administration," Roy said, "leading some observers to conclude that the US government has attitudes rather than policies."

Roy echoed the sentiment of Thomas Wright, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, when Wright said: The US president "did not veto the National Security Strategy — he's just operating as if it does not exist."

Citing recent comments by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and the president's own tweets, Roy said policy statements on China by senior administration officials consist of "a jumble of positive and negative statements" without the prioritization necessary for coherence.

There have been "contradictions" built into the administration's view of China, he said.

"It's hard to have other countries view our approach as reflecting a fair and wise policy when we're making statements that don't seem to fit together," Roy concluded.
---
When Chinese customs officials found traces of the novel coronavirus on the packaging of frozen shrimps from Ecuador, it cast an unwanted spotlight on a key pillar of the country's economy.

But industry insiders express confidence that they can continue to rely on China to help offset the huge drops in sales to Europe and North America during the COVID-19 pandemic. Their optimism has also been boosted by upgrades to hygiene measures.

Maritza Rojo, an independent agricultural economist, said in an interview that "very strict sanitary regulations must be met" for exports of shrimps to China.

Jose Camposano, executive president of CNA, the national chamber for aquaculture businesses, known by its Spanish acronym, said the Ecuadorian shrimp sector is looking to provide quality assurance to customers around the world.

The industry is joining a global blockchain initiative that uses QR code technology to track food products from farm to table, no matter what the origin or final destination. The goal is to reassure consumers on safety and quality. No other shrimp industry in the world has joined the initiative yet, Camposano said.

"We are only weeks away from having customers being able to review the whole traceability of the product," he said. "They will be able to know from which farm it comes, at what working shift it was harvested, where it was packaged, and which routes it took before it arrived at the table."

The importance of the Chinese market to the South American country's shrimp industry cannot be overstated.

"China demands shrimps 12 months of the year. Unlike other countries, China demands more shellfish and more seafood," said Rojo, after the General Administration of Customs of China announced the findings on the tainted shipment on July 10.

In April and May, China purchased 82 percent and 73 percent of Ecuador's shrimp exports, respectively, according to data from the CNA, before the discovery of the packages carrying the virus that leads to COVID-19.

Camposano said the Chinese market has recovered, but the European market has collapsed.

Severe toll on industry

The pandemic took a severe toll on the industry, which relies on sales from hotels, restaurants and catering services for about half of all shrimp sales globally. These are all businesses that were shut down, or are shutting down again, in parts of Europe and the US.

Camposano said restaurants and hotels used to account for 50 percent of the demand for shrimps, but many did not survive the outbreak. Those that did are now turning to cheaper protein options like chicken, he said.

In 2019, shrimp exports from Ecuador totaled about 635,000 metric tons, worth $3.9 billion. The sector directly accounts for 4 percent of GDP and, indirectly, for about 12 percent. It generates between 200,000 and 300,000 direct jobs. Over the past seven years, the sector has grown by about 18 percent per year, according to the CNA.

But producers like Fernando Huerta, an independent shrimp operator with over 30 years' experience, are struggling now. They worry that global prices will plummet along with global demand.

"The situation is really complex. The challenge is to get to the break-even point," said Huerta, who is from Guayaquil, Ecuador's second-largest city,

Along with bananas and oil, shrimp production and sales form a key pillar of country's economy. With just 0.8 percent of total production going to domestic consumption, the sector is an important source of economic growth and US dollars, which the country uses domestically.

Ecuador is also looking to attract more investment in the industry.

"It is a sector open to explore financing alternatives, because those are large investments," said Camposano.

"With Ecuador being the second-largest shrimp producer and second-largest shrimp exporter, it has significant investments and an interesting performance, but still, there is much to do."

Late last year, Ecuador joined the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, becoming the first Latin American member of the Chinese-backed initiative. The country hopes its participation in the multilateral development bank will spur investment and help Ecuador enhance its competitiveness.

The writer is a freelance journalist for China Daily.
---
Women workers at a market wear face masks in San Francisco, California, US, Feb 25, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

California Governor Gavin Newsom said Thursday that he is confident the state can track and contain the possible spread of the coronavirus, including what may be the first case of "community transmission" in the US.

Prior cases in the US involved those who had traveled to China or had close contact with a spouse who recently returned from overseas. A newly discovered case in Solano County, northeast of San Francisco, involves a patient who hasn't had contact with a known carrier or traveled abroad.

"We're meeting this moment with the kind of urgency that's necessary," Newsom said at a news conference in Sacramento. "People should go about their day-to-day lives with some common sense. I don't want to instill any sense of new anxiety."

The governor said California officials are working closely with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). He stressed that the effort to limit the spread of the new strain of the virus is well funded.

The case of unknown origin was left undiagnosed for days because a request for testing wasn't initially granted, according to officials at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento.

In response to the first case of "community transmission" of the coronavirus in California, health officials have begun tracking down people who may have come in contact with the Solano County patient to halt further spread of the disease, also called COVID-19.

"We have a tracking protocol that's best in class," the governor said. "I'm not worried about money."

He said the CDC will send 10 people to California to interview those who may have come in contact with the patient.

"Nothing is more important at this point than contact-tracing," Newsom said.

The patient, a resident of Solano County, wasn't immediately tested for the virus because the person's history didn't fit CDC criteria for establishing risk from the new strain of the coronavirus.

The patient was brought to the University of California at Davis teaching hospital in Sacramento, which has treated other coronavirus patients and followed standard precautions. Nevertheless, several employees at a Vallejo hospital where the woman was treated earlier, were asked to stay home and monitor their temperatures, officials said.

Dr Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, said there is no known connection between the new case and Diamond Princess cruise ship passengers who were exposed to the virus overseas and quarantined at Travis Air Force Base, which is in Solano County.

"The (Solano County) patient had no known exposure to the virus through travel or close contact with a known infected individual," she told reporters at the news conference.

Prior to the Solano County case, all 59 cases in the US were traced to people who had traveled abroad or had been in contact with those who had visited China.

Prior cases included 14 people who had traveled in China, or their spouses had; three people who were evacuated from Wuhan in China, and 42 American passengers on the Diamond Princess.

The governor said privacy laws prohibit release of information about the Solano County patient, including employment and residence. But he said key information about the virus will be released when pertinent to reassure the public.

He said California has "just a few hundred" testing kits on hand, but noted the CDC is "moving expeditiously" to send more to allow the state to "exponentially expand our capacity to advance testing protocols".

Newsom, a Democrat, has sued US President Donald Trump over greenhouse emissions from cars and illegal immigration but stressed, "We have a good working relationship with this administration" and vowed "not to politicize" a public health issue.

Los Angeles officials also said they are working closely with the CDC.

"The risk from the novel coronavirus 2019 to spread in Los Angeles is deemed to be low at this time," the county Health Department said in a statement.

The number of cases in the US is extremely small, but infections could increase rapidly and mirror the outbreaks in Italy or South Korea, a researcher warned.

"It's possible to say suddenly we'll have 20 or 30 cases from one particular place," Dr Jeffrey Klausner, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at UCLA, told the Daily Beast. "People should expect that, but people should not be overly concerned."

While the new strain of the coronavirus appears to be highly contagious, so far it is not as deadly as SARS, which killed nearly 10 percent of those infected compared with about 2 percent who die after exposure to the new strain of the coronavirus.

The flu season, which starts in September and can run through May, has killed about 10,000 people so far in the US, the CDC reported.

On Jan 30, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the coronavirus outbreak a "public health emergency of international concern" but not a pandemic. It didn't recommend travel or trade restrictions. But with cases in 45 countries outside China and rapid spread of the virus in South Korea, Italy and Iran, WHO said health officials have now reached a "decisive point" in the battle against it.

On Thursday, South Korea announced 505 new confirmed cases — the nation's largest daily increase since the outbreak began — and a 13th death.

Italy, center of the largest number of infections outside Asia, said the number of cases increased to 528 Thursday, up from 400 Wednesday, a 32 percent increase. The coronavirus also has been reported in the Middle East, including an increasing number of cases in Iran.

Israel said Thursday it had diagnosed the first citizen in the nation with the coronavirus. The infected man had visited Italy and spent four days in Israel before he was diagnosed, raising the possibility he had unknowingly infected others.

There are now seven Israelis known to be infected. Six contracted the disease while quarantined on the Diamond Princess. Israel advised its citizens to avoid travel to Italy and said it would bar entry to all foreigners traveling from that nation.

https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1496/72/158289141489.jpeg


---
A federal judge in California has blocked two regulations proposed by the Trump administration to restrict H-1B visas for foreign high-skilled workers. [Photo/Agencies]

A federal judge in California has blocked two regulations proposed by the Trump administration to restrict H-1B visas for foreign high-skilled workers, which was praised by tech industry and immigrant advocates as "a major win".

The planned restrictions announced in October include reducing the occupations eligible for H-1B visas, slashing the duration from three years to one year and increasing minimum H1-B salaries to as much as $208,000 a year.

The government claimed its goal was to protect American jobs amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The rules issued by the Homeland Security Department was set to go into effect on Dec 7; the other one by the Labor Department had been in effect since October.

The judge set aside both rules on Tuesday after having found no "good cause" for the hurried adoption without public notice and comment.

"The lack of notice and review has been a common theme in these rulings. The courts can readily strike down rules on this basis alone, though some businesses and individuals were impacted by the DOL (Department of Labor) ruling that went into immediate effect," said Julie Pearl, a San Francisco-based legal tech expert, in an email.

"The irony in the Trump administration's claim that these rulings were to protect the economy is that they would have the opposite impact. Artificially requiring an employer to pay an entry-level base salary of $127,000 – when the market rate is $88,000 – simply causes that employer to either look offshore or go without the needed talent," said Pearl. "And it is unfair to the US citizens who are paid the market rate, if the job manages to stay in the US."

Business associations and educational institutions, such as the Bay Area Council and Stanford University, also criticized the new rules as counterproductive.

"This is a major win for our economy and for our ability to recover from the worst downturn in generations," said Jim Wunderman, CEO of the Bay Area Council, in a statement.

"H-1B workers fill an important need in our economy and provide immense benefits not only to the companies they work for but the communities where they live. Many of the leading and fastest-growing technology companies in the Bay Area have been founded by entrepreneurs from other countries who first came here on visas."

Pearl echoed his comments, saying that there is "ample evidence" that the H-1B visa workers create jobs rather than take them away.

"By definition, these are US-based, US-taxpaying jobs. Most employers have learned through the pandemic that they can keep workers abroad at lower cost— without paying the $2,500-plus government H-1B filing fee, plus legal fees. So if they are going to the trouble to hire an H-1B worker, it's because there are typically at least eight US workers who are also needed stateside," she said.

Based on her 20-year experience of running a corporate immigration law firm, Pearl said the average client company had less than 7 percent of the workforce in H-1B visa status. "Since 14 percent of people legally in the US are foreign-born, that number makes sense for employers who don't discriminate based on national origin," she said.

The Trump administration has been cracking down on immigration, including the H-1B visa program, in recent years. In a separate order, President Donald Trump barred all issuance of H-1B visas in June. The order triggered a string of lawsuits filed by a diverse set of parties, including the US Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, and the National Retail Federation. The ban was lifted in October by the same judge who blocked the two new rules on Tuesday.

"These rules were another rushed attempt by the Trump Administration to restrict legal immigration," said Todd Schulte, president of the immigrant-advocacy group FWD.us, in a statement following Tuesday's ruling.

"If implemented, they would be deeply harmful to both American families and our nation's global competitiveness by imposing obligations completely disconnected from real world labor markets.'
---
A man wears a mask to prevent exposure to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) while walking past the New York Stock Exchange in New York, March 17, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]

Stigmatizing disease does no good to solving crisis and scientific research

As COVID-19 rampages across the globe, Chinese scientists have opposed some United States politicians hijacking vital collaborative scientific undertakings－such as finding the origin of the virus－to rekindle xenophobia and stigmatization against China and its people.

They urged US officials to focus on disease mitigation and saving lives, and to air sensitive issues in a rational, objective manner to avoid undermining the international cooperation critical for tackling a global health crisis.

Understanding the origin of the virus will provide crucial clues to arresting the disease that has sickened about 210,000 people in over 140 countries, according to the World Health Organization.

However, scientists have yet to reach a verdict on the origin and mode of transmission due to it being a new pathogen.

Before the disease was officially named COVID-19 by the WHO last month, foreign media used a variety of sensationalist and misleading names including Wuhan SARS and Wu Flu. The virus was often referred to as the "China Virus" in headlines, a title that hearkens back to the xenophobic "Yellow Peril" slur used during the colonial era.

US officials, including President Donald Trump, have recently rekindled stigmatization against China by calling the novel coronavirus a "Chinese virus" on multiple occasions, despite the WHO being explicitly opposed to connecting the virus with a certain country or region.

Huang Yu, deputy director of the Department of Medical Genetics at Peking University, said it is common sense that a new virus should be named without the stigma of attaching it to a place, region or individual, as history is full of poorly named diseases bringing devastating consequences.

In the early days of AIDS, researchers called the disease GRID, or gay-related immunodeficiency, creating stigma among the already marginalized gay community. During the early 20th century, Irish people in the US were ostracized when media dubbed Irish woman Mary Mallon as "Typhoid Mary" for her being one of the first asymptomatic carriers that led to a typhoid outbreak in New York City.

"Such anti-intellectual rhetoric will inevitably stir up hatred toward the Chinese people, and we should firmly oppose and condemn these actions," Huang said.

"The scientific communities from China and the US have upheld the principle that scientific knowledge knows no borders, and we are constantly sharing new information on basic research and clinical results related to COVID-19," he added.

Huang said US politicians' anti-China rhetoric will not directly affect scientists' work, but geopolitics can interfere with international scientific cooperation.

"We hope the scientific communities from both countries can better communicate knowledge to the public and officials, and work together to curb xenophobia and misunderstanding," he said.

A Beijing biologist who spoke on condition of anonymity said finding the source of the virus is an important scientific question that could shed light on how the virus jumped species, thus allowing health authorities to cut off the route of transmission and prevent future outbreaks.

However, this mystery often requires years of rigorous research to solve, and that knowledge may be too late or too irrelevant for saving lives now, which should be the top priority, he said.

"Politicians discussing the origin of the virus serves no practical purpose against the pandemic other than assigning blame, and through contrast, defining their own innocence and defending their incompetence," he said.

"Current information regarding the origin of the virus is very limited and difficult for non-experts to digest," he said.

"It is impossible for the public, let alone politicians with agendas, to have an honest discussion on this topic without it disintegrating into a shouting match of misinformation and conspiracy theories."

More research needed

The WHO said the novel coronavirus may have originated from bats, which are natural carriers of many types of coronaviruses including the one that causes SARS. Experts also noted that it is rare for coronaviruses to jump directly from bats to humans, so intermediate hosts are likely necessary to make the transmission.

However, consensus starts to break when scientists argue over what the hosts are. Snakes, pangolins and even domestic pets have been considered potential candidates, but all current studies proved inconclusive.

To further complicate matters, scientists have discovered through clinical records and genetic tracing that the Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan, Hubei province, may not be the source of the virus after all, according to the journal Lancet and other follow-up studies.

The market might just have served as the jumping off point where the virus emerged and began infecting a wider public, but who or what brought the virus to the market in the first place remained unknown, scientists said.

Shi Zhengli, a researcher from the Institute of Virology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said in a recent public lecture that closing the market shortly after the outbreak began had made it difficult for scientists to collect samples directly from the wild animals sold there－an approach that allowed scientists to quickly identify civets as the intermediate host for the SARS epidemic in 2003.

But the intermediate host is only one piece of the puzzle. Locating the actual viral origin is so difficult that it wasn't until 2016 that Chinese scientists said they had traced the natural carrier of the SARS virus to horseshoe bats in a cave from Yunnan province. Shi said scientists might need to do the same time-consuming field work to find the source for the new virus.

Moreover, Shi said SARS-like coronaviruses, which include the novel coronavirus, are the most infectious of the 12 types of bat-carrying coronaviruses that her team has studied.

There is a chance that a similar SARS-like coronavirus from bats would jump species and possibly infect humans, and scientists, along with public health authorities, should prepare in advance, she said.

"Mankind has the ability to nip new diseases from wild animals in the bud. It is not a question of whether we can, but a question of whether we want to," she said.
---
By Janghyuk Lim | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-04-22 11:05

A freight train leaves Chongqing for Europe, on April 3, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Following the COVID-19 outbreak, the global market and supply chain at large have been faced with a lot of challenges. It has been over a year since the initial outbreak, and there remains a lot of uncertainty on when the world will regain normalcy. Several researchers, scholars, and analysts indicate the need for the world to prepare and adapt to a "new normal" with tolerance to the prescribed measures in dealing with the pandemic. In response, many enterprises have already rolled out new supply chain models, with various sustained response strategies underway.
Contrary to expectations, the scale of global trade and consumption continues to increase despite lockdowns across the world and minimized personal exchange. Therefore, the importance of global logistics becomes clear, with a challenge to the global market to explore new strategic values. According to Fitch Ratings, the container shipping industry has gone through a radical consolidation through mergers, acquisitions and alliances in a few decades to avoid overcapacity. Eventually, shipping capacity has been reduced, but the container ship order book has shrunk in a situation where trade volume is increasing. Currently the container order book as a percentage of the existing fleet has sharply reduced, with its current value being approximately below 10 percent, as opposed to its value in 2007 which was at 57 percent.
Port congestions and lockdowns due to pandemic-related operational disruptions at origins and destinations have extended container ships' turnaround times, curtailing services on specific routes or canceling port calls, leading to container box shortages and further increasing freight rates.
According to the Freightos Baltic Index, the cost of shipping one 40-foot container from China to Europe or the west coast of the United States has heightened from about $2,000 a year ago to the current fee of $8,000 and $4,000 respectively. Asia-Europe sea freight rates have increased four times compared to their values in November 2020. The situation has resulted in financial challenges for Asia-based exporters, and delays in export shipments.
The Trans-China Railway has constantly evolved since the launching of its first direct freight railway from Chongqing to Duisburg, Germany in March 2011, which enhanced the China-Europe connection. Following the emergence of the pandemic, TCR volume dropped to 315 Ton mn in February 2020, due to the closure of the European border. But as of January 2021, volume has risen to 408Ton mn, which was much higher than before the pandemic. It is surmised the rise increased TCR traffic not only from China, but several Asian exporting countries. TCR transit time is around 1/4 of sea transport and 1/5 of air transport cost.
While sea transport takes more than 50 days, the departure of a shipment from East Asia takes about 23 days to arrive in Poland, thus making the TCR a realistic and economical means of transport.
Generally, in a situation where sea transportation is a challenge, TCR has made it possible to transport Asian goods to Europe through a more convenient and faster means. This means not only a broad choice of transportation for the Asian exporters, but it could also allow shipping lines to focus on an Asia-US route, which would result in reduced freight rates and efficient supply chain operations. Furthermore, following the Suez Canal accident, there is a great need for an alternative sea transport route to avoid global supply chain threats attached to full reliance on a single maritime transport system.
As the global supply chain needs improvement and efficiency, I hope TCR continues to develop its advantages, becoming an axis of improvement and efficiency for the global supply chain.
Janghyuk Lim is associate professor with Business School of Shantou University.
The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
If you have a specific expertise and would like to contribute to China Daily, please contact us at opinion@chinadaily.com.cn  , and comment@chinadaily.com.cn
---
By Wang Xiaoyu | China Daily | Updated: 2020-10-29 07:27

A woman looks at frozen food products in a supermarket following an outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Beijing, Aug 13, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Chinese scientists have discovered that the COVID-19 outbreak in Beijing in June was likely to have been triggered by cold-chain imports from overseas, adding to mounting evidence that the virus can be transmitted from contaminated cold-chain products to humans.
Based on the findings, the study underscores the significance of intensifying supervision of cold-chain imports, especially for countries that have managed to curb the domestic spread of the virus and continue to receive shipments from regions where the virus is still raging.
The study, "Cold-chain food contaminationÔºçthe possible origin of COVID-19 resurgence in Beijing", was published online on Friday in China's peer-reviewed journal, the National Science Review.
It was jointly conducted by researchers from Tsinghua University, the Beijing Center for Diseases Prevention and Control, the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking University and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
A new cluster of local infections linked to the massive Xinfadi wholesale market in Beijing's Fengtai district emerged on June 11 after the capital reported no new local cases for 56 consecutive days.
The outbreak, which prompted a mass testing campaign covering about half of the over 20 million residents of the capital, saw 335 confirmed cases, with the last patient being diagnosed on July 5, according to local health officials.
In the new study, researchers found that nearly half of those who tested positive for the virus had worked at the Xinfadi market and 28 percent visited the market about two weeks before the first case was confirmed. The remaining patients were close contacts of those employees and visitors.
The study then narrowed down the source of infections to a stall in the market's basement, which mainly sells seafood products.
Genome sequencing also confirmed that the virus strain responsible for the outbreak was not derived from strains previously circulating in China. Instead, observed mutations suggest that the virus strain was more similar to those identified in Europe and was thus likely to have been imported from a foreign country.
Since salmon was the only imported food sold at that stall, the researchers then examined all sealed salmon in cold storage at the market. Test results show that five salmon swab samples from a company that supplies imported salmon to the market tested positive, and genome sequencing of one of the five was very similar to the virus found in infected patients and the environment at the market.
"We speculate that the COVID-19 resurgence in Beijing was likely to have been initiated by an environment-to-human transmission originating from contaminated imported food via cold-chain logistics," the study said.
Evidence found
Tsinghua University's Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, a participant in the study, said in an article released on its website on Tuesday that the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention also reported that it isolated live novel coronavirus from cold-chain food products in Qingdao, Shandong province.
The China CDC's discovery corroborated the study's finding that cold-chain food is likely to be a significant route of transmission for the novel coronavirus, the article said.
Aware of the potential risk, China has already ramped up checks on imports. The virus has so far been detected in packages or shipping containers of imported food in at least nine provincial regions across the country.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/160393414959.jpeg
---
By Woo Jin-Hoon | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-04-17 09:40  A bird's-eye view of Boao in South China's Hainan province, on April 16, 2021. [Photo/IC]
With the 20th Bo'ao Forum for Asia set to open on Sunday, it's time to reflect on how to promote economic cooperation in Asia in the post-pandemic period.
China and the Republic of Korea have set a good example in the fight against the pandemic in East Asia by making concerted efforts to strengthen bilateral ties and facilitate mutual economic recovery by promoting to recognize each other's health code. If they eventually do so, it will boost economic and trade cooperation and people-to-people exchanges not only between the two sides but also across the rest of East Asia.
Compared with Western European countries, East Asian countries have not been severely affected by the pandemic, which, combined with the rapid rollout of COVID-19 vaccines in East Asian countries, means there exist favorable conditions for the rapid economic recovery of the region. And China's strong economic performance and the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement among China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia, New Zealand and the 10 member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in November have contributed to the favorable conditions.
But to actually realize rapid economic recovery, East Asian countries have to effectively contain the epidemic as soon as possible.
China was the only major economy to achieve positive economic growth (of 2.3 percent) last year. It has also largely controlled the spread of the novel coronavirus within the country. No wonder it remained a major destination for foreign investment despite the pandemic-induced global economic downturn.
According to data from China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange and the UN Conference on Trade and Development, China attracted $520.6 billion in foreign investment in 2020, up 81 percent year-on-year, and $163 billion in foreign direct investment, up 4 percent year-on-year, overtaking the United States to become the largest FDI recipient.
Some countries and regions with huge investments in the research and development sector have benefited from the Chinese mainland's demand for high-tech products, with Japan, the ROK and Taiwan enjoying major benefits.
And that ASEAN became China's largest trading partner last year indicates the regional bloc, along with China, will drive East Asia's economic development.
True, some foreign enterprises operating in China have relocated to their base or other countries due to Sino-US frictions and/or the impact of the pandemic, as well as their declining competitiveness, bringing about some changes in the global value chains. But since China is still the "world's factory" and the world's manufacturing industry is still highly dependent on China, there is little possibility of the existing global value chain structure undergoing drastic changes any time soon.
Besides, many economies depend heavily on goods imported from China, and it is difficult for them to find alternative sources for those goods. And given that China's per capita GDP has crossed $10,000 and more and more Chinese people will travel and spend across the world, no country or company can turn a blind eye to such a huge consumers' market. China has more or less managed to offset the negative impact of the pandemic and will continue to play an important role in the global supply chains, which will further increase its influence in Asia.
As for the RCEP, with 29.5 percent of the world's GDP, 29.5 percent of global population, and 25.4 percent of global trade, it has surpassed the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement to become the world's largest trading bloc. The RCEP signatory states are likely to further open up their respective markets for goods, services and investment, and build stable supply chains in the region. And by standardizing the rules of origin, they can consolidate the links of the value chains in the region, with the RCEP playing a positive role in improving the global value chains, which were damaged or disrupted due to the previous US administration's protectionist policies and the Sino-US frictions.
Thanks to ASEAN's efforts, China, Japan and the ROK have for the first time become signatories to the same multilateral trade agreement (the RCEP). Hopefully, that will prompt them to sign a special, trilateral free trade agreement.
In the meantime, the three countries should expand their cooperation to achieve win-win results and common development, so that in the post-pandemic period, the RCEP can serve as a springboard for deepening global cooperation and become a powerful engine for development.
The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
The author is a guest professor at the International Business School, Beijing Foreign Studies University.
---
By ZHONG NAN | China Daily | Updated: 2021-04-09 07:56

Containers are unloaded from a ship at a port of Qingdao, East China's Shandong province, on Feb 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
China's foreign trade is expected to sustain its upward momentum during the first quarter, the Ministry of Commerce said on Thursday.
A recent survey conducted by the ministry of more than 20,000 export-oriented companies across China showed that they held more orders than the same period a year ago, during the January to March period. Many of them believe that they have benefited from the country's policies, including tax and fee cuts, export rebates and other trade facilitation measures.
However, a number of companies said that there are still several uncertainties for their businesses this year. There are risks such as the impact of COVID-19, the instability of the international industrial and supply chains, and the complexity of the global environment.
Gao Feng, a spokesman for the ministry, said the government will pay close attention to the global business environment, maintain the continuity, stability and sustainability of policies, and continue to help Chinese exporters reduce costs and increase efficiency to reinforce the stability and quality of the country's foreign trade.
In terms of expanding imports, the official said the ministry will continue to cooperate with the Ministry of Finance and other relevant departments to optimize and adjust import tax policies in order to promote import of high-quality products and services.
"In the meantime, the country will continue to highlight the leading role of the national import demonstration zones to boost the imports of advanced technology, equipment and services, import more products related to people's livelihood, and support the growth of new import formats," he said during a weekly news conference in Beijing.
As China has been actively fulfilling the promises it made when the nation joined the World Trade Organization, there are still plenty of areas to further cut import taxes, particularly after the country launched the Hainan Free Trade Port, where a number of products and commodities can be traded with zero or low tariffs, said Liang Ming, a researcher with the Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation.
As long as global trade maintains a healthy growth order, China will further cut import tariffs and try to seal more free trade deals with various partners, he said.
Apart from cutting import tax, China has also taken other measures to enrich its opening-up. It has been working with 14 other partners to ratify the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement before the end of this year and push for it to take effect on Jan 1, 2022.
The deal will establish a management system for the origin of goods as well as informing companies about tariff concessions and relevant policies under the RCEP framework, said Zhang Jianping, director-general of the Beijing-based China Center for Regional Economic Cooperation.
Jean-Etienne Gourgues, managing director of Pernod Ricard China, the French wine and spirits group, said that major regional free trade agreements like the RCEP will have a real impact in facilitating trade and play a strong role in trade promotion among companies in the region.
For companies from outside the region like Pernod Ricard, he said the RCEP agreement will provide a more open and favorable business environment, as well as bring about more transparent policies.
"A unified system of rules in the region will allow us to pursue further investment and in-depth development in the Chinese market, while also providing more space to introduce high-quality foreign consumer products in China," he said.
China will issue a guideline to make clear the provisions on products covered by the RCEP preferential regulations, such as transportation rules and verification of the origin of exports, said Jiang Feng, director-general of the Department of Duty Collection at the General Administration of Customs.
The country will also enhance policy promotion and training to help companies better understand the tariff concessions and preferential rules under the RCEP, so that they can fully benefit from such a massive multilateral trade deal, she added.
---
By WANG XIAODONG | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-01-15 07:03

Members of a World Health Organization expert team tasked with origin-tracing of the novel coronavirus travel in a bus after their arrival in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Thursday. THOMAS PETER/REUTERS
An international expert team from the World Health Organization arrived in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Thursday to work with its Chinese counterparts on origin-tracing and scientific research of the novel coronavirus.
The team landed at Wuhan Tianhe International Airport on Thursday morning, where they received throat swab and serum antibody tests for the coronavirus before going into a 14-day quarantine, according to China Global Television Network.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said at a regular news briefing in Beijing on Thursday that, during their quarantine, the WHO experts will have exchanges via video link with Chinese scientists and medical experts.
All of the team members had multiple tests for COVID-19 in their home countries before traveling.
The WHO confirmed the arrival of the international team of 13 scientists in Wuhan in a post on social media, which also said that another two scientists are still in Singapore to be retested after they tested positive for antibodies associated with COVID-19.
Before the visit, WHO expert teams on origin-tracing of the novel coronavirus had visited China twice, in February and July, at China's invitation. The two sides have kept exchanging information on the latest progress in origin-tracing and worked together to formulate a plan on cooperation with China under a broader plan for global cooperation on origin-tracing of the virus.
WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at an earlier media briefing that he was pleased that the team, with members from countries including the United States, Russia and Japan, would travel to China for joint scientific research on origin-tracing with its Chinese counterparts.
"Scientific evidence will drive hypotheses, which will then be the basis for further, longer-term studies," he said."This is important not just for COVID-19, but for the future of global health security and to manage emerging disease threats with pandemic potential."
It will be a very difficult task to find the origin of the novel coronavirus, and no significant progress has been made over the past year, some experts have said.
Although some of the earliest COVID-19 cases were reported at Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan in December 2019, no evidence was found to link the market with the origin of the coronavirus, despite great efforts by Chinese researchers to find an answer, Gao Fu, director of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an earlier interview.
The latest research and discoveries about earliest cases of the virus in some other countries have pointed to the possibility that the virus may have existed in nature for a long time before the earliest COVID-19 cases were reported, he said.
https://img2.chinadaily.com .cn/images/202101/15/6000e345a31024adbdaea473.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-12 16:09

Premier Li Keqiang meets the press via video link after the closing of the fourth session of the 13th National People's Congress at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, March 11, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
Premier Li Keqiang took questions from Chinese and foreign reporters via video link at a news conference Thursday after the closing of the fourth session of the 13th National People's Congress. Let's take a look at what overseas media covered.
On employment
While officials didn't set a GDP growth target last year, they did set a goal of at least 9 million new urban jobs because "employment is the foundation of people's wellbeing and development, it is also a source of wealth", Li said.
"With employment, there will be a source of income, it will boost consumption and drive economic growth," he said.
The government has set a target of 11 million new urban jobs for 2021 and will prioritize employment creation, Li said, adding that there will be 14 million people entering the urban job market this year, including more than 9 million college graduates.
- Bloomberg
On novel coronavirus source tracing
China, too, wants to know where the COVID-19 virus came from, Li said.
He said knowing the origins of the coronavirus would help to effectively contain it.
Li, however, noted that tracing the virus' origin is a complex process, and needed continuous research and close cooperation among countries.
"China has acted in an open, transparent and cooperative manner," he said.
- Malaysia's news website The Star Online
On macro economy
Li defended the government's target for more than 6 percent GDP growth this year, saying it is "not low" and policies would not be dramatically loosened to chase higher growth.
The target was well below analysts' expectations, as their consensus forecast was for growth of more than 8 percent this year.
Li said the focus this year is on consolidating China's economic recovery, and setting hugely different growth targets from year to year would only "disturb" market expectations.
- Reuters
On science-tech innovation
Li said China will continue to scale up inputs in driving scientific and technological innovations for the next five years, and more efforts will be made to encourage the private sector's participation in research and development.
- Press Trust of India
On China-US relations
China and the United States have common interests and many areas for cooperation and should strive for a healthy development in relations, Li said.
Li said Beijing hoped ties could develop in a healthy way based on respecting each other's core interests, win-win cooperation and non-interference in internal affairs.
US President Joe Biden's administration has committed to reviewing elements of US policy toward China.
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken will meet with top Chinese officials on March 18 in Alaska, the first high-level in-person contact between the two countries under the Biden administration.
- Reuters
"We hope to see dialogue between the two countries in multiple areas, and at various levels. Even if we cannot work everything out anytime soon, such exchange of views will help boost trust and dispel misgivings," Li said.
"China and the US have common interests. There are many areas where the two countries can cooperate with each other... The two countries need to put more energy and focus on their common ground and expand converging interests," he said.
- The Straits Times
---
By WANG XIAODONG | China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-25 07:27
A container with Sinovac coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines is seen after it was unloaded from a plane at Bangkok's Suvarnabhumi International Airport, in Bangkok, Thailand on Feb 24, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
When Wu Guizhen and her colleagues at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing received their first sample of an unknown virus on Jan 2, 2020, they rushed to identify it.
The sample had been collected from a pneumonia patient in Wuhan, Hubei province.
"It's similar to when you cannot see the enemy during a war if you cannot get a clear picture of a virus when fighting an infectious disease," said Wu, chief biosafety expert at the China CDC.
In the initial days of the COVID-19 outbreak, when the disease was referred to as "pneumonia caused by unknown causes", Wu and other virologists at the China CDC's National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention had never been busier. The virologists worked around the clock to analyze the sample using the latest technology. Some of them slept at their workplace for days, she said.
In less than a week, on Jan 7, China CDC researchers successfully isolated a new coronavirus from the sample.
The next day, a team of experts from the National Health Commission gave initial confirmation that the novel coronavirus was the cause of the epidemic in Wuhan. The following day, China shared the information with the World Health Organization.
"Preliminary identification of a novel virus in a short period of time is a notable achievement," the WHO said in a statement on Jan 9. "The preliminary determination of a novel virus will assist authorities in other countries to conduct disease detection and response."
Meanwhile, the China CDC began releasing data on the virus, and the genome sequence of the virus was made available for global access through the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data on Jan 10, Wu said.
In the following days, two other Chinese institutes, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, also released data on the virus' genome sequence to the platform for global sharing, she said.
The prompt release of information on the novel coronavirus greatly facilitated research and development of COVID-19 vaccines across the world, which has made "the miracle" of market approval of vaccines possible within one year of the disease being identified, Wu said.
"Following the release of the genome sequence, all countries were able to produce testing kits for the virus, or research and develop vaccines," Wu said. "It also laid the foundation for research in tracing the virus' origin, monitoring its mutation trends and figuring out how the virus causes sickness."
Information shared
For example, development of BNT162b2, one of the first COVID-19 vaccines available for use, began early on. The RNA vaccine was developed by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and German company BioNTech and approved for emergency use in the United Kingdom in December.
"The development of BNT162b2 was initiated on Jan 10, 2020, when the SARS-CoV-2 genetic sequence was released by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention and disseminated globally by the GISAID initiative," said a paper published in the New England Journal of Medicine in December.
Wu said "information-sharing is a major contribution China has made to the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic". She added that such sharing, including origin-tracing, with the WHO and the international community, began at the start of the pandemic.
Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at China CDC, said in an earlier interview with China Daily that China's quick identification of the pathogen and development of testing kits played an important role in the rapid containment of the epidemic in China.
The global sharing of the genome sequence also greatly contributed to the worldwide fight against the pandemic. "We did not apply for patents for the research and instead made it free for the public good of all," Wu said.
---
By Li Fusheng | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-08 17:25

Jochen Goller, president and CEO of BMW Group Region China. [Photo provided to chinadaily.com.cn]
Jochen Goller, president and CEO of BMW's operations in China, said he is impressed by the nation's plan to keep using innovation to drive its development, as outlined in the Government Work Report delivered on Friday.
"Based on the tremendous progress China has achieved over the past decade, it is now a world-leading innovation hub," said Goller in a written interview with China Daily on Saturday.
He said the development of intelligent infrastructure, such as 5G and 1,000 megabyte fiber-optic networks, will provide the framework for accelerated industry transformation and upgrading in the country.
"BMW Group considers China to be much more than just our largest single market, but rather an important origin of innovation and we are continuously scaling up our investment in this regard," said Goller.
The carmaker has established its largest R&D footprint outside its home of Germany, with research facilities in Shanghai and Beijing as well as Shenyang, Liaoning province.
It is expanding collaboration with leading Chinese technology companies as well, including Alibaba. This year, the carmaker is establishing a joint venture in China to accelerate the integration of in-car digital features to meet the demands of tech-savvy Chinese customers.
Goller applauded China's dual-circulation strategy development pattern. "It puts a parallel emphasis both on domestic and international circulation. A high-level opening-up certainly serves this end, bringing win-win outcomes both for China and multinational companies," he said.
He said the potential of the Chinese market is huge and BMW will continue investing in the country.
Since 2009, BMW has invested more than 64 billion yuan ($9.81 billion) in Shenyang to build vehicle and battery plants and infrastructure. China is now the only country that produces its iX3 electric SUV.
The carmaker is investing 5.1 billion yuan into its joint venture with China's Great Wall Motors to produce electric MINIs in the country.
"These latest moves of BMW in China are based on our confidence that we will strive to seize the greater opportunities brought by a more open China," he said.
BMW entered the Chinese market in 1994 and established its first joint venture in 2003.
Last year, its sales in the country hit a record 777,379 vehicles, up 7.4 percent year-on-year despite the COVID-19 pandemic. That was about one-third of the group's global sales for 2020.
The company is planning to launch 25 models in the Chinese market this year.
"The year 2021 is the first year of China's 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2015), which will start a new journey of modernization in all dimensions. We are confident that China will continue to open up and promote high-quality development," said Goller.
---
By DANIEL ZIPSER/ALEX SAWAYA | China Daily | Updated: 2021-03-05 08:06

LI MIN/CHINA DAILY
China's grocery stores are at a crossroad as the novel coronavirus has hastened a shift in consumers' consumption behavior
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus has irrevocably changed the domestic retail landscape. Nowhere is more pronounced than in grocery stores and markets selling essential foods and other daily-use products. It is no exaggeration to say that China's grocery stores played a pivotal role in keeping the country on its feet, or rather off its feet and safe at home when the virus was raging last year. Amid widespread closure of shops and workplaces, China's grocery ecosystem emerged as a beacon of resilience, their lights and deliveries showing life went on in otherwise silent cities.
Several trends highlight the growth of grocery retail in China, which has been driven by its move online. Online grocery retail is expected to grow significantly after the pandemic, as demand is unlocked in lower-tier cities. In recent years, online grocery retail has been growing at more than 30 percent annually, helping online penetration reach 10 percent of the market in 2019. According to a survey by McKinsey & Co in March 2020, because of the pandemic, the overall frequency of online purchases increased by more than 70 percent, with the shift most pronounced in small cities, where demand from both first-timers and infrequent users has been further unlocked. These cities will continue to be a battleground for fresh grocery e-commerce retailers, all of whom are aggressively expanding their coverage while working to resolve logistics and supply chain issues.
Consumers expect convenience and ultra-fast delivery of fresh food. McKinsey's research shows that four out of five Chinese consumers receive their online fresh food orders a day after placing the order at the latest, while almost half (47 percent) receive them the same day, and 15 percent enjoy delivery within an hour.
Driving this pattern is the sophistication of China's e-commerce infrastructure and the digital adaptability of the Generation Z-those Chinese consumers under the age of 25.According to the McKinsey 2019 Gen Z Asia Survey, 40 percent of Chinese Gen Z respondents rarely visit an offline supermarket, making the number of offline supermarket goers far fewer than older generations in China and their counterparts in other Asian countries. Instead, they source ingredients for home-cooked dinners from online grocery platforms offering ultra-fast delivery, while turning to general e-commerce retailers to stock up on non-perishables. They visit offline convenience stores only for last-minute or impulse buying.
This convenience-seeking behavior has encouraged the opening of neighborhood fresh food marts, which are expected to lift sales by more than 20 percent annually.
The shift to online ordering and consumers' growing preference for healthy and safe products accelerated during the pandemic. Grocery retailers should adapt by investing in online and omnichannel initiatives, particularly those that help reassure consumers about the quality and health benefits of products.
Omnichannel services such as in-store pickup of online orders, QR code scanning of products to reveal more information, and self-check-out have been the most widely adopted digital retail concepts in China.
In-store digitization initiatives including augmented and virtual reality hold great potential, as do smart vending machines and electronic price-tagging, as they are strongly appreciated by shoppers in the limited cases where they have been deployed, according to McKinsey's China digital consumer trends report.
Meanwhile, community group-buying startups have rapidly formed a 29 billion yuan ($4.48 billion) market. Leading players such as Xingsheng Selected leverage social media platforms such as WeChat to offer attractively-priced products, benefiting from efficient community referral models and a scalable supply chain.
Chinese consumers place the highest value on quality, safe ingredients in the fresh and packaged foods they buy, while the pandemic has reinforced the importance of deploying easy methods for tracing food back to its origin. Retailers are meeting this expectation by directly purchasing food from farms, and improving supply chain technologies to reassure customers about the provenance of their products.
There is room for China to catch up with the developed countries in the growth of the organic foods market where it still lags behind in terms of the retail value of packaged organic food as a proportion of total packaged food. The COVID-19 crisis is likely to accelerate consumer appreciation of products they can confidently trace from farm to table.
Traditionally in China, the proportion of private label products is low. However, leading grocery players with strong branding are spearheading an increase in private label penetration. Alibaba Group's Freshippo, for example, is investing ambitiously to reshape the market. In order for the private label market to take off, consumers must perceive private labels as "high quality, value for money "rather than as cut-price alternatives to established brands. Private labels can also help alleviate margin pressure due to intensifying competition.
While the post-pandemic outlook is still uncertain, the public health crisis has set in train a stream of changes in China's grocery market. Consumers increasingly want convenience, whether online or in-store, combined with healthy, fresh and safe products. A battle for the future of the market is already underway, with incumbent offline retailers vying for relevance with the new entrants. Whatever comes next, China's grocery market will continue to develop in dynamic and exciting ways as some of the world's most innovative retail companies compete to deliver daily necessities in the world's second-largest consumer market.
Daniel Zipser is a senior partner at McKinsey & Company, based in Shenzhen. Alex Sawaya is a partner at McKinsey& Company, based in Hong Kong. The authors contributed this article to China Watch, a think tank powered by China Daily. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
---
By Wang Xiaodong | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-10-29 12:29

Medical workers perform medical treatment on a patient in Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, Jan 24, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
The possibility the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, Hubei province, was caused by imported seafood contaminated with novel coronavirus cannot be ruled out, a top public health researcher said.
Although the earliest cases in Wuhan were linked to a seafood market in the city, experts have said that did not prove the virus originated in the market.
In a report published on Thursday by Global Times, Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said that since COVID-19 outbreaks in recent months in Beijing and the port cities of Dalian, Liaoning province, and Qingdao, Shandong province, were caused by imported seafood, people should think about new approaches to tracing the earliest COVID-19 cases linked to the seafood market in Wuhan.
Earlier this month, China CDC announced it had isolated live novel coronavirus from a package containing imported frozen cod when tracing a COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao, which proved the virus could survive in cold chain storage over long distances and infect humans.
However, the newspaper cited an anonymous virus expert as saying one puzzle that needed to be answered about the possibility the novel coronavirus was introduced to China from overseas was why it had not caused outbreaks in its place of origin.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/87/160395146616.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-17 19:03

Peter Ben Embarek, head of the international expert team in Wuhan, attends a news conference on the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Geneva, Switzerland, February 12, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
If the World Health Organization's field research in Wuhan had produced findings that fitted the narrative prescribed by those looking to pin the blame on China for the COVID-19 pandemic before the work began, the expert team would have been commended for its professionalism in not only digging out the facts but also breaking through the host country's alleged obstructiveness.
But since its findings do not conform to the conspiracy mongering that China was the source of the novel coronavirus outbreak and remiss in its response, the team's professionalism and independence are being questioned and attacked in some quarters.
While the team's hard work and its productive collaboration with its Chinese counterparts have been recognized by much of the international community, Washington and some hawkish Western media, led by The New York Times, have engaged in malicious speculation aimed at casting doubt on the team's findings.
The reason why the pandemic has raged out of control in the United States for so long is because the country put politics and bias above science and facts. The pressure it is intent on exerting upon the WHO's Wuhan mission shows that it has still not seen the error of its ways.
As WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus pointed out during a news conference on Monday, the mission ‚Äî which the team leader Peter Ben Embarek called "successful in many ways" ‚Äî was an independent study that "has added important information that takes us closer to understanding the origins of the virus".
But there are those who do not care about the scientific evidence; their intrigue is to discredit China in the global court of public opinion. That this mudslinging, which originated with the previous US administration, still has its market in the US and some of its allies, such as the United Kingdom, shows that the politicization of the pandemic is set to continue.
The irony is that critics of the previous administration's prevention and control measures at home, such as The New York Times, have picked up its baton of bias.
The US needs to know that as the worst-hit country in the pandemic, it will directly benefit from scientific efforts to learn more about the virus, endeavors that call for global solidarity. If it really wants to rejoin the international fold, it needs to demonstrate that it is doing so for the right reasons, rather than entering as a wolf in sheep's clothing.
For effective multilateral cooperation, mutual respect and trust are essential. China is unswervingly committed to building trust, but the US should keep in mind that trust is a two-way street.
---
By WANG XIAODONG | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-02-03 07:02

Disease control and prevention workers collect samples from frozen products in Tianjin's Nankai district on Nov 9, 2020. [Photo/China Daily]
Studies into the clusters of COVID-19 cases in recent months show that contaminated cold-chain food products are the major cause of the outbreaks, highlighting the need for protection of workers associated with the industry, experts said.
"Research has indicated that the novel coronavirus can survive on cold-chain food and food packaging during long distance shipping and may cause human infection, in particular to high-risk people such as dockworkers," said Liu Zhaoping, a researcher at the China National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment.
"However, the likelihood of food-to-human transmission is considered lower than with other routes of transmission."
Investigations into the source of the outbreaks in cities across China, including Beijing and the port cities of Dalian, Liaoning province, and Qingdao, Shandong province, found many of them could be traced to workers at cold storage areas, seafood processing plants and markets selling imported frozen food products, he said.
In many areas, the RNA of the novel coronavirus has been detected on the surface of frozen food, including salmon, shrimp, beef and chicken, as well as their packaging. Most of them were imported from countries where the pandemic is still wreaking havoc, Liu said.
Meat and poultry processing facilities are more prone to outbreaks due to the cold and humid environment, where it's easier for workers to catch and transmit respiratory diseases. Food products and their packaging are likely to be contaminated by droplets exhaled from virus carriers through actions such as breathing, coughing and talking.
Studies have shown that the novel coronavirus remains highly stable under freezing conditions, so it may survive cold-chain transportation.
Christopher Elliott, a professor of food safety at Queen's University in the United Kingdom, said: "There was a growing knowledge to suggest that the novel coronavirus could have a longer survival time at lower temperatures."
COVID-19 outbreaks in port cities such as Dalian and Tianjin were caused by harbor workers, who were infected after coming into contact with frozen food and packaging, he said.
"The isolation of a live virus in the Qingdao case study has further confirmed the transmissibility from food packaging to humans," he said.
The investigation into the COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao for the first time isolated live samples of novel coronavirus taken from imported frozen seafood packaging, proving the possibility of virus transmission via frozen food, according to a study published by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention in October.
The possibility of the virus being transmitted via frozen food was first raised after a COVID-19 outbreak at a wholesale market in Beijing in June. Cutting boards used to handle imported salmon in the market tested positive for the virus.
Before the outbreak, Beijing had reported no new domestically transmitted cases for about two months, and the virus was effectively under control in the rest of the country.
A research paper jointly published in October by Tsinghua University, the Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention and the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and other institutes said the outbreak was highly likely to have been caused by imported contaminated frozen food.
During an outbreak in Dalian between Dec 15 and Jan 11, which involved 51 confirmed COVID-19 patients and 32 asymptomatic carriers, epidemiologists identified imported frozen food as the origin of the outbreak.
Five stevedores were infected in early December while unloading frozen food from a foreign cargo ship. They later spread the disease via human-to-human transmission, according to the Dalian government.
Recent studies have also found that transportation containers may also harbor live coronavirus in low winter temperatures.
In November, health authorities in Shanghai said two workers who did not wear masks became infected while cleaning a sealed container flown in from North America.
All of China's major infection clusters since December were caused by inbound travelers or contaminated cold-chain goods, Ma Xiaowei, the health minister, said last month.
Intensified supervision
China has intensified supervision of imported frozen food since the June outbreak in Beijing, to cover the cold-food chain industry across the country. Strict epidemic prevention and control measures have been applied to the sector, and front-line port workers have been included on the priority list of occupations for COVID-19 vaccinations.
Liu, from the center for food safety, said as COVID-19 continues to spread across the world, relevant departments should strengthen the inspection of inbound cold-chain goods, especially from countries or regions with serious outbreaks.
Meanwhile, measures to protect cold-chain workers should be increased to minimize the risk of infection, he said. "Keeping all workers in the food supply chain healthy and safe is vital for their personal wellbeing, for their families, and for ensuring that consumers' needs are met."
---
By WANG XIAOYU | China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-05 08:00  An international expert team from the World Health Organization visit an exhibition on how China fought the coronavirus in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province on Jan 30, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
An international expert team from the World Health Organization has visited a number of key facilities in Wuhan, Hubei province, in recent days, including food markets, disease control centers and a research institution, as their scientific research into the origin of the novel coronavirus makes progress, the National Health Commission said on Thursday.
Commission spokesman Mi Feng said the team had visited Wuhan Baishazhou Agricultural Market, Huanan Seafood Market, Wuhan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hubei Provincial Center for Animal Disease Control and Prevention, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.
"The WHO team has talked with relevant administrative personnel, experts, business owners, residents and media representatives there," he said during a news conference.
Mi added that team members have also had talks with experts from the Wuhan Blood Center and Huazhong Agricultural University.
The visiting team arrived in Wuhan on Jan 14 and began field visits on Jan 28 after completing the mandatory 14-day quarantine required for inbound travelers.
Previously, the team had visited two local hospitals-Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine and Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital-where some of the earliest COVID-19 patients were treated.
Peter Daszak, a British zoologist and a team member, said on social media on Wednesday that the team had an "extremely important meeting" with researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, including the leading scientist Shi Zhengli, who had firmly dismissed conspiracy theories that the virus was leaked from the institute in Wuhan.
"Frank, open discussion. Key questions asked and answered," Daszak said in a social media post that described the meeting.
In a video interview with British television news channel Sky News, Daszak said that China's openness and willingness to cooperate with the international expert team is being felt every day.
"They are sharing data with us that we've never seen before, that no one has seen before. They are talking with us openly about every possible pathway," he said, adding that any scientific inquires concerning people's lives are sensitive worldwide and appropriate constraints are necessary.
He stressed that on-site visits in Wuhan had enabled team members to directly pose significant questions.
"We do not just wander around and take a few pictures. We look into things and ask questions. We talked to people who collected the samples from the market that tested positive," he said.
In China, the virus has been largely brought under control despite a number of outbreaks in recent weeks.
As of Wednesday, the country had administered over 31.23 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines to people deemed at higher risk of catching the virus, including public service employees, and coldchain and port workers, according to commission spokesman Mi.
---
By WANG XIAOYU | China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-05 08:00  An international expert team from the World Health Organization visit an exhibition on how China fought the coronavirus in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province on Jan 30, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
An international expert team from the World Health Organization has visited a number of key facilities in Wuhan, Hubei province, in recent days, including food markets, disease control centers and a research institution, as their scientific research into the origin of the novel coronavirus makes progress, the National Health Commission said on Thursday.
Commission spokesman Mi Feng said the team had visited Wuhan Baishazhou Agricultural Market, Huanan Seafood Market, Wuhan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hubei Provincial Center for Animal Disease Control and Prevention, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.
"The WHO team has talked with relevant administrative personnel, experts, business owners, residents and media representatives there," he said during a news conference.
Mi added that team members have also had talks with experts from the Wuhan Blood Center and Huazhong Agricultural University.
The visiting team arrived in Wuhan on Jan 14 and began field visits on Jan 28 after completing the mandatory 14-day quarantine required for inbound travelers.
Previously, the team had visited two local hospitals-Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine and Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital-where some of the earliest COVID-19 patients were treated.
Peter Daszak, a British zoologist and a team member, said on social media on Wednesday that the team had an "extremely important meeting" with researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, including the leading scientist Shi Zhengli, who had firmly dismissed conspiracy theories that the virus was leaked from the institute in Wuhan.
"Frank, open discussion. Key questions asked and answered," Daszak said in a social media post that described the meeting.
In a video interview with British television news channel Sky News, Daszak said that China's openness and willingness to cooperate with the international expert team is being felt every day.
"They are sharing data with us that we've never seen before, that no one has seen before. They are talking with us openly about every possible pathway," he said, adding that any scientific inquires concerning people's lives are sensitive worldwide and appropriate constraints are necessary.
He stressed that on-site visits in Wuhan had enabled team members to directly pose significant questions.
"We do not just wander around and take a few pictures. We look into things and ask questions. We talked to people who collected the samples from the market that tested positive," he said.
In China, the virus has been largely brought under control despite a number of outbreaks in recent weeks.
As of Wednesday, the country had administered over 31.23 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines to people deemed at higher risk of catching the virus, including public service employees, and coldchain and port workers, according to commission spokesman Mi.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-02 21:06
Today, as COVID-19 is spreading rapidly across the globe, it constitutes the most urgent and serious challenge to both the health of the humanity and world peace and development.
Faced with this unprecedented situation, we, major political parties of various countries tasked with the weighty responsibility of improving people's wellbeing, promoting national development and safeguarding world peace and stability, hereby issue our joint appeal as follows:
I. We pay our loftiest tribute to all the people, health workers in particular, who devote themselves to saving lives and protecting people's health. We extend our heartfelt sympathies and solicitude to those who are suffering from pain and whose lives are under the threat of COVID-19 as well as the bereaved families of those deceased. We also express our deep mourning for the unfortunate loss of lives in the outbreak.
II. We recognise that if the COVID-19 outbreak is not effectively and promptly contained, it will inflict even greater harm to the lives, safety and health of many more people, and exert a severe impact on the economic and social development of most countries as well as on international exchanges and cooperation. We call on all countries to put the lives, safety and health of the people above everything else and take resolute and forceful measures to put an end to the spread of COVID-19.
III. We support countries to put in place contingency plans and strategies for combating COVID-19 in light of their specific national conditions and to strengthen cooperation, with equal emphasis on containing the further spread and on patient treatment. Meanwhile, modern science and technology must be applied to the full to ensure the quickest and best possible results.
IV. We call on the general public of all countries to comply with prevention and mitigation measures with a due sense of social responsibility. We encourage countries to fully leverage the strength of civil society organisations and volunteers with a view to unleashing the power of all social sectors to combat COVID-19.
V. We encourage all countries, while devoting efforts to epidemic control, to adopt an integrated approach to ensure economic and social development, take targeted measures to protect vulnerable groups and the SMEs, and honour their commitment to people's living standards and social progress. We call on all countries to step up the international coordination of macroeconomic policies to maintian stability of global financial market as well as that of industrial and supply chains, and to reduce or exempt tariffs for trade facilitation so as to prevent world economic recession. Countries are also encouraged to maintain an appropriate level of international exchanges, in particular to facilitate the cross-border transportation of urgently needed medical equipment and protective materials for the fight against COVID-19.
VI. We are aware that the virus respects no borders, and no country can respond to the challenges alone in the face of the outbreak. Countries must enhance their consciousness of a community with a shared future for mankind, proactively rendering mutual help and support to one another as the situation becomes more difficult. Closer international cooperation, coordinated policies, concerted actions, and mobilisation of resources and forces globally will enable us to defeat this virus, a common enemy to all of humanity.
VII. We take note of the significant progress in the fight against COVID-19 in China and some other countries, which has bought time and offered experience to the rest of the international community. We highly commend countries including China for adopting an open, transparent and responsible attitude to disclosing related information in a timely fashion, sharing experience on response and patient treatment, and in particular providing medical and other supplies to the best of their ability to other affected countries. These represent a major contribution to the global fight against COVID-19, boosting the hope and confidence of countries that they can win this battle.
VIII. We welcome the Extraordinary G20 Leaders' Summit Statement on COVID-19 and support countries to strengthen the sharing of experience and medical cooperation in containing the outbreak, including joint research and development of specific medicines, vaccines and tests. We call on the provision of material, technical and other support to developing countries and countries with vulnerable public health systems. Let the sunlight of cooperation disperse the darkness of the pandemic.
IX. We call for science-based professional discussions on issues like prevention measures and the origin of the virus. We strongly oppose the politicisation of public health issues and the stigmatisation of other countries under the excuse of COVID-19. We stand firmly against all discriminatory comments and practices against any country, region or ethnic group, and call on governments of all countries to take proactive measures to protect the health, safety and legitimate interests of foreign nationals and students they host.
X. We are of the view that the COVID-19 outbreak has laid bare the need for all countries to further foster the global governance outlook of achieving shared growth through discussion and collaboration and to support the leading role of the United Nations and the World Health Organisation in global public health governance. We call for all parties to enhance coordination and cooperation within the framework of the G20 and other international mechanisms for effective international prevention and control as we strive to build a global community with a shared future for public health.
As major political parties from countries of the world, we undertake to maintain close communication under the unusual circumstances, and ensure better performance of the due role of political guidance for the purpose of injecting political energy into the global fight against COVID-19. We firmly believe that our current difficulties are only temporary, just as the sunlight shall eventually shine after each storm. If the international community makes concerted efforts with confidence and resolve and takes a science-based and targeted approach, it will definitely win the final victory in the all-out global war against COVID-19. It is our belief that, after the pandemic, the community with a shared future for mankind will emerge stronger and humanity will embrace a brighter tomorrow.
---
By ZHONG NAN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-01-19 07:30

Visitors check out cosmetic products from Thailand during the China-ASEAN Expo in Nanning, the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region, on Nov 28. PENG HUAN/FOR CHINA DAILY
One-third of China's foreign trade goods to be tariff-free after deal implementation
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement is expected to take effect by the end of this year, enabling more than one-third of China's foreign trade goods to enjoy zero tariffs in the next stage, a senior government official said on Monday.
Commerce Minister Wang Wentao said the pact will drive the opening-up of services and investments, promote trade facilitation and improve the business environment in the country.
China will take the opportunity to expand trade and investment activities in the region, stabilize industrial and supply chains and form new advantages in global economic cooperation and competition. Besides, China will highlight the characteristics of local economic development and fully integrate into the huge market, Wang said.
The minister said at a national online training session that the government will systematically introduce articles about the deal on goods, services, investment, rules of origin, Customs facilitation and other areas. Its goal is to assist local governments, industry associations and export-oriented companies to be familiar with RCEP rules.
The mega trade deal was signed by China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Australia, New Zealand and 10 member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on Nov 15, 2020. The RCEP is also the world's biggest free trade bloc, covering 2.27 billion people, or almost 30 percent of the global population, with a combined gross domestic product of $26 trillion, or about 30 percent of global GDP in 2019, data from the ministry showed.
At present, all the signatories are actively pushing for early clearances for the pact. It will come into force and be implemented after ratification by six ASEAN economies and three non-ASEAN countries, said Wang Shouwen, vice-minister of commerce.
With the signing of the RCEP, China has sealed 19 free trade agreements with other countries and has 26 free trade partners, he said. After the implementation of the RCEP, China's foreign trade volume with its FTA partners will increase from 27 percent to 35 percent, indicating more than one-third of its foreign trade goods will be tariff-free.
Wang urged Chinese companies to take advantage of the cumulative rules of origin, because the benefit of the RCEP lies in the adoption of such rules.
"When products are exported to other RCEP member states, intermediate goods from multiple member states can be added into the value-added standard, which greatly lowers the threshold of the goods benefits," he said. "Therefore, more goods can have access to tariff reductions."
The RCEP will build a solid foundation for China to substantially push forward the China-Japan-ROK free trade process, together with China's announcement of favorably considering joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, or CPTPP, said Wang.
Zhao Ping, vice-president of the research institute at the Beijing-based China Council for the Promotion of International Trade, said China must seize this rare opportunity to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic effect and other uncertainties to the regional economy by actively promoting the implementation of the RCEP, sharing the development dividends of the FTA and relying on the regional market and various connectivity facilities to achieve win-win cooperation.
Promoting regional economic and trade ties on the RCEP platform will open new frontiers for economic growth in China and provide new impetus to regional and even global economic recovery and growth, Zhao said at an economic forum held by China News Service on Monday.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-01-12 13:20

Tourists have fun at an ice and snow amusement park in Mohe, Northeast China's Heilongjiang province, Jan 8, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
Last year, the COVID-19 outbreak had limited impact on China's family trips market, with post-80s parents becoming the main driver, The Paper reported.
According to a report from online travel service provider Ctrip, the frequency of family trips fell to 2.4 times in 2020 from 2.7 times in 2019. Data showed between February and May, due to the COVID-19 outbreak, the number of tourists was at its lowest. However, amid the country's firm containment of COVID-19, demand for family trips went through a V-shaped recovery.
Due to COVID-19, family trips mainly focused on short-distance trips close to cities, and road trips became the most popular type. About 40 percent of families chose road trips, and 28 percent preferred high-speed railways. For long-distance trips, airplane is still the first choice, accounting for 32 percent of the total.
Over the past year, the share of post-80s parents who booked family trips via Ctrip reached 41 percent, followed by post-90s (32 percent) and post-70s (20 percent).
With effective and successful control of the COVID-19 pandemic domestically, driven by a "free tickets" policy, there was a growing trend toward traveling in Hubei province, which was hit hard by the novel coronavirus earlier last year.
This trend also drove family trips in surrounding cities there. Wuhan, Xiaogan, Xiantao, Yichang, Ezhou, Huanggang, Jingmen, Xianning and Suizhou became the top 10 fastest-growing tourist origin cities in 2020. These cities all come from Hubei province, and most are second-tier or below.
Most family trips last three to five days, accounting for 45 percent of the total, followed by six to eight days (31 percent) and over eight days (4 percent).
In terms of destinations, theme parks accounted for 27 percent of family trips, followed by natural scenery (22 percent), architecture (19 percent), city tours (12 percent), museums (11 percent) and historical sites (9 percent).
According to the report, the Palace Museum, the Shaanxi History Museum, Emperor Qinshihuang's Mausoleum Site Museum and the National Museum of China all were in the top 10 most popular museums visited.
Meanwhile, as affluent tourists chose to travel within the country rather than abroad last year, the quality of domestic tourism saw significant enhancement. More than 45 percent of parents choose four- or five- star hotels when travelling.
---
By WANG XIAODONG | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-12-11 07:13

A worker disinfects packaged cold-chain food to be exhibited at the third China International Import Expo in Shanghai on Oct 29, 2020. [Photo provided to China Daily]
Scientists say cold-chain foods might have been source of original illnesses
The novel coronavirus may have been lurking in different places across the world long before it caused COVID-19 outbreaks, although efforts are underway to try to find its origin, said a top public health expert.
Meanwhile, the possibility is increasing that the novel coronavirus, or SARS-CoV-2, was imported via contaminated cold-chain food products and resulted in the initial outbreaks in Wuhan, Hubei province, in December of last year based on recent studies, Gao Fu, director-general of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an exclusive interview with China Daily.
"Of course, all the possibilities need further scientific evidence to be proven," he said.
Although it is generally believed that SARS-CoV-2 was transmitted to humans via an intermediate host mammal, scientists have made little progress in determining the host despite great efforts, he said. A thorough, worldwide investigation should be a priority, he added.
"Back in early January, my colleagues and I conducted a thorough search of Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan in the hope of identifying the host but found no clues," Gao said. "Investigations by the China CDC have been searching for the answer since then, but without results."
The wholesale food market is where certain types of wildlife and aquatic products were sold. It was closed on Jan 1 after initial reports of COVID-19 cases, then known as a "pneumonia of unknown cause" were linked with the market.
"The fact that the virus was first identified in Wuhan does not equate with the city being the origin of the virus," Gao said. "The latest findings might have shown that the virus had existed in some other parts of the world long before the outbreak."
The novel coronavirus infected people in the United States in mid-December of last year, a month before the first COVID-19 case was identified in the country, according to a study by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that was published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases on Nov 30.
Researchers from the centers analyzed 7,389 samples from blood donations collected from residents of nine US states as early as mid-December and found evidence of infection in 106.
In Italy, after identifying antibodies to the virus in volunteers participating in a lung cancer screening trial, researchers have found that the coronavirus may have existed in the country since September of last year, months before the report of the first COVID-19 case in the country in February.
"We are still far from clear why the virus caused outbreaks in Wuhan, and why the outbreaks started in December," Gao said, adding it is very likely that the novel coronavirus had undergone an important mutation so its infectivity to humans was significantly increased.
Following the recent scattered outbreaks in China, including those in Beijing in JuneÔºçwhich were linked to a wholesale food market where cutting boards for imported salmon tested positive for the virusÔºçand in the port city of Qingdao, Shandong province, in October, Chinese researchers proved that the virus can be transmitted to humans via contaminated cold-chain food products.
---
By WANG XIAOYU | China Daily | Updated: 2020-12-04 09:35

Disease control and prevention workers collect samples from frozen products in Tianjin's Nankai district on Nov 9, 2020. [Photo/China Daily]
A national platform designed to trace and manage cold-chain imports has been established and put into operation recently as China tightens measures to prevent the transmission of COVID-19 infections from cold, imported food products, according to the country's top market regulator.
Nine provinces and municipalities that serve as the first point of entry for more than 90 percent of all such products are now linked to the new platform, according to an article posted on the website of the State Administration for Market Regulation on Wednesday evening.
With the rollout of the platform, "we have basically expanded our online tracing capability to cover the entire industry chain, from customs clearance, production and processing to wholesaling, retailing and catering services," the administration said.
The platform has also played a significant role in screening cold imports online, implementing targeted supervision and facilitating on-site management.
"The outcomes of efforts devoted to stemming virus risks arising from objects have begun to materialize," the administration said.
It added that it has used advanced technologies to overcome barriers in identifying and consolidating different sets of information nationwide.
During a video conference held by the administration on Tuesday with local market regulators, the administration stressed that all cold imports that lack inspection and quarantine certificates, nucleic acid test reports, disinfection certificates and information on their origin and flow will be banned from entering the market.
Businesses should be urged to upload key data on shipments' origins, destinations, quantities and locations in a timely manner. When an abnormal situation arises, local officials should be able to swiftly screen all imports and identify suspicious cargo, the administration said.
Key port cities are required to fully implement disinfection, testing and information collection procedures, as well as strengthen cooperation between different departments and regions, it said.
In addition, local market regulators are required to screen all enterprises involved in handling cold imports, including importers, agricultural markets and online e-commerce platforms.
Sellers of products that test positive for the novel coronavirus will be guided to pull such products and handle problematic batches immediately, it added.
Evidence of the virus' ability to travel and survive on cold imports has accumulated in recent months. Experts have also noted that the transmission risk is mostly associated with logistics and transportation, so the possibility of consumers catching the virus from cold products is very low.
Li Ning, deputy director for the China National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment, said during a news conference held in late November that about 4.8 per 100,000 products sampled for nucleic acid testing had tested positive.
Given the potential risk, Chinese authorities have moved to intensify testing over cold-chain shipments and halt imports from foreign enterprises deemed to be at higher risk of shipping products contaminated with the virus into the country. Workers involved in handling cold imports are also undergoing regular tests.
Before the national platform's launch, a number of regions, including Zhejiang province, Beijing and Shanghai, had already launched similar, regional platforms.
---
By WANG XIAODONG | China Daily | Updated: 2020-10-28 07:14

A market supervision official inspects a seafood market in Beijing on June 16, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
The origin and flow of all imported cold-storage meat and aquatic products available on the market in Beijing will be traceable starting in November, as part of efforts to put such food under effective supervision for COVID-19 control and prevention.
All businesses dealing with imported cold chain food in the Chinese capital will be required to upload data on their products, including the origin and flow, onto a platform starting on Sunday, the Beijing Administration for Market Regulation said on Monday.
Businesses that have already established their own tracing systems should connect those with the platform, the administration said.
All imported cold-storage meat and aquatic products will be electronically coded on entering Beijing, and trace codes will be available on the packages of the products or market shelves where they are placed so consumers can scan and get information on the products, including their origin and flow.
More types of cold-storage food that are imported may be gradually covered by the tracing system in Beijing, the administration said.
Experts have suspected transmission of the novel coronavirus from meat or aquatic food products or from their packages to humans following COVID-19 outbreaks in recent months in places including Beijing and Dalian, Liaoning province, and have called for intensified supervision of such food, including establishing a tracing system to fight outbreaks at the source in case they occur.
Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an earlier interview that the novel coronavirus could survive in deep-freeze conditions for a very long time.
The China CDC confirmed this in a recent report. Researchers isolated the live novel coronavirus for the first time from a package containing imported frozen cod while tracing a COVID-19 outbreak in Qingdao, a port city in Shandong province, the center said earlier this month. Prior to the outbreak the city had not seen any domestically transmitted COVID-19 cases for several months.
The discovery confirmed that contact with packaging containing the novel coronavirus can cause infection, the China CDC said, suggesting measures be taken to control risks of the spread of the virus via polluted cold-chain products from overseas.
With the COVID-19 pandemic effectively under control in China, the spread of the coronavirus from overseas has become a major risk for epidemic control and prevention in China over the past months.
A total of 16 new confirmed COVID-19 cases were reported on the Chinese mainland on Monday, all of them from overseas, according to the National Health Commission.
In addition to Beijing, some other places across China have also intensified supervision of imported cold-storage products.
In Shanghai, the city's market regulation administration has urged all businesses dealing with cold-storage food to upload data on meat and aquatic products to the city's food safety tracing system before the end of October.
In Zhejiang province, the provincial administration for market regulation launched a tracing system for imported cold-storage food in June to supervise its flow. The system will gradually cover cold-storage food produced domestically, the administration said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/85/160384371820.jpeg
---
By AN BAIJIE in Beijing and CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-12-31 06:52

President Xi Jinping greets European leaders on Wednesday during a videoconference in which they jointly announced the conclusion of negotiations for a landmark China-European Union investment deal. China and the EU agreed "in principle" on the major investment pact. LI XUEREN/XINHUA
Pact to provide greater market access, brighter future for cooperation, Xi says
A landmark China-European Union investment deal agreed upon Wednesday night will provide greater market access for both sides and a brighter future for China-EU cooperation, President Xi Jinping said on Wednesday.
The agreement was reached "in principle" as negotiations drew to a close on the bilateral investment agreement, the negotiators said.
In a videoconference with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron, European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, Xi and the European leaders jointly announced the conclusion of the negotiations after more than seven years of talks.
The balanced, high-quality and mutually beneficial agreement demonstrates China's resolve and confidence to promote high-level opening-up, Xi said.
It will promote recovery of the world economy in the post-pandemic era, facilitate global trade and the global economy, boost the international community's confidence toward economic globalization and free trade and make important contributions to building an open world economy, he added.
The China-EU investment deal negotiations started in October 2013, aiming to reach a higher-level agreement covering investment protection and market access. The two sides held the 35th round of negotiations early this month.
Xi noted that China is dedicated to building a new development paradigm, which will bring more market opportunities and greater space for cooperation for Europe and the whole world.
Xi said he hoped the EU would promote free trade and multilateralism, and provide an open, fair and nondiscriminatory business environment for Chinese investors.
Xi pointed out that 2020 has been an extraordinary year for China, Europe and the world, with rising uncertainties given the outbreak of COVID-19 and the great changes unseen in a century.
China and Europe have overcome difficulties and made fruitful achievements in strengthening bilateral relations, he said.
China and Europe, as two major forces, two large markets and two ancient civilizations, should assume their responsibilities and be proactive in promoting global peace and progress, Xi said.
The president put forward five proposals, namely coordinating their efforts to fight against pandemics, jointly promoting recovery of the economy, connecting development strategies, promoting green development and pushing forward multilateral cooperation.
The investment treaty is a comprehensive, balanced and advanced agreement that is based on high-level international economic and trade rules, and focuses on institutional openness, the Ministry of Commerce said late on Wednesday.
The result of the negotiations covers four areasÔºçmarket access commitments, fair competition rules, sustainable development and dispute settlement, said Li Yongjie, director-general of the ministry's department of treaty and law.
The European leaders said that despite the influence of COVID-19, Europe-China communications have been strengthened this year, with a great amount of progress made, including the conclusion of a geographical indications agreement on product origins.
The conclusion of negotiations for the EU-China investment deal is a milestone for Europe-China relations, the leaders said. It will promote global economic recovery, they said, adding that it also proves that although Europe and China have disagreements on some issues, both sides have the will to enhance dialogue, deepen cooperation and achieve win-win cooperation on the basis of mutual respect.
Hailing the agreement as a high-quality deal, the European leaders said they appreciated China's efforts to boost opening-up, promote free trade and facilitate investment.
The EU appreciated China's measures in dealing with climate change and fighting pandemics, and the two sides should enhance cooperation on such issues as disease control, climate change, biological diversity, sustainable development and reform of the World Trade Organization, they said.
Jochum Haakma, chairman of Brussels-based EU-China Business Association, said the association is very happy that a decision to conclude the negotiations has been taken, and of course details will need to be hammered out in coming months and ratified by the European Parliament.
Based on the negotiations, European companies active in industries including financial services, telecommunications services and new energy vehicles would see new opportunities in China, he said.
It will be of great importance and a big step for the bilateral relationship and shows the political willingness of both parties to continue to sit down together and to try to solve problems and misunderstandings on the basis of reciprocity and a level playing field, he said.
Bernard Dewit, chairman of the Belgian-Chinese Chamber of Commerce, said the move will help to increase trade between China and the EU. European companies and investors in China will benefit from that.
Zhong Nan contributed to this story.
---
By Wang Yiqing | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-03 07:24

A woman looks at frozen food products in a supermarket following an outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Beijing, Aug 13, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Beijing authorities on Sunday launched Beijing Cold Chain, a platform to track the movement of imported frozen food to prevent and control the spread of the novel coronavirus.
With this system in place, frozen meat and aquatic products being sold in Beijing can now be tracked online. To enable that, cold chain food enterprises in Beijing are required to register on the platform and upload detailed information, such as the frozen food's place of origin and inspection information. Other frozen food-related businesses such as supermarkets, e-commerce platforms and restaurants are also required to register on the platform to make all the frozen food sold in Beijing traceable. According to the Beijing municipal administration for market regulation, beginning on Sunday there is a ban on frozen food that is not registered on the platform from being sold or purchased or served in restaurants.
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus in Beijing's Xinfadi wholesale market in June was most likely triggered by imported frozen food. In recent days, imported frozen food has tested positive for the novel coronavirus in various parts of China. Just last month, during a novel coronavirus outbreak in Qingdao, Shandong province, virus samples on the outer packing of imported frozen fish tested positive.
All these instances show that frozen food transport chains could be a channel for the virus' spread. As a result, customers are afraid of purchasing imported frozen foods even when they are safe.
The new tracking platform is expected to play a key role in arresting the spread of the novel coronavirus through the frozen food chains. It will ensure that all frozen food packs in Beijing's markets are tested for the virus. And customers can scan the QR code on the frozen food package to know the place of origin and be assured they have been tested for the virus. The move is conducive to not only preventing and controlling the spread of the coronavirus, but also reassuring customers.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/160436617203.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-11-13 01:18
Speech by H.E. Li Keqiang
Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
At the 23rd China-ASEAN Summit
November 12, 2020
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang delivers a speech at the 23rd China-ASEAN Summit at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Nov 12. [Photo/Xinhua]
Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc,
Colleagues,
It is a great pleasure to meet you all again. I would like to thank the Vietnamese government and Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc for your hard work in putting this meeting together. I look forward to our in-depth discussion on China-ASEAN cooperation and common development into the future.
This has been an unusual year for the world as COVID-19 seriously affected the development and external interactions of all countries. Either in combating the coronavirus or recovering the economy, we must stay the course of openness and cooperation. In his keynote speech at the opening ceremony of the third China International Import Expo, President Xi Jinping reaffirmed that China will join hands with all other countries to create opportunities in opening-up and tackle difficult problems through cooperation.
Since the start of COVID-19, China and ASEAN have taken the lead in conducting regional anti-epidemic cooperation. We have met online several times and discussed in-depth ways for tackling the immediate challenge. Thanks to our joint efforts, we have overcome the impact of the pandemic and resumed the growth of China-ASEAN economic cooperation and trade. In the first three quarters, China-ASEAN trade reached 481.81 billion US dollars, up by five percent year-on-year, making ASEAN China's largest trading partner. China's industry-wide foreign direct investment in ASEAN topped 10.72 billion US dollars, jumping 76.6 percent year-on-year. These figures speak volumes about the strong foundation and potential of our cooperation.
Such achievements are a further testament to the growing maturity and stability of China-ASEAN relations after three decades of development. Among ASEAN's dialogue partners, China has been number one on many fronts. China was the first to join the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, the first to forge strategic partnership with ASEAN, the first to start FTA negotiations with ASEAN, and the first to give unequivocal support for ASEAN centrality in East Asian regional cooperation. China and ASEAN working in concert has been a key underlying factor behind the strong momentum of China-ASEAN cooperation and its important role in ensuring regional stability and prosperity.
First, we have pursued the path of solidarity and development by upholding good neighborliness and friendship. China and ASEAN are permanent neighbors and close partners, and our people enjoy a deep bond of friendship. In times of adversities, from the two financial crises, to major natural disasters such as tsunamis and SARS and to the sudden onslaught of COVID-19, we have always stood together and looked out for each other in the spirit of a community with a shared future.
Second, we have pursued the path of common development by promoting win-win cooperation. China-ASEAN cooperation is open, inclusive and delivers benefits to both sides. Seeing each other's development as crucial opportunities, we have promoted integrated and interconnected development by synergizing development plans and strengthening connectivity, and advocated multilateralism and free trade. These common endeavors have made the pie of shared interests bigger; they have not only facilitated our own development, but also injected a strong impetus into the stable economic development of the region and beyond.
Third, we have pursued the path of peaceful development by adhering to dialogue and consultation. Peace and stability are the preconditions for development and prosperity. It is natural for neighbors to sometimes run into frictions. But, if handled properly, these frictions will not disrupt the course of development. We all believe that countries should respect each other, seek common ground while putting aside differences and settle differences and disputes through friendly consultations. Such shared commitments have fostered a regional environment of peace and stability.
Fourth, we have pursued the path of coordinated development by putting people first. For us, the fundamental interests of the two billion people of China and ASEAN countries are always the top-order priority. In the face of COVID-19, we have cared deeply about life and livelihood, extended a helping hand to those most in need and made joint efforts to protect the life, security and health of all our peoples. We have also facilitated practical cooperation to safeguard and enhance peoples' well-being in light of their real needs.
Colleagues,
As the pandemic continues to spread across the world, global recovery will be a difficult and tortuous process. Rising protectionism and unilateralism have put the global governance system and multilateral institutions in jeopardy. Economic and social development at the regional and international levels face serious challenges.
It is encouraging to see that the pandemic situation has largely stabilized in East Asia and is turning for the better. Countries in our region are reopening economies in an orderly manner with normalized containment measures in place. More and more positive factors indicate a steady return to economic and social progress.
Last month, the Communist Party of China (CPC) convened the Fifth Plenum of its 19th Central Committee and adopted the Recommendations of the CPC Central Committee on Formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development and the Long-Range Goals for 2035. The Recommendations proposed that China embrace a new development philosophy for high-quality development and move expeditiously to forge a new development paradigm. As China strives to expand domestic demand, we will pursue opening-up at a higher level. This will enable us to better match the two huge markets of China and ASEAN, bring out greater dynamism from within our economies, and contribute to regional economic recovery and sustainable development. As China's close economic and trading partner, ASEAN will be the first to benefit from this development strategy.
China has always regarded ASEAN as a priority in our neighborhood diplomacy. We firmly support ASEAN's community-building, support ASEAN's efforts in strengthening its centrality in regional cooperation, and support ASEAN's greater role in building an open and inclusive regional architecture.
We are ready to work with ASEAN to cement good-neighbourliness, uphold multilateralism and free trade, and push for more concrete outcomes in various areas of our cooperation by implementing the Strategic Partnership Vision 2030, and the recently finalized Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on China-ASEAN Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (2021-2025). These joint efforts will not only boost development on both sides, but also facilitate economic recovery within the region and safeguard regional and global peace and stability.
To achieve this goal, I propose that China and ASEAN work together in the following areas:
First, we need to defeat COVID-19 together and upgrade public health cooperation. As there appears to be no end in sight to the pandemic, vaccine R&D will be key to a complete victory against the virus. China is reaching out to several ASEAN countries on vaccine R&D and production cooperation, and will actively consider ASEAN countries' needs when our COVID vaccines are developed and deployed. This will be China's concrete action to promote vaccine accessibility and affordability.
China is ready to hold more "Friends of Vaccines" activities in collaboration with the ASEAN Committee in Beijing or through other channels to promote information sharing and cooperation. We would like to launch the Liaison Mechanism for Public Health Emergencies with ASEAN at an early date, earnestly implement the China-ASEAN Cooperation Program on Public Health Management, and ensure the success of the third China-ASEAN Health Cooperation Forum. We will carry out more practical cooperation projects with ASEAN, including the China-ASEAN Human Resources Training Program of Health Silk Road, the China-ASEAN Training Program for Public Health Executives and other similar programs to help ASEAN countries build capacity. We support ASEAN in establishing the COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund and the ASEAN Regional Reserve of Medical Supplies for Public Health Emergencies. China offers to lead efforts in setting up an APT reserve of essential medical supplies to pool resources from different quarters and optimize the distribution and utilization of emergency response supplies in our region. We will continue to support WHO in playing its role, enhance international cooperation and joint pandemic response, and work for a global community of health for all.
Second, we need to focus on economic cooperation and trade and boost regional economic recovery. China actively supports ASEAN in adopting and implementing the Comprehensive Recovery Framework and steadily reopening the economy. We welcome the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). It will be an important step for regional countries to uphold the multilateral trading system and build an open world economy, which is vital to deepening regional economic integration and stabilizing the global economy.
China is ready to work with ASEAN to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the full establishment of the China-ASEAN FTA and release a report on its 10-year development. Going forward, we need to further implement our free trade agreement and the upgrading protocol, and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation in the region. China will import more high-quality agricultural products from ASEAN and encourage Chinese businesses to increase investment in ASEAN. We also welcome your active participation in the 17th China-ASEAN Expo to share in our market opportunities.
China wishes to further leverage the bilateral "fast tracks" and build a regional "fast track" network. Our two sides need to further synergize the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) with ASEAN's development plans, hold the meeting of the Connectivity Cooperation Committee at an early date to discuss priority cooperation areas and projects, and steadily advance the China-Laos Railway, the China-Thailand Railway, the Jakarta-Bundung Railway and other major projects. China has completed the first stage of fund-raising of the China-ASEAN Investment Cooperation Fund II, totaling one billion US dollars. The Fund will be officially established and put into operation as soon as possible to support ASEAN's major projects in such fields as infrastructure, energy and resources, and boost regional economic and trade exchanges.
Third, we need to create highlights in digital economy and foster new sources of growth for cooperation. The importance of digital economy has been further revealed in the context of COVID-19. ASEAN has adopted the ASEAN Digital Masterplan 2025, and China is formulating a national plan on IT application for the 14th Five-Year Plan period (2021-2025). On such basis, our two sides need to leverage the opportunities of the Year of Digital Economy Cooperation to synergize digital development strategies and boost infrastructure development and transformation in this field. We need to intensify cooperation on innovation in e-commerce, smart city, big data, 5G and other areas, and promote joint R&D, technological exchanges and human resources development. In this connection, China welcomes the release of the Initiative on Building China-ASEAN Partnership on Digital Economy. Now what is needed is to work out follow-up plans to put it into practice.
China has put forward the Global Initiative on Data Security, and it would be useful for our two sides to establish a China-ASEAN Cyber Dialogue mechanism to share experience and enhance capacity building cooperation in areas such as cybersecurity and digital governance. We need to release the Plan of Action on a Closer Partnership of Science, Technology and Innovation for Future (2021-2025)as early as possible. China hopes to make the China-ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Science and Technology Cooperation a regular one and stands ready to host its second meeting in 2021 for in-depth communication and exchanges on scientific and technological innovation.
Fourth, we need to promote sustainable development and strengthen preparedness for risks. Pursuing sustainable economic and social development is our shared objective. China welcomes the decision to make 2021 the China-ASEAN Year of Sustainable Development Cooperation and stands ready to step up cooperation on ecological conservation, environmental protection, disaster prevention and mitigation, climate change, and poverty reduction. China will ensure the success of the China-ASEAN Social Development and Poverty Reduction Forum as a platform for us to share experience on digitally enabled poverty reduction. We look forward to the early adoption and implementation of the China-ASEAN Environmental Cooperation Strategy and Action Plan (2021-2025), and stand ready to hold the China-ASEAN High-level Forum on Green and Sustainable Development. We also welcome your active participation in the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP15) to be held next year in Kunming.
China welcomes the establishment of a China-ASEAN Ministers' Meeting on Disaster Management and expects the first meeting to be held as early as possible. China is ready to work with ASEAN to build a Partnership on Blue Economy. We look to work with you to put it into practice in an expeditious manner. China will make good use of the China-ASEAN Maritime Cooperation Fund and other resources to support early harvest projects in relevant fields. The Lancang-Mekong cooperation and China and BIMP-EAGA cooperation are important components of China-ASEAN cooperation. We will encourage greater synergy between these cooperation mechanisms and the New International Land-Sea Trade Corridor to help facilitate ASEAN integration and promote balanced and coordinated development of the region.
Our two sides need to further enrich cooperation in other areas. To build up cooperation on defense and non-traditional security issues, China will continue to hold the China-ASEAN Defense Ministers' Meeting, the exchange programs for Chinese and ASEAN military think tanks and young and middle-aged officers, and the joint naval exercise of China and Southeast Asian countries. We will continue to work for a direct hot line between our defense departments and will convene the second "Security for Prosperity" China-ASEAN Ministerial Dialogue on Law Enforcement and Security Cooperation in China next year.
Our two sides need to keep working closely for the approval and implementation of the Outreach Program on Revised Rules of Origin under CAFTA Upgrading Protocol and the program on building ASEAN Tourism Digital Platform, as part of Chinese assistance. Next year, China will contribute another 10 million US dollars to the China-ASEAN Cooperation Fund to support the China-ASEAN Young Leaders Scholarship and other signature projects on cultural exchanges. This will provide impetus to social and cultural cooperation, the third pillar of China-ASEAN relations.
Colleagues,
The South China Sea is the shared home for countries in the region. The situation there has on the whole been stable. This is attributable to the fact that China and ASEAN countries, bearing in mind the larger interests, have actively managed differences with the "dual-track" approach, deepened cooperation, fully and effectively implemented the DOC and steadily advanced the COC consultations.
Over the past 18 years, the DOC has served as a guide for the parties to enhance dialogue, trust and cooperation. As an upgraded version of the DOC, the COC will be a more substantive, effective and operable document that provides further institutional safeguards for peace and stability in the South China Sea. China remains firmly committed and determined to conclude the COC consultations at an early date. We call on all parties to overcome the impact of COVID-19, think creatively, and accelerate the consultations in a flexible and pragmatic way. By so doing, we will demonstrate to the international community that we have the wisdom and capability to properly manage the situation in the South China Sea and safeguard its peace and stability. China will positively consider convening face-to-face consultations in China, as soon as the COVID-19 situation allows, to advance the second reading of the COC. Safeguarding peace and stability in the South China Sea is the shared aspiration of countries in the region, and dialogue is the right way forward to resolve disputes.
Colleagues,
Next year will mark the 30th anniversary of China-ASEAN dialogue relations. Our friendship and cooperation, which is fully established, will move toward greater maturity as we both enter an important period of development. Taking the 30th anniversary as an opportunity, we proposed elevating our relations to a comprehensive strategic partnership. China will stand in solidarity with ASEAN countries to address the difficulties head on. Together, we will usher in even brighter prospects for the China-ASEAN strategic partnership and contribute even more to peace, stability, development and prosperity of the region.
Thank you.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/100/160520851133.jpeg
---
By XING YI in Shanghai | China Daily | Updated: 2020-12-04 09:02

Containers are seen at the Yangshan Deep-Water Port in Shanghai, October 19, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
China will increase the supply of containers and tighten monitoring of the shipping market to further stabilize the rising logistics costs in international trade, a government official said on Thursday.
Gao Feng, a spokesperson for the Ministry of Commerce, said during a news conference that shipments from China have played a vital role in stabilizing global supply chains and sustaining the global economy. However, some countries have been facing logistics issues due to the unequal distribution of containers, he said.
The Commerce Ministry will continue to work with related parties to provide more containers to the market, speed up the turnaround of containers, and help container manufacturers to expand productivity, the official said.
The China Container Industry Association said on Nov 27 that the surge in China's exports and the low turnaround rate of containers from abroad have triggered an increased demand for containers of China origin since July. The association has urged the manufacturers of shipping containers to ramp up production and ease the shortage of containers.
Chinese container manufacturers have already extended the normal working hours from eight hours to 11 hours, and started making 300,000 twenty-foot equivalent units every month since September.
The association said that the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on production in countries around the world and the nearing of Christmas, a peak season for export of Chinese products to Europe and the United States, were part of the reasons for the shortage of containers.
According to the Shanghai Shipping Exchange, the average China Containerized Freight Index stood at 1,198 on Nov 27, up 4.6 percent on a weekly basis. The index tracks spot and contractual freight rates from Chinese container ports for 12 shipping routes across the globe, based on data from 22 international carriers.
Shanghai has handled 238,000 TEU containers through the railway-to-port model in the past 11 months, up 79 percent compared with the same period a year ago, China Railway Shanghai Group said on Wednesday. More than 30,000 containers were handled by this mode in September, a monthly record, it said.
The multimodal transportation of containers by railway and connecting ports is being promoted as more cost-effective, safer and more environment-friendly, the group said, predicting that more than 250,000 containers will be handled through this model this year.
The increased shipping through the new transport model is just one reflection of the rebound in the total container throughputs at ports across China since the country largely controlled the COVID-19 pandemic.
According to Shanghai International Port Group, the total throughput of containers in Shanghai Port exceeded 40 million TEUs on Wednesday, marking the fourth consecutive year that the port broke the world record it set in 2017.
Nearly 15.5 million TEU containers were handled at the Tianjin Port from January to October, up 5.6 percent on a yearly basis, Tianjin Daily said in a recent report.
In southern China, the Guangzhou Port Group said it saw a container throughput of 15.8 million TEUs during the first nine months of the year, up by 1.5 percent on a yearly basis.
The surge in exports has also increased shipping rates, and containers in major freight lines have been booked up to 10 to 15 days before the shipping date, according to Guangzhou Daily.
Zhong Nan contributed to this story.
---
By WANG ZHUOQIONG | China Daily | Updated: 2020-12-12 10:45

Pop Mart's mystery box products on show during an exhibition in Beijing. ZHAO YADAN/FOR CHINA DAILY
Pop Mart International, a trendy toy maker, saw its shares rise by as much as 100 percent during its debut on the Hong Kong stock exchange on Friday and catapulted its founder Wang Ning into the billionaires' club.
Shares of the Beijing-based company opened for trading at HK$77.1 ($9.95), nearly 100 percent higher than the initial offer price of HK$38.50. The company's IPO drew strong interest from investors and its retail offering was oversubscribed by 356 times.
After its listing, Pop Mart shares had an intraday low of HK$68 and a high of HK$81.7, before closing at HK$69, putting the company's market value at HK$95.3 billion.
Wang, the 33-year-old founder of the company, holds a 55 percent stake in the firm.
The decade-old company's main product is pop toys, products with a mix of pop culture and trendy content. Each of the toys is packed randomly in a packaging box so that its contents remain hidden or unknown to sellers and consumers alike, thereby creating a sense of suspense, surprise and expectation for the buyer.
Mystery toy boxes are not new and trace their origins to Japan. But Pop Mart has taken the trend to new heights. The company's mystery boxes, each priced at about $9, are immensely popular among the younger generation of consumers.
Wang founded Pop Mart in 2010 and quickly discovered the charm of pop toys, especially the SonnyAngel, which was a big hit. He then secured the licensing rights for a toy character named Molly designed by a Hong Kong designer. Since then he has worked as an incubator for global artists and distributor for influential intellectual properties.
The intellectual property-driven company had 114 retail stores in 33 cities and 825 roboshops, or vending machines, in 57 cities across China by the end of last year. Pop Mart also owns fast-growing online channels including its Tmall flagship store and the Pop Draw mini program.
In terms of its wholesale operations, Pop Mart has 22 distributors in China and 19 in 21 overseas markets, including South Korea, Japan, Singapore and the United States.
The company has completed eight rounds of pre-IPO fundraising, receiving 958 million yuan ($146 million) from institutional investors, including Sequoia Capital China, which holds a 4.96 percent stake in the firm.
Pop Mart's revenue rose from 158.1 million yuan in 2017 to 1.68 billion yuan in 2019, with net profit growing from 1.6 million yuan to 451.1 million yuan during the period. The company said it was the largest pop toy brand in China in terms of retail value in 2019 with a market share of 8.5 percent, outpacing all other major players, including Lego and Line Friends.
This year, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, online shopping has become increasingly significant for Pop Mart. During Tmall's 2020 Singles Day shopping festival on Nov 11, Pop Mart ranked first among flagship stores of toy brands on Tmall in terms of retail value, achieving revenue of 142 million yuan, up from 82.12 million yuan in the same period a year ago.
Sinolink Securities said the pop toy market in China is valued at 20.7 billion yuan and poised to grow at an annual rate of 29.8 percent in the next five years, exceeding the growth rate of chip sector. The market is forecast to reach 60 billion yuan in the next three years.
Northeast Securities said Pop Mart has remained at the top of the market and has its own niche. With its increasingly expanded and diversified IP products, the expansion of online and offline accesses, as well as its upscale business in overseas markets, the company is set to maintain its high growth rate and long-term investment value.
Wang said earlier that his vision is to make Pop Mart a company that could become the Chinese equivalent of Disney or Netflix.
---
By YUAN HUI in Hohhot and ZHOU HUIYING | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-11-27 07:17

A passenger wearing mask is seen on a bus in the China-Russia border city of Manzhouli in North China's Inner Mongolia autonomous region, on April 14, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
The coronavirus clusters that have sprung up in communities in Manzhouli in the Inner Mongolia autonomous region, have been identified as being triggered by imported infection based on the latest research on the virus' origins, the local government said.
The genetic sequencing on the first two confirmed cases reported in the city on Saturday, a middle-aged couple, showed that their type of the novel coronavirus belonged to Branch I of the European L genotype, and the following comparison showed it was highly similar to the strain that spread in Russia, said Wang Wenrui, director of the Inner Mongolia autonomous region disease control and prevention center, on Thursday.
"It indicated that the latest outbreak in the city was triggered by imported coronavirus infections," Wang said, adding that investigations on other confirmed cases will also be conducted.
The city reported nine new confirmed cases of COVID-19 on Thursday, increasing the tally to 11. It also reported another asymptomatic case and a suspected case, according to the city's health authority.
"Among the universal screening of the 203,326 residents in the city starting from Sunday to Wednesday, we found 10 positive cases," Guo Xiaofang, deputy mayor of Manzhouli, said at a news conference on Thursday.
"Among them, there are family members, classmates, teachers and neighbors in the same residential communities, from ages 10 to 62," said Wang Hongquan, director of the Manzhouli disease control and prevention center. "The cases have obvious characteristics of cluster infections."
After the outbreak, Manzhouli has adopted strict measures to control the spread, including locking down six residential communities in two medium-risk areas for COVID-19 since Saturday evening, and conducting strict inspections on vehicles and travelers in and out of the city, according to the government.
Several flights between Manzhouli and other cities, including Beijing, Tianjin, Harbin and Hohhot, have been canceled, Manzhouli Xijiao Airport announced on Saturday. Bus and railway services for passengers were suspended to keep people from gathering and spreading the coronavirus.
In addition to the strict measures adopted in Manzhouli due to the recent outbreak, other cities have tightened regular management especially regarding cold-chain food, which has been considered the virus source of the recent outbreak in Tianjin.
In Beijing, Xinfadi wholesale market, which supplies more than 80 percent of the capital's agricultural produce, has disposed of all of its cold-chain food including seafood and frozen meat, local media reported on Wednesday.
According to staff at the market, it will strengthen the management of its cold storage to ensure safety under the current COVID-19 epidemic condition.
Large-scale nucleic acid testing will be carried out for all workers in the cold-chain food industry as well as those who live with them, said officials at a conference on Wednesday.
Du Juan in Beijing contributed to the story.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/2/160643681282.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-11-19 07:16

Disease control and prevention workers collect samples from frozen products in Tianjin's Nankai district on Nov 9. [Photo/China Daily]
Nation's lockdown, testing measures become more targeted after fine-tuning
Stringent monitoring of cold-chain food imports and the fine-tuning of lockdown and testing strategies are China's latest weapons in the battle against COVID-19 as the country braces for possible outbreaks this winter.
While local transmission of the novel coronavirus has been under control for months, public health experts in China have highlighted the risk of new outbreaks linked to the virus hitching a ride on imports of frozen foods.
As domestic life and production return to normal, experts have hailed local governments' efforts to replace blanket lockdowns and citywide tests with more targeted and economical measures to reduce disruption to socioeconomic development.
"A growing body of evidence shows that frozen seafood or meat products are likely to bring the virus from severely affected countries into China," said Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Wu made the comment last week in an article posted on the website of the Communist Party of China Central Commission for Discipline Inspection.
"The discovery has prompted customs officials to step up testing on imports, and prompted local market regulators and health authorities to tighten supervision over the cold-chain sector."
In an interview with China Newsweek last month, Wu said virus transmission risks from contaminated seafood imports are likely to be greater than those from incoming passengers.
Since June, at least three major outbreaks have been linked to frozen imports, said Feng Zijian, deputy director of the China CDC, during a recent interview.
That includes the Beijing outbreak in June with 335 confirmed cases, the outbreak in Dalian, Liaoning province, in late July with 92 confirmed cases and the outbreak in Qingdao, Shandong province, in October that resulted in 14 confirmed cases.
Excluding a major outbreak in Urumqi, Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region, that saw over 800 confirmed cases, the three outbreaks account for nearly 85 percent of domestic cases since June, according to the National Health Commission. The source of infections in Urumqi is still under investigation.
Concerns linked to cold-chain food imports are bound to rise as cargo shipments into China increase, according to Zhang Wenhong, head of the infectious disease department at Fudan University's Huashan Hospital in Shanghai.
"Land ports and international airports in China will need to cope with the risk," he said.
Wu said virus control in the cold-chain sector entails three layers of testingÔºçsamples of imported goods and their outer packaging, samples taken from vehicles and cold-storage facilities and testing of workers involved in handling such products.
The tests are being implemented regularly nationwide and have begun to pay off through timely alerts.
CDC officials in Nanjing, Jiangsu province, said on Nov 10 that they managed to block and seal some cold-chain imports from entering the market after shipments from Argentina tested positive for the virus during a routine test.
Then, from Friday to Monday, local governments in nine regions said they had detected the virus on cold-chain food imports or their packaging, resulting in the immediate shutdown of affected facilities and the sealing of contaminated products.
He Peng, a spokesman for the Tianjin Health Commission, said at a recent news conference that a local dockworker was confirmed to have contracted the virus after a routine test of frozen pork from Germany tested positive.
"We must adhere to the principle of fending off risks carried by both products and people, especially workers coming into contact with cold-chain food," he said. "Their health is the basis for blocking contaminated food products."
On Nov 9, the State Council released a guideline requiring thorough disinfection of cold-chain imports after collecting samples for testing and urging the establishment of tracking systems.
On Monday, the Ministry of Transport published another guideline urging all companies, docks and freight terminals involved in cold-chain logistics to protect their front-line employees by enforcing safety protocols, monitoring their temperatures and conducting nucleic acid testing. It also stressed the importance of the strict and regular disinfection of transportation equipment and vehicles.
Wu, from the CDC, said, "Instead of imposing a reckless and simple ban on all imported food, China has decided to integrate management of cold-chain products into regular disease control work and mitigate risks to the lowest possible level."
He said the State Council guideline is aimed at ensuring the safety of cold-chain food and safeguarding people's health while increasing the efficiency of customs clearance and securing the stability of the industry chain.
Similar efforts aimed at striking a balance between curbing the virus and continuing the pace of economic recovery are part of adjustments to the scope and duration of long-standing epidemic control measures.
A medical worker in protective suit collects a throat swab from a woman at a nucleic acid testing site in Qingdao, Shandong province, on Oct 13, 2020. [Photo/China Daily]
Different lockdowns
Feng, the CDC deputy director, said community lockdowns imposed nowadays are "distinctly different "from those in Wuhan early this year.
"Lockdowns are more precise now, affecting smaller areas and having less impact on society, though the goal remains the same: to reduce population-mixing," he said.
When Tianjin detected three local infections among cold-chain workers this month, the city upgraded virus risk levels from low only to medium in three areas where the confirmed patients and several asymptomatic individuals worked and lived. Mass testing covered only residents in medium-risk areas and all cold-chain workers in the city.
Zhang Diyuan, a program developer in Tianjin's Xiqing district, about 100 kilometers from the affected cold-chain facilities, said the new cases did not affect his life at all.
"I'm in favor of such an accurate designation of risks," he said. "As a Tianjin resident, I see no need to expand lockdown areas."
When the Beijing government was dealing with the outbreak in June, the launch of a citywide testing campaign covering all 20 million residents of the capital was initially proposed, Wu said.
"The campaign was called off after screening 10 million because an additional 10 million tests would not detect any more cases and would pile on unnecessary costs," Wu told China Newsweek.
"Other cities should use the science-based and refined method. Large-scale tests should revolve around the origin of confirmed infections and be called off when no new cases can be found."
Zhang, from Shanghai, said during a forum last week that even though the virus continues its rampage worldwide and China has largely stamped out local transmission, there is no need to sever communication with the outside world.
"We should maintain a certain degree of international cargo and personnel exchange while properly managing risks stemming from imported cases," he said.
To reach the goal, Zhang underscored the importance of fever clinics being able to detect suspected cases and send alerts swiftly, as well as the ability of public health workers to track down close contacts.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/69/160574496261.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/99/160574496268.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU in Beijing and YANG CHENG in Tianjin | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-10 07:29

A worker disinfects packaged cold-chain food to be exhibited at the third China International Import Expo in Shanghai on Oct 29. The expo concluded on Tuesday. [Photo provided to China Daily]
China is doubling down on efforts to stem the transmission of the novel coronavirus through imported cold products, requiring thorough disinfection of such shipments before they come into contact with domestic workers.
The heightened precautions were announced in a notice, released by the State Council's Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism on Monday, after Tianjin reported a confirmed case of COVID-19Ôºça worker at a local frozen food companyÔºçon Sunday. A string of domestic infection clusters this year have been linked to cold-chain imported food.
With regular nucleic acid tests in place on imported cold goods and workers involved in handling them, the notice highlights the significance of comprehensive disinfection of storage facilities, transport vehicles and packages of the products.
Sellers of cold-chain imported food must present disinfection certificates before their products are allowed to enter the market, according to the document.
In order to reduce disruption to normal logistics and supplies, disinfection should be carried out after nucleic acid samples from overseas products are collected, and should be conducted only once in most cases, it said.
"Disinfection service providers should record their work in detail and the records and paperwork should be kept for at least two years," it added.
The document also stresses improving the capability of tracing the origin and flow of cold-storage products and investigating and holding shipments from unspecified sources.
"The goal is to be safe, efficient, speedy and economical," it said. "While ensuring the safety of imported cold products, we are also aiming to increase efficiency during customs clearance, avoid backlogs and secure the stability of the industry chain."
Global experts have long suspected the virus' ability to travel and be transmitted through cold-chain products, but evidence has not been easy to nail down.
The Chinese mainland has detected at least 16 cases involving frozen imports testing positive for the presence of the novel coronavirus since July, prompting customs officials to ramp up supervision over foreign goods and suspend imports from a number of manufacturers.
In October, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention said it isolated living novel coronavirus on the outer packaging of frozen food when investigating the source of an outbreak in Qingdao, Shandong province. The discovery, a world first, proved that contact with frozen food packaging contaminated by live virus could cause infection.
Later that month, a Chinese research team consisting of university researchers and CDC experts concluded from epidemiologic history and data analysis that the outbreak that took place in Beijing in June was likely to have been triggered by imported seafood, and cold-chain transportation could be a new route of transmission for the virus.
The confirmed patient in Tianjin is a loading dock worker who handled frozen pork from Germany that arrived in Tianjin on Oct 19. The shipment, part of which was sent to Shandong, tested positive for the virus on Saturday.
The Tianjin government said on Monday evening that it found a new asymptomatic patient on MondayÔºça truck driver who lugged goods from a frozen storage cluster in the city's Binhai New Area on Thursday. The patient with the previously confirmed case also worked there but handled a different set of goods.
Gu Qing, deputy director of the Tianjin Health Commission, said two areas in the Binhai New Area would be classified as a medium-risk region starting on Monday midnight. Other parts of the city remained at low-risk.
All 70,000-plus residents of the medium-risk area will take nucleic acid tests overnight and those who intend to leave for essential reasons must present nucleic acid test results taken within seven days, he added.
Liang Chunzao, deputy director of the Binhai area, said all 364 workers at the affected cold storage cluster have been tracked down and their test results were negative.
The area is home to 39 cold storage facilities, housing 126,000 metric tons of cold-chain products, according to Liang.
"We have assembled a joint testing team in order to complete nucleic acid tests on all cold imports as soon as possible," she said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/41/160496718543.jpeg
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | China Daily | Updated: 2020-06-15 07:31

People line up for nucleic acid testing on Sunday at Beijing Youan Hospital, a few kilometers away from Xinfadi wholesale market, which is linked to the latest COVID-19 outbreak. CHEN HAO/FOR CHINA DAILY
Mutated strain that caused outbreak appears to have European origins
Experts said it is extremely unlikely for seafood like salmon to be the carrier of the novel coronavirus, which was found on cutting boards for imported salmon at Beijing's Xinfadi wholesale market, China's new hot spot of COVID-19 infection.
Beijing reported 36 new domestically transmitted cases on Saturday, all having direct or indirect links to Xinfadi market, the biggest wholesale food and vegetable market for the city. The market has been shut down to curb the spread of COVID-19.
Zeng Guang, a senior researcher at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Sunday that, based on preliminary analysis of the two early cases, the coronavirus strain in the latest outbreak is different from the ones found in China, and early data suggest it is a mutated variety from Europe.
However, Zeng stressed that people should take this finding with a grain of salt as more testing is being conducted to confirm the origin of virus.
Wu Zunyou, the chief epidemiologist at the CDC, said in a statement on Saturday that fish in their natural habitat cannot catch coronavirus, however, they can be contaminated by workers during capture or transportation.
China imports about 80,000 tons of cooled and frozen salmon each year, according to news site Jiemian.com. Chile, Norway, the Faeroe Islands, Australia and Canada are the main sources of salmon imports.
Wu said that it cannot be concluded that salmon is the source of infection just because novel coronavirus was detected on cutting boards.
"Our seafood products are typically stored and transported in cold containers, thus it is possible for the virus to be preserved for a long time and increase the likelihood of infecting people," he said.
Wu said Beijing's new outbreak could have two possible explanations. The first may be the influx of meat and seafood to the market from all over the country and around the world. Some of it may have been contaminated by workers during processing and transportation, then the virus jumped from produce to people.
The second possibility is person-to-person transmission. "The infected person who brought the virus into the market might be asymptomatic or have very mild symptoms, and the hustle and bustle of the market led to the cluster of new infections," he said.
Wu said there is no need to panic as Beijing has moved swiftly to contain the outbreak. "The know-how accumulated over the last few months, and with the use of advanced technologies like big data, has served us well in our contact tracing and diagnosis initiatives," he said.
"The valuable information we are collecting will be instrumental in Beijing's prevention efforts, and may even reveal new insights into the mysteries of the virus' mode of transmission," he added.
Gao Xiaojun, spokesman for the Beijing Health Commission, said on Saturday that of the 40 environmental samples collected from the market that were later tested to contain the virus, only some came from salmon cutting boards.
A preprint study by the University College London last month found that the novel coronavirus strain can infect humans and a broad range of mammals, but not fish, birds or reptiles.
In April, a study published on the journal Asian Fisheries Science stated that the novel coronavirus is a type of betacoronavirus that can only infect mammals. Moreover, the virus mostly impacts the respiratory system, which most fish do not have. This means the virus is extremely unlikely to infect and multiply in fish.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/26/159218696837.jpeg
---
By ZHONG NAN and LIU ZHIHUA | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-09-29 07:24

Employees make auto parts at a foreign-funded company in Anshan, Liaoning province. YAO JIANFENG/XINHUA
Foreign companies that have long been a thriving part of China's economy and strong supporters of global supply chains are finding fresh momentum from the improved market access in the nation and the ongoing efforts to create a more transparent and free business environment.
At his speech delivered during the 2020 China International Fair for Trade in Services earlier this month, President Xi Jinping said that a review of human history shows that the world economy thrives in openness and withers in seclusion, and that China will stay committed to further opening up.
Measures mentioned by Xi include the establishment of a sound negative list management system in cross-border services trade, the advancement of constructing open platforms for piloting innovative development of trade in services, the easing of market access in the service sector, and the active expansion of quality services imports.
Xi also stressed on raising the level of opening up in an all-around manner, and building higher-level new institutions for the open economy, while chairing a symposium on economic and social work in Beijing in late August.
Many opportunities are also arising from China's new policy measures introduced this year to stimulate consumption, attract global capital, boost both goods and services trade to mitigate the COVID-19 epidemic effect and support its early economic recovery.
Foreign direct investment in the Chinese mainland grew by 18.7 percent on a yearly basis to 84.13 billion yuan ($12.3 billion) in August, the fifth successive month of positive growth, according to the latest data released by the Ministry of Commerce.
FDI inflows amounted to 619.78 billion yuan in the first eight months, up 2.6 percent year-on-year.
In order to assess the effect of many challenges facing businesses going forward, the American Chamber of Commerce in South China conducted a comprehensive study involving 172 companies from Aug 28 to Sept 8.
The survey found that about 90 percent of the respondents, regardless of origin, had a positive outlook for the second half of this year. These companies, including those from Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Spain, the United Kingdom, France, Japan and the United States displayed a strong willingness to continue to grow and expand in China.
Over 78 percent of companies said they no longer face difficulties with the supply chain, up 46 percent since March 12, when the chamber released its report on the effect of COVID-19 on the supply chain in China.
Global business leaders said that building on the effective containment of the pandemic, China has rigorously rolled out a string of measures to stabilize foreign trade and investment. China, with its excellent economic resilience and potential, will remain an attractive investment destination for global investors, said the survey.
Alfonso Alba, country division head for Bayer Crop Science in China, said the company is optimistic about the good business environment and innumerable market opportunities in China, one of the most important global markets for the company.
"We appreciate China for its excellent supply chain management and good economic recovery during the pandemic, which has provided strong support for us to conduct regular business in the Chinese market and ensure the supply of products and services," he said.
Alba said Bayer has a long-term development strategy and market commitment in China, and will continue to invest in innovation, sustainability and digital transformation. China's agriculture has entered a stage of high-quality development and his company will keep pace with this trend, he said.
The German company to date boasts about 80 plant protection products in five categories that can prevent and control major diseases, pests and weeds. It also develops and markets conventional vegetable and corn seeds for Chinese farmers through its wholly-owned subsidiary and a joint venture.
In terms of new market opportunities, he said Bayer regards digital technology as one of the key areas. Digital farming plays an essential role in the high-quality development of agriculture in China, and it is also the global innovation direction of Bayer Crop Science.
Woody Guo, president of Herbalife Nutrition China and senior vice-president of the US-based nutrition company Herbalife Nutrition, said the company enjoyed double-digit growth in sales on a yearly basis in China during the first and second quarters of this year despite COVID-19, thanks to the growing demand for high-quality health products in China.
The company has accelerated its new product launches in China since the second half of 2019, and expects to double the same in the next five years.
Its first product innovation center globally, the Herbalife Nutrition Product Innovation Center, will be launched by end of the year in Shanghai. With investments totaling 100 million yuan, the center will enable the company to rapidly transform the cutting-edge scientific and technological achievements in nutrition science into nutritional products, Guo said.
Wilson Ho, vice-president and managing director of SAS China, part of the US-based analytics firm, said the company has always been optimistic about the Chinese market and has full confidence in China's economic development prospects.
"SAS mainly serves analytics applications in various industries, especially as we are passing through a special phase this year. However, business data show that the pandemic had little effect on SAS' business in China in the first half of the year. In fact our business in China managed to see some improvements," he said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/1/160134495268.jpeg
---
By Paul Stapleton | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-03-24 09:47
An US Customs and Border Protection police officer talks to a driver as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak continues, at Paso del Norte International Border bridge as taken from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, 23 March 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Politicians in the United States have been defying proposals by the World Health Organization and diplomatic norms by repeatedly and intentionally calling the novel coronavirus a "Chinese virus".
Their whimsical renaming is unfortunate for several reasons, not the least of which is to take the focus off the pandemic while also needlessly attributing blame.
As everyone knows, the outbreak started in Wuhan, Hubei province.
Until now, viruses that have reached the public consciousness have not been given a name associated with a country of origin, but rather the animal that is thought to have been the origin or was especially damagedÔºçfor example, swine or bird fluÔºçor a scientific name such as SARS or H1N1.
The Spanish flu from 1918, which did not originate in Spain, is the one exception to this norm.
The WHO has exercised scientific means in naming the disease COVID-19. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses has its entrenched mechanisms for the classification and nomenclature of viruses, which led to the naming of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
US politicians' renaming of the virus fits well with their overall modus operandi, which is to use a strategy of diversion through blaming and name calling to hide their mismanagement over the past weeks.
By attacking the United States' main political competitor through labeling of the virus, they apparently hope to attribute blame to China, while drawing attention away from the abysmal job the US administration has done in preventing the country from suffering the worst effects of the pandemic.
Until recently, US politicians had been quite dismissive about the dangers that COVID-19 posed. And many Americans are pointing fingers at the administration for what they see as slow and ineffective responses long after the WHO issued warnings to all nations.
Even as little as a week or two ago, the White House was claiming that "everything is under control", which gave Americans a false sense of security while undermining the gravity of the situation. Now with the stock market crashing and COVID-19 cases rising exponentially, the US situation is anything but under control.
The blame game of US politicians in tweets and news briefings of past days has prompted the National Basketball Association's Asian-American star Jeremy Lin to take them to task: "Can you honestly tell me there is ZERO anti-Chinese sentiment in all his (US President Donald Trump's) characterizations of the virus? Can you honestly tell me Asians aren't being unfairly physically attacked today in the US?"
Now is not the time for blaming. When all is said and done and we are either immune from the virus, having acquired it and recovered, or have acquired immunity through a yet-to-be-formulated vaccine, the time will have come for a grand reckoning.
One should bear in mind that although the flu pandemic of 1918-19 is now known as the Spanish flu, there are indications its origin was a pig farm in the US state of Kansas.
The bigger picture here is that these terrible pandemics arise from our physical contact with animals, both wild and domestic, both East and West. And this has led to the deplorable treatment of animals, as if they are commodities.
Now that the animals have gotten their revenge, if and when a grand reckoning about the present pandemic takes place in months or a year or two from now, leaders need to seriously reconsider our whole model of animal husbandry. Treating animals better is surely one of the key steps toward preventing the next outbreak.
The author is a Hong Kong-based scholar who comments on local and environmental issues.The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/43/158502257104.jpeg
---
By Andy Heng | China Daily | Updated: 2020-10-10 07:42

Photo taken on May 3, 2018 shows Tiananmen Square in Beijing. [Photo/VCG]
Three years ago, at the invitation of Indonesia's consul general to Guangzhou, I gave a talk on "China's Economy in 2050" at the Ritz-Carlton Guangzhou, which was attended among others by 44 consuls general. I framed the talk drawing from three major trends of China over the past three decades, and focused on three areasÔºçgrowing regional and international trade; emphasis on education, including the revival of classics; and the proliferation of communications technology exemplified by enterprises such as Alibaba and Tencent.
Trade, classics and the press (Gutenberg), the parallels between today's China and 15th century Europe are too prominent to miss. As China is experiencing its own renaissance, I was optimistic about China's economy in 2050.
What I did not expect was the dynamic interactions following the speech. Some questioned the possibility of China undergoing "reformation" following a Chinese "renaissance", while others were convinced that China's economic rise has benefited the region.
One consul general said that I had missed out the critical factor that helped spread Renaissance from Florence to Venice and beyond: the Black Death of 1347-51 which affected Europe and Asia, including China. Whatever the place of origin of the plague which claimed millions of lives, the traveling merchants, bankers and militia groups along the ancient Silk Road were the catalysts. The consul general's conclusion was that the fates of Europe and China were bound together for better or for worse, and it was always business that stood in between these crossroads.
What acerbic wisdom?
Against this backdrop and the daily feeds of current geopolitical reads, the question on how to approach China through trade and diplomacy is worth reflecting. Conversely, China needs to win friends from Asia to Europe, especially in critical times like these. Reversing the order of 2016-17, based on the figures from January to July this year, ASEAN is the number one trading partner of China followed by the European Union and the United States.
Also, for the first two quarters of this year, China was the biggest export market for Germany. Even Temasek has made China its top investment venue, with underlying exposures of 8.7 billion Singapore dollars ($65.28 billion), which account for nearly one-third of the fund's global investment portfolio.
As for Beijing, it is on the move to win new friends and consolidate old friendships. On Aug 24, in a videoconference with leaders of Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam, Premier Li Keqiang promised to accord priority to providing COVID-19 vaccines. The same day, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi embarked on a weeklong visit to Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, France and Germany to promote global trade, technology cooperation, and multilateralism. Earlier, on Aug 18, Yang Jiechi, China's top diplomat, visited Singapore, followed by trips to Spain and Greece in early September.
It appears China is taking a page out of the diplomatic playbook of the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644).
Emperor Yongle commissioned seven sea voyages between 1405 and 1433 through Malacca, India, the Strait of Hormuz and the Malindi Bay near Mombasa, Kenya. Led by Zheng He, a Chinese Muslim, the Chinese fleet in 1405 had 317 vessels carrying 70 eunuchs, 180 medical personnel, five astrologers, 300 soldiers and 26,800 other personnel. Through these voyages, China conducted trade with 30 countries, bringing back visitors, gifts and what John King Fairbank called "scientific curiosities" such as giraffes. Unlike Vasco da Gama's objectives of gold, glory and the Gospel, Zheng He's purpose was primarily commercial and to ensure national security.
On the other hand, there is the story of the Jesuits who traveled to China during the late 16th century, especially that of Matteo Ricci (1552-1610), an Italian priest who spent 28 years in China. Ricci lived in Zhaoqing, Guangzhou, Nanchang, Nanjing and Beijing, making friends with people from all sections of society including high-ranking officials. With the help of three such officialsÔºçXu Guangqi, Yang Tingyun and Li ZhizaoÔºçRicci and some other Jesuits translated Confucian works such as The Great Learning and "exported" them to Europe.
The collaboration and knowledge transmission between Ricci and Xu helped China to grow potatoes in Shanghai and Tianjin, control floods and eradicate locusts in many places, shape its worldview, and correct its calendar.
In fact, the ties between China and Europe were so strong that the Jesuits survived the transition from the Ming Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911) and flourished in the country till about 1724. The friendship between China and Europe resulted in knowledge transfer, technology sharing, enriching cultural ties, and regional stability.
How to win friends and influence people? This could be on top of the agenda for today's diplomatic and business worlds, from Beijing to Bangkok to Brussels. But, unfortunately, there is a sense of declining neighborliness. China's good Samaritan gestures of supplying medicines, medical equipment and face masks to other countries have been labeled "face-mask diplomacy", which hints at Beijing's "increasingly controlling" attitude.
But while China needs a better way to tell its story, other countries should also seize the chance to develop friendship and trade ties with China.
The author is the general manager of a foreign bank in Guangzhou. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/53/160228833809.jpeg
---
By Zhong Nan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-09-30 09:14

A Vesuvius employee works on a ceramics production line in Anshan, Liaoning province, in April. [Photo/Xinhua]
Economist sees new biz models, digitalization and growing market as game-changers
New business models, deepening of the opening-up policy and the growing size of the domestic market will all encourage multinational corporations to continue to bet big on China for long-term success, said a senior economist.
Gu Xueming, president of the Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation, which is under the Ministry of Commerce, said 4G-and 5G-based digital infrastructure is a solid foundation that facilitates rapid growth of artificial intelligence, big data and diversified online services.
China's fast-growing digital economy has sharpened the country's competitive edge in industry and created favorable conditions for foreign companies to invest in more areas.
Consumer demand for goods and services has contributed about 60 percent to China's economic growth in recent years, especially in the areas of services, high-end products and personalized consumption, he said.
This has offered a broad market space for various types of Chinese and foreign companies operating in China as well as overseas, he said.
He made the remarks following China's newly placed emphasis on the "dual-circulation" development pattern.
The said pattern underlines that internal economic circulation will be the mainstay of economic growth from now on even as the domestic and external markets complement each other.
Foreign direct investment in the Chinese mainland grew 18.7 percent on a yearly basis to 84.13 billion yuan ($12.3 billion) in August.
In August, the monthly growth in FDI in the Chinese mainland also rose for the fifth successive month, according to Commerce Ministry data.
FDI inflows in the first eight months reached to 619.78 billion yuan, up 2.6 percent year-on-year.
Given Chinese consumers' strong spending power, expanding middle-income group, comprehensive support for industry, advanced services and logistics networks, the country's potential for attracting FDI will continue to expand over the next three years, Gu said.
"It's worth noting the rate of utilization of foreign capital in China's high-tech industry continues to soar, and foreign-funded enterprises have invested more in this sector," said Gu.
What is powering this transformation is the country's policy to pursue high-quality growth, he said.
The process of economic globalization has been hindered in recent times, which is a challenge, he said.
The rise of unilateralism and protectionism has been impeding internationalization of corporates. This has weakened the resolve of certain developed countries to reform the global governance system, he said.
These factors have seriously disrupted the global economic order, and growth of the world's business is facing greater downward pressure these days, he said.
In Gu's view, the Chinese economy will still grow rapidly in a long run. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic will not significantly affect the mid-to long-term prospects of the economy.
"Since the reform and opening-up policy has laid a solid foundation for an open economy, China will still be in a period of rapid advancement in industrialization and urbanization," he said, noting the huge demand potential will provide continuous impetus to global businesses.
"Therefore, the opportunities outweigh the challenges on the whole and we should be confident in confronting the challenges," said Gu.
A comprehensive study involving 172 companies, conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce in South China from Aug 28 to Sept 8, showed that about 90 percent of the respondent companies, regardless of their origin, hold a positive outlook on China for the second half of this year.
The survey found that companies with global operations, including those from Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, the United Kingdom, Spain, France, the United States and Japan, are unwavering in their commitment to seeking future growth via business expansion in China.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/66/160143137497.jpeg
---
By Zhu Lixin in Hefei, Zhang Xiaomin in Dalian, Liaoning and Hu Dongmei in Yinchuan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-08-18 19:01
Frozen seafood products made of imported shrimps are seen inside a sealed freezer at a supermarket in Beijing, on June 19, 2020. [File photo/Agencies]
Wuhu, Anhui province has banned sales of all imported cold-chain food after reporting a positive coronavirus test on frozen shrimp imported from Ecuador, Wuhu Daily reported on Tuesday.
The packaging of the shrimp tested positive for coronavirus on Aug 11 after being collected from a local restaurant.
The ban took effect on Monday even though 5,173 samples tested since Aug 11 were all negative, according to the report. Those samples came from food, the environment and people.
Testing of everyone working in the frozen food import sector in the city was completed by Monday, with no positive result.
Sales of the imported frozen food products were banned, and such products found in the city would be destroyed, the report quoted the city's pandemic control office as saying.
Meanwhile, Dalian, Liaoning province, which has also found coronavirus in recent weeks, urged all cold-chain food production enterprises, markets, businesses trading in aquatic products and meat and catering services to carry out tests of all related personnel, materials and environment, an official said at a news conference on Tuesday.
Every shipment of imported aquatic products and meat should be tested before storage, and every shipment should be tested before leaving the factory, the official said, adding that related employees and environments should be tested every two weeks in Dalian.
As a port city, Dalian processes a large volume of cold food for import and export, and there are many places for production, processing, storage and trade in the city, said Wang Wentao, deputy director of the city's market supervisory bureau.
To further strengthen the prevention and control of coronavirus infections in the cold-chain food sector, Dalian vowed to ensure that such food is traceable and that it would prevent products of unknown origin or risk of contamination from entering the market.
Previously, the Ningxia Hui autonomous region banned imports of seafood and other meats starting on July 23.
Tian Fengnian, a health expert and director of the region's command office for COVID-19 pandemic control, said people do not need to panic over the recent reports of positive test results on imported cold-chain food across the country.
Authorities in Wuhu said the city remains a low-risk area for COVID-19 and reminded residents to continue personal protective measures including wearing a mask.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/159775922465.jpeg
---
By GABRIEL WONG | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-09-14 08:15

MA XUEJING/CHINA DAILY
Thanks to the booming opportunities created by the Belt and Road Initiative, the transforming globalization trend, and the changing geopolitical landscape and global economic and trade environment, an increasing number of enterprises, including multinational enterprises with significant presence in China, are reviewing and optimizing their supply chains. These enterprises are evaluating the advantages of relocating and/or expanding their production units from China to Southeast Asian countries with the aim of benefiting from a diversified manufacturing base and expanded market outreach.
Among the Southeast Asian countries, Vietnam, with a population of 96.5 million, is one of the fastest growing economies and poised for robust growth. Although Vietnam is projected to grow only 2.7 percent this year, due to the novel coronavirus pandemic, it is expected to rebound quickly and register GDP growth of 7.5 percent in 2021.
The trend of low value-added manufacturing, notably for consumer electronics, and part of the manufacturing process of multinational companiesÔºçparticularly those based in Japan and the Republic of Korea such as Sony, Panasonic and SamsungÔºçshifting production from China to Southeast Asian countries has been reinforced by the Sino-US trade frictions. The trade frictions have prompted many companies from China and other countries to remodel and optimize their supply chains to avoid the tariffs the United States administration has threatened to impose on goods made in China.
In fact, foreign direct investment from China to Vietnam in 2019 exceeded $2 billionÔºçdouble the figure since the US triggered the trade frictionsÔºçand is forecast to increase continuously.
However, China still plays a major role in the high value-added and sophisticated product manufacturing, where the production, especially final assembly process requires advanced automation and flexible manufacturing capability, areas in which China enjoys an advantage compared with Southeast Asian countries. This fact is based on our observations and discussions with senior executives of many multinational enterprises.
While leveraging the massive domestic market demand and abundant labor supply, many Chinese manufacturers have managed to operate at a good economy of scale and survive even by making niche products or serving niche markets. Due to the continuous supply of a full range of parts at competitive cost in China, a number of the multinationals are moving only part, not all, of their manufacturing to Southeast Asian countriesÔºçjust to benefit from the cheaper labor cost and "country of origin" label. They will then ship these semi-finished products back to China for final assembly.
According to the 2020 China Business Survey and Report jointly issued by PricewaterhouseCoopers China and the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai in September, of the more than 200 respondents that run or outsource manufacturing operations in China, 70.6 percent said they did not intend to shift production out of China, 14 percent said were moving some of the production process to a non-US location such as a Southeast Asian country, Mexico or India, and only 3.7 percent said they were moving some production to the US.
In the survey, we also asked the senior executives to identify the reasons for reassessing and reducing their investment in 2020.Unsurprisingly, 31.2 percent of them said it was because of the impact of the pandemic, which has exposed the relative complexity and vulnerability of the global supply chains because of lean production.
Consequently, the supply chains are being assessed on their agility and flexibility rather than just by cost-effectiveness. Although manufacturing in China was hit by the pandemic in the first half of 2020, the determination and effectiveness of the Chinese government in handling the COVID-19 pandemicÔºçwhich led to the strong rebound of business activities, in particular, the 10.4 percent export growth in July 2020 compared with the 2.02 percent average growth of other Asian countriesÔºçdemonstrates the resilience of China's supply chains.
In addition, China's highly developed transportation infrastructure and logistics industry facilitate just-in-time manufacturing and highly efficient production, driving down the total production cost, shortening the time-to-market and enhancing overall customer satisfaction. Also, China's efficient and compact energy and public utility sectors offer a stable and uninterrupted energy supply to the manufacturing units and thus help them to grow. In comparison, the infrastructure and energy sectors in a lot of Southeast Asian countries are relatively less developed and therefore cannot claim overall production efficiency and competitive advantage.
To become a strong player in manufacturing, a country needs to develop heavy industry for machine tools. In China, heavy industry is highly developed and capable of manufacturing different products using machine tools across a wide range of industries. While the industrial development of Southeast Asia has been rapid in the last few years, their production capacity for high-end industrial products remains relatively low, which could slow their pace of catching up with China in industrial development.
As such, Southeast Asia is unlikely to fully replace China as a global manufacturing hub in the near future. Instead, the region is more likely to supplement China. Relying on its advantages of the economy of scale, industrial and digital infrastructure, heavy industry, and advanced science and R&D, China is developing into a sustainable economy that will transition to a high value-added manufacturing base supported by advanced assembly lines.
However, Southeast Asian countries will get huge economic growth opportunities because of the relocation of part of the manufacturing process from China. The synergy between China and Southeast Asia will help the two sides play complementary roles in producing end deliverables, low-to high-end production, competitive production process of a wide range of products, and benefit from shorter time to market.
Moving forward, China and Southeast Asian economies can come together to form an interconnected "China-Southeast Asia "industrial region and become an expanded "global factory" to collectively increase the importance of Asia in global industrial manufacturing.
The author is head of China Corporate Finance, Inbound/Outbound Leader and Belt and Road Leader at PricewaterhouseCoopers China. The author contributed this article to China Watch, a think tank powered by China Daily. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
If you have a specific expertise and would like to contribute to China Daily, please contact us at opinion@chinadaily.com.cn  , and comment@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/26/160004898847.jpeg
---
By Zhang Xiaomin in Dalian, Liaoning, Du Juan in Beijing and Aybek Askhar in Urumqi | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-07-31 09:52
Beijing and Dalian, Liaoning province, have tightened the supervision of imported frozen food amid the recent outbreak of COVID-19 infections, especially after an epidemiologist spotted the similarity of the two cities in seafood markets or processing.
Dalian has increased its screening of imported aquatic products, frozen and refrigerated meat and other key products, and has also strengthened the daily supervision of storage facilities and markets, said Zhao Lian, deputy director of the city's health commission, on Thursday.
Beijing will also strengthen oversight of imported cold-chain food by accelerating the formulation of standards in the sector, along with a tracing system, according to a statement from the capital's anti-virus leading group on Wednesday.
The two cities have experienced recent outbreaks of COVID-19, with similar origins.
In Beijing, the infections were related to the Xinfadi wholesale food market; in Dalian, many confirmed cases have been connected to people working at Kaiyang World Seafood Co.
Further, the outbreak in Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, in January was tied to the Huanan seafood market.
"The three places all have moist, low-temperature environments," Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, told CGTN in a TV program in Chinese on Wednesday night.
That type of environment is suitable for the survival of the virus, he said. When there is contamination, the virus can accumulate in certain areas and is not easily killed, so there's a risk of transmission, he said.
According to Wu, Dalian has identified no new local COVID-19 cases for more than 100 days. The virus must have come from outside.
Big data analysis has not established a definite relationship between the epidemic in Dalian and the outbreak in Beijing, he said, nor is there any definite indication of a connection with imported cases from abroad.
---
By Liu Weiping/Yu Zheng | China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-01 09:49

SONG CHEN/CHINA DAILY
The United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, which the US president has called the "largest, fairest, and most balanced trade agreement in history", formally came into force on July 1. Centered on the basic idea of "America first", the USMCA not only strengthens the rules of origin, intellectual property rights, digital trade, labor, environment and other standards based on the now defunct North American Free Trade Agreement, but also contains a "poison pill" clause in Chapter 32, which says that if any of the three countries signs a free trade agreement with a "non-market economy", the other partners have the right to withdraw after six months and replace it with, say, a new bilateral agreement.
From the perspective of regional cooperation among the US, Mexico and Canada, the "poison pill" clause has limited direct impact on China, and it is difficult for the US to use it to target China in the short term. But from a medium-and long-term perspective and in the context of increasing global economic uncertainties, the ultimate impact of the "poison pill" clause will depend on the outcome of Sino-US disputes at the global, regional and bilateral levels.
Limited impact of 'poison pill' clause on China
From the perspective of trade volume or industrial and value chains, China, Canada and Mexico are not deeply interdependent. Therefore, the direct impact of the "poison pill" clause on China would be limited.
In terms of total trade volume, neither Canada nor Mexico ranks high among China's trading partners. In 2018, the total import and export of goods between China and Canada was $79.5 billion, and between China and Mexico $90.7 billion, accounting for only 1.72 percent and 1.96 percent of China's total goods imports and exports respectively. In particular, given China's declining dependence on foreign trade and accelerated construction of a new economic development pattern, the "poison pill" clause will have little practical impact on China's economy.
Besides, China's industrial correlation with Canada and Mexico is not high, and their links at the value chain level are relatively distant. For Canada, plants, paper, minerals, chemicals and animal products account for over 64 percent of its total exports to China, while minerals, transportation equipment, mechanical and electrical equipment, base metals and products account for 83 percent of Mexico's total exports to China. This shows raw materials and final products that all have strong substitutability dominate Canadian and Mexican exports to China.
The "poison pill" clause is a part of the USMCA, but it is difficult for the US to quickly include the same provision in trade agreements with the European Union, Japan and other major economies, so the risk of the US using the "poison pill" clause to isolate China from the rest of the global economy is basically small in the short term.
Canada and Mexico more dependent on US
The US, Mexico and Canada have a special asymmetrical economic interdependence, and aside from the close geographical connection among the three countries, Canada and Mexico are far more dependent on the US than other countries. Also, the US has significant influence and leadership in the political, military, cultural and other fields in North and Central Americas. Therefore, under the US' "either this or that" pressure, Canada and Mexico signed the "poison pill" inclusive agreement with the US to safeguard their national interests.
But due to globalization, economic ties and interdependence among the world's major economies have reached unprecedented levels. Especially, China, as the world's largest trading country and second-largest consumer market, is playing an increasingly important role in the world economy and global value chain. And considering the disputes between China and the US, adopting an overtly US-favoring economic policy is not in line with the basic interests of the EU, Japan and other "traditional allies" of the US, so it would be difficult for Washington to use the "poison pill" provision against China in the short term.
The US-EU trade negotiations and the second round of US-Japan trade talks are still facing uncertainty. The US and the EU have major differences on global economic governance and dispute settlement, as well as specific issues such as digital trade, aerospace and agricultural subsidies. With US-EU relations deteriorating, the trade negotiations between the two sides have not progressed much.
For Japan, the first-phase of a trade agreement with the US officially came into force on Jan 1, but more important issues such as services trade, investment and digital economy will be discussed in the second round of talks, and the two sides may find it more difficult to reach a new deal.
US may try to rebuild global value chain
Although the direct impact and short-term risks of the "poison pill" clause on China are not high, the power game between China and the US at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels is probably inevitable, and the "poison pill" clause may become one of the important tools for the US to use to isolate China from the world and reconstruct the global value chain in the medium to long term.
From the historical point of view, the US and some other Western countries have been using the "market economy status" to adopt discriminatory trade policies against China, and the US could use the "poison pill" clause to put extra pressure on China in the economic and trade fields.
China and the US signed the "phase one" trade deal in January, but despite the transformation of the global economic structure, the nature and complexity of China-US trade frictions have not changed. So if the Sino-US power game continues to deepen, the US may put more pressure on other countries to agree to the "poison pill" clause and further expand the scope of regulation and limitation to forcibly decouple the Chinese economy from the rest of the world.
Unprecedented challenge to economic globalization
The COVID-19 outbreak and rising global economic uncertainties have exposed the deficiencies in the international division of labor, and some countries' support for building domestic and regional value chains poses an unprecedented challenge to globalization. If "anti-globalization" and "regionalization" eventually signal the end of globalization as we know it, the "poison pill" clause may become the preferred choice of many economies under new multilateral cooperation frameworks.
Although the China-US relationship is facing the most serious challenge since the establishment of diplomatic ties 41 years ago, it does not mean the inevitable decoupling of the two economies. By holding talks on an equal basis, and properly handling bilateral relations, the two sides can effectively deal with the "poison pill" clause.
Apart from properly handling China-US relations, China should also more actively promote multilateral economic cooperation at regional and global levels under the framework of, for example, the Belt and Road Initiative, and try to expand its influence by increasing its "circle of friends" to minimize the potential risks posed by the "poison pill" clause.
Liu Weiping is a researcher at the China Development Bank, and Yu Zheng is a professor of American and Canadian Economic Studies at Wuhan University. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/59/159624864421.jpeg
---
By Mario Cavolo | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-02 09:01
This article is for those of you who somehow still don't understand how it is that China achieved getting the virus outbreak under control. There are no lies about it. There are no new cases and when a few crop up, the controls here are quickly put back in place. There are over 250 major cities in China and here and there small outbreaks will appear. The same will be the case for many months to come in countries all across the world after they gotten the severe initial outbreak under control.
Our children here in China are still not back to school even though there are no new cases. This is because cases in local cities will pop up and so there is still an abundance of caution. Most recently, there is a cluster of more than 50 cases in Harbin and lockdown measures are back in place to stop it, which of course are working fine. But these control measures stifle the economy and community. This is the new reality for many months to come. (Middle school students are just now starting to go back as we head into the end of April.) And this is even if President Trump wonders whether "those numbers seem light". I don't know whether to laugh, cry or throw dishes at the wall. The numbers are as real as any country or city, who as we can see are also regularly updating and adjusting their numbers.
Here is exactly what we did and how we did it in China. Living here for 21 years and having been here through the entire winter months up to now, I am extremely familiar with what has happened here on the ground along with tens of thousands of other foreigners here as well, including our community through many of the chambers of commerce. And importantly, we foreign friends here are in constant live touch with one another through the WeChat groups that we all belong to.
This is an incredibly efficient and transparent direct communication network. For example, two weeks ago when there were some problems related to a local outbreak in Guangzhou, our friends in Guangzhou sent information. This is one of the primary reasons you can believe me when I tell you that the information that comes from me comes directly from me and is a direct reflection of the experience of all the foreigners here who are directly live connected with one another. With WeChat, we continuously send each other texts, voice messages, photos, 15 second videos, weblinks and computer files such as PDFs. If you were also here in China during this time, then you fully understand this situation as well.
Meanwhile, being past the worst of the outbreak, China is getting back to normal, with shopping malls much busier, sales rebounding, the Apple stores packed again, Huawei too. But restaurant business is still down as people are still vigilant and nervous about being directly close to other people for extended periods of time.
1. The reason China does not have any new cases and got the virus completely under control in a few weeks is because even before any province had less than a hundred cases, the entire country was completely shut down. And every person at all times outside wears a mask. It is mandatory, not optional. What don't you understand about this crystal clear explanation?
2. For example, here where we live in Liaoning province, we only had 89 cases and the entire province was shut down. For America, I will use Arizona as a comparison, where there are not many cases. Do you want Phoenix to turn into New York? Fine, then don't shut down, don't isolate and watch what happens. Something every person needs to remember is that the current rate of outbreak we are watching includes the social distancing, isolating and hygiene practices so many people have been doing. So if this year was treated as just another flu season, you tell me how many more cases and deaths there would be than the current 55,000? Please do not lose sight of this point. As bad as it is, you have avoided worse cataclysmic disaster. If there were not lockdowns, the situation would have been a far worse disaster exactly as was happening in Wuhan, Italy and New York, for example.
Remember H1N1? Nothing that significant was done to stop it in America. According to the CDC, H1N1 then infected 60 million Americans with 18,000 dead, and then 1.4 billion worldwide killing an estimated 200,000-575,000.
Next, be thankful H1N1 had a very low death rate, but COVID-19 does not. So please take a moment to imagine the death counts if 60 million Americans get infected with COVID-19. Stop with speculations and do the math. You tell me how many would be dead right now instead of 55,000 if for the past two months America had done nothing and let COVID-19 spread the same as H1N1. Click here to read my original comparison to H1N1 if you haven't already. Something's not right here folks, has close to 2 million views.
And in case you still don't understand and want to doubt what we are saying to you, remember this: 37 New York Police Department workers are dead. So far, over 10,000 US healthcare workers are infected and 27 are dead; those numbers will continue increasing. In China, over 50 healthcare workers died in Wuhan, Hubei treating patients. Heartbreaking.
Did that happen during the H1N1 outbreak? No. COVID-19 is far more deadly.
3. Here in China, in every province, all public transportation, every retail shop, every office building, every school, everything was entirely shutdown. And no doubt, that is damaging to the real world economy. But in China, from day one, the government and community of households put saving lives, saving people first. There was never even a discussion of the economics and politics, so I get livid when people try to imply and accuse that the Chinese government doesn't care about its people when the situation is the exact opposite. Actions speak louder than words in life and saving lives was the first and only priority here in China, knowing full well that meant falling on the economic sword as a united act of civic duty and sacrifice. And yes, people really suffered miserably as many other countries are now experiencing.
4. The only thing you could do in China through February, and March too, was go to a nearby grocery store with temperature and QR scan controls to buy groceries. That's it. Every 3-4 days I went out to one of the two large markets that were open. On entering, they took your temperature and you scan the QR code to track where and when you were so they can back trace who you were in contact with later if you later developed symptoms.
5. After shopping, then you just go back home and enjoy yourself isolated once again, with your children at home because the schools were shut. It has been a struggle to keep our 9-year-old busy in a routine, moving him from playtime to online courses to reading to playing downstairs with the other kids in our apt garden space. But we're doing great.
6. This level of discipline is what we did for weeks and weeks here in China. More importantly, this is what every province across the entire country without exception did. This was what China's provinces with very few cases did to insure that the outbreak would stop.
7. We didn't wait. The government said do it, we did it. It's called civic duty and sacrifice to your community in the society in which you live.
8. By the end of February, most provinces had no new cases. All controls remain in place, now relaxed. If and when any small clusters of new cases pop up, those controls will instantly be turned on again. So there will never be another large outbreak ever again anywhere in China.
9. As of now, all cities have rolled out the Green Health QR Code app across China's cities. Every Chinese citizen has it on their mobile devices. Here in Shenyang, for example, you need to QR scan and show your green health code when you enter the subway, or a mall. Simple. If for some reason, it is yellow you can 't go and if it is red, you belong at home in quarantine. The software works for foreigners in most cities. Here in Shenyang, it is not updated yet. So foreigners need to show their passport and register in a manual book in that case. Perfect? Nope, definitely not. Annoying at times? Sure. But it's a system in action being rolled out and tweaked at lightning speed across the country. Privacy? Hah, don't make me laugh. You better get over that one anywhere on planet Earth.
So now I want to ask you. Do you have any more silly questions about why there are no cases here in China? It is because of extreme disciplined controls. There is no conspiracy, there are no lies. The political anti-China haters are a distraction at best. They are just making this pandemic problem worse across the world by sowing disinformation and lies and hate. Please ignore them.
Or do you still believe the latest CIA "intelligence" report and other media on how things are still bad in China, which by the way are just trying to make you feel better about how bad things are there instead? Do you know that it is now crystal clear the virus is natural?
Do you know that there are now many, many reports of people in other countries including the US with the exact same severe/pneumonia coronavirus symptoms back in October and November? I have a close family friend telling me that most of their customers in Phoenix had these severe symptoms and also tested negative for the flu virus, so what did they have? We do not know. Even the CDC Director already said it could be they had COVID-19. Maybe we can find out later with antibody tests.
Listen to me please, and understand that we don't know who flew from where to where first. For example, there was a medical device exhibition in Los Angeles in October with hundreds of visitors from Wuhan medical companies. There was the US military visiting Wuhan from the US during the same time to engage in military sports games at a stadium which in fact was not far from the Wuhan market. There were reports of nasty pneumonia then in other parts of the US and other countries. We just don't know. And the virus source for New York has been shown to be Europe. But many Chinese also fly between China and Europe. Also, did you now that the first two confirmed cases in Wuhan, Nov 17 and Dec 1, were not associated with the Wuhan market?
So then, as Nassim Taleb well pointed out, this is globalization with international flights. So do you see how many unknowns there are? These are people flying back and forth on flights so no one can identify who spread it from where, who started it.
The scientists are right now, the Chinese and American and other country scientists are right now still actively working on identifying these origins and paths. Meanwhile, stop with the speculations and political garbage.
And on the millions of cellphones canceled, that's because all the workers on very low salaries/income at home for three months canceled their mobile subscriptions to save money while they knew they were stuck at home for at least two months. AT&T just reported losing 897,000 TV subscribers. So they all died from the virus, right?
Are you done speculating? I surely hope so.
Thanks, god bless, go home and stay home until the end of May and don't touch anything outside your home. Use sanitizer and wipes. Don't get near any person whose history you don't know. Tough. Simple. Do it. I told you before, act like you're going camping for a few weeks. Enjoy yourself and practice hygiene and isolation vigilantly.
The author is a non-resident senior fellow, Center for China & Globalization. The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/22/158838506070.jpeg
---
By Zhao Xinying | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-06-17 11:34

A volunteer checks the temperature of a resident at a community in Beijing, June 16, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Beijing authorities have requested that all the residential communities in the city to strengthen management on people getting in and out, in the wake of an increase of newly detected cases of COVID-19 over the past several days.
All people having close contact with the Xinfadi Market should take nucleic acid tests and isolate themselves at home for further observation, the standing committee of the Beijing Municipal People's Congress stressed at a meeting held in the city on Tuesday.
The meeting, chaired by Cai Qi, Beijing's Party Secretary, requested that the strictest measures should be carried out in response and every minute and second should be seized to conduct investigations, tests and origin-tracking to stop the novel coronavirus pneumonia from spreading and bring the number of newly confirmed cases under control.
Officials noted at the meeting that all markets selling fresh farm produce and restaurants near the Xinfadi Market should be strictly inspected and disinfected, and that people working in these venues should receive nucleic acid tests.
In addition, all medical and health institutions, schools, senior care centers and public transport should raise their level for control and prevention of COVID-19, and people with a high risk o
f being infected should be forbidden to leave Beijing to prevent an outbreak within the city or spreading the virus outside.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/159236687435.jpeg
---
By Philip J. Cunningham | China Daily | Updated: 2020-06-18 07:41

Xinfadi agricultural products wholesale market is closed on June 13. [Photo by Wu Xiaohui/chinadaily.com.cn]
The sudden COVID-19 outbreak at a wholesale food market in Beijing's southern district of Fengtai is an unwelcome reminder that there is still much to be learned about the novel coronavirus and its means of transmission. The world's attention to the novel coronavirus was first riveted to a food market in Wuhan, which accounted for a high percentage of early cases in China.
Leaving the question of the origin of the virus to scientists, it still seems fair to speculate that there is something about markets that requires immediate attention.
Shoppers in supermarkets, especially in the West, are accustomed to buying meat and other food products wrapped up, packaged and branded, no questions asked. Fish are no longer swimming, chickens no longer clucking, and the food chain is an abstraction.
Traditional Asian markets, and farmers' markets in the West are a step closer to fresh food, the desirability of which speaks for itself, but sometimes problems arise on account of freshness. "Modern" beef-packing plants from Iowa and South Dakota in the United States to Rio do Sul in Brazil have been hard-hit with explosive outbreaks. By mid-May half of the coronavirus hotspots in the US were factories that process beef, chicken and/or pork.
As the biggest exporter of beef and chicken in the world, Brazil has been hit hard by the virus, and is second to the US in numbers with more than 888,000 people infected. In a single Brazil state, Rio Grande do Sul, nearly 2,500 COVID-19 can be traced to 24 slaughterhouses in the state.
Texas has seen its infection numbers jump, and not necessarily in big cities. Rural Moore County, population 20,000, has an infection rate 10 times higher on account of the local meatpacking plant which processes beef from 5,000 cows a day.
The startling number of hot spots associated with meat-packing raises critical questions. Does the cool, refrigerated air play a role? Is ventilation the crux of the problem? It raises anew the anxious question of whether the greatest risk simply comes from human beings breathing in close proximity. Although respiratory droplets have been identified as a vector that can be mitigated with distancing, the problem of aerosolized exposure is far harder to address.
In what seems like a nightmare scenario, combining the already established dangers of confinement on a floating vessel, as exemplified by the Diamond Princess and dozens of other big ships, there is an emerging awareness that something about the processing of animal flesh poses serious problems, too.
The American Dynasty, a combination fishing boat and fish-processing plant limped into the port of Seattle due to a coronavirus outbreak on board in early June. Ninety-two of the 126 workers tested positive for the virus. The US fishing industry which works the waters off Alaska has reported other outbreaks, so the scramble is on to contain the spread of onboard infection and to find protocols that allow for safe fishing and processing.
The outbreak in the US fishing industry perhaps contributed to early speculation that salmon might be a source of contamination. Too soon to say, but the salmon trade is another example of an industry being shaken to the bones by the COVID-19 scare. There is even talk of cancelling the 2020 salmon fishing season in Alaska.
Markets that sell meat and fish, fresh, frozen and processed will be under pressure to ever more exacting sanitary standards. This is surely a good thing, but it takes time and money to implement those standards.
The US meat-packing industry is responding in a piecemeal fashion, issuing face masks and instituting temperature checks, but testing remains inadequate. The failure of the US to produce, distribute and administer tests in sufficient numbers still hampers the national response to the pandemic.
In contrast China and the Republic of Korea have tested aggressively, and authorities in cooperation with the residents have mobilized the necessary resources to trace, identify and isolate people likely to have infected in response to outbreak nodules.
It is hoped that the rapid and thorough response of Beijing authorities to the Fengtai outbreak, where widespread testing and tracing is now underway, will present statistical clues not just as to what caused this "out-of-the-blue" outbreak but also help markets across the world understand the vectors and take necessary precautions.
The author is a media researcher covering Asian issues.
The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/12/159243921886.jpeg
---
By CAO DESHENG in Wuhan, ZHAO HUANXIN in Washington and ZHANG ZHIHAO in Beijing | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-03-20 07:33

People queue to enter a tent erected to test for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) at the Brooklyn Hospital Center in Brooklyn, New York City, U.S., March 19, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Some US politicians attempting to politicize the novel coronavirus have come under fire as officials, scientists and experts on international relations warned that such stigmatization would undermine international solidarity in containing the pandemic.
The warning came after some senior US officials connected the virus with China. They include US President Donald Trump, who described the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus" on social media and a White House media briefing, although Director Robert Redfield of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said using the word Chinese as a way to describe the coronavirus is wrong.
On Monday, Yang Jiechi, a member of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China Central Committee, told US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that Beijing strongly opposes and condemns certain politicians' slanderous stigmatization of China as it fights the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak.
Yang, who is also director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee, said any attempt by the US to discredit China will not succeed and any act that undermines the interests of the country will be resolutely fought by the Chinese side.
During telephone conversations with the foreign ministers of Singapore, Russia and the Netherlands as well as Indonesia's coordinating minister for maritime affairs and investment on Wednesday, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi said that China strongly opposes labeling the virus with the name of a country as it is disgraceful, immoral and unfair.
Such a move will divide the international community, Wang said, adding that it does not help efforts to unite countries in the battle against the spread of the pandemic, nor will it contribute to the disease prevention and control efforts in the US.
The three foreign ministers also expressed their opposition to the stigmatization of China.
The World Health Organization gave the pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus the generic name COVID-19 on Feb 11 to avoid stigmatizing a country or particular group, choosing a name that doesn't refer to a geographical location, animals, an individual or a group of people.
WHO officials have warned against calling COVID-19 the "Chinese virus", saying that it could lead to racial profiling.
Michael J. Ryan, Executive Director of the World Health Organization (WHO) Health Emergencies Programme and Maria Van Kerkhove, Head a.i. Emerging Diseases and Zoonosis attend a news conference on the coronavirus in this Jan 2020 file photo. [Photo/Agencies]
At a media briefing on COVID-19 at the headquarters of the United Nations body on Wednesday, Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's health emergencies program, said: "It's really important that we be careful in the language we use.
"The pandemic of influenza in 2009 originated in North America, and we didn't call it the 'North American flu'," Ryan said. "So it's important that we have the same approach when it comes to other viruses."
"This is a time for solidarity, this is a time for facts, this is a time to move forward together, to fight this virus together. There is no blame in this," he said."All we need now is to identify the things we need to do to move forward quickly, with speed and to avoid any indication of ethnic or other associations with this virus."
London Breed, the mayor of San Francisco, said references to the virus that causes COVID-19 as a "Chinese virus" are "offensive and counterproductive".
"There is never an excuse for xenophobia. Coronavirus is a global pandemic that is affecting all of us, and it requires all of us to listen to public health experts and respond together," Breed said in a statement.
Zhong Nanshan, the prominent Chinese expert on respiratory diseases, said at a news conference on Wednesday that although Wuhan, the hardest-hit Chinese city, first reported the outbreak, there is no evidence that the city is the source of the virus that caused COVID-19.
A lot more needs to be understood about COVID-19 and international cooperation is important in fields such as drug development, he said.
Scientists have discovered through clinical records and genetic tracing that the Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan may not be the source of the virus after all, according to the journal Lancet and other follow-up studies.
The market might just serve as a jumping-off point where the virus emerged and began infecting a wider public, but who or what brought the virus to the market in the first place remained unknown, scientists noted.
The Foreign Ministry has reiterated on many occasions that China believes that the origin of the virus is a matter of science which requires a professional and science-based assessment.
Li Haidong, an international relations professor at China Foreign Affairs University, said that playing the blame game might help politicians divert public attention from their own lackluster response to the outbreak and alleviate social pressure in the short run, but people will eventually catch on.
"Those who are pointing fingers now will soon realize this pandemic is a common challenge that must be addressed through honest and constructive collaboration," Li said.
A recovering pneumonia patient gives a thumbs-up to medical workers at Wuhan University's Zhongnan Hospital. [GAO XIANG/FOR CHINA DAILY]
John Ross, former director of economic and business policy for the mayor of London, said in an article that through the determined fight against the virus, China created a window of opportunity of almost two months for the rest of the world before the coronavirus began to significantly spread outside the nation, but this time was wasted.
Instead of learning the positive lessons of China's ability to control the virus, the US government and the Western media engaged in anti-China propaganda, said Ross, a senior fellow at the Chongyang Institute for Financial Studies of Renmin University of China.
"The bitter truth is that people in the West now face a medical, human and economic disaster due in significant part to this anti-China propaganda," he added.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/84/158466978871.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/22/158466978903.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/42/158466978928.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-06-15 06:42

Residents undergo nucleic acid tests at a stadium in Beijing's Xicheng district on Sunday. DU YANG/CHINA NEWS SERVICE
Authorities ramp up testing to cover key areas, population as level of alert rises
Beijing is taking swift steps to curb a new cluster of local COVID-19 infections that has led to more than 50 new cases in the past four days, including shuttering a major wholesale market linked to all new infections, imposing a partial lockdown in its vicinity and ramping up mass testing and screening in key areas.
The capital reported eight new confirmed cases as of 7 am on Sunday and added 36 new infections on Saturday, with the majority found in its southern Fengtai district but also affecting five other districts.
A large number of the newly confirmed patients work at or have been to Fengtai's Xinfadi wholesale market, which sells a wide range of agricultural, meat and seafood products, and the remaining ones had direct or indirect exposure to the market, the city's health commission said.
On Thursday, Beijing reported its first domestic infection in nearly two monthsÔºça 52-year-old man who had not been outside Beijing for the past two weeks but visited the seafood and meat hall of the market on June 3.
On Friday, six more people, either workers at the market or people who had recently visited it, were confirmed with having contracted the virus. On the same day, in a citywide check of agricultural product wholesale markets and large supermarkets, only 40 environmental samples taken from the Xinfadi market tested positive for the virus, the commission said.
All confirmed patients in Beijing are mildly or moderately ill, except for one patient being classified as a severe case on Friday and one whose condition has not been revealed, commission data shows.
The State Council's Joint Prevention and Control Mechanism said during a meeting on Sunday that the strictest epidemiological survey and comprehensive investigation into the origin of the source will be rolled out in Xinfadi and its nearby areas.
The meeting stressed expanding testing to cover all key areas and key populations while tightening control of movement in affected communities, launching rigorous screening and enforcing centralized quarantine of all confirmed cases and their close contacts, suspected cases as well as people with fever.
Precautions against hospital-acquired infections must be strengthened and all agricultural product markets, catering venues and related logistics facilities nationwide will be disinfected, according to the meeting.
Xu Hejian, a spokesman for the municipal government, said on Sunday: "Beijing has entered an extraordinary period. We should draw lessons from the pain, remain alert against the risk of the epidemic at all times and resolutely cut off the spread of the virus."
"All personnel in the Xinfadi market and nearby residents will receive nucleic acid tests and be put under medical observation. Those who have had close contact with workers at the market since May 30 should take the initiative to report to their employers and communities, and go through testing," Xu said.
From 3 am on Saturday, the market has been shut down for probes into its contamination and infection risk, as well as cleaning and disinfection.
Eleven residential areas nearby are now closed to nonresidents, and several primary schools and kindergartens near the market are suspended, Chu Junwei, acting chief of Fengtai, said on Saturday.
Chen Yankai, deputy director of Beijing's market supervision administration, said on Sunday that 252 agricultural product markets that are in operation are urged to conduct disinfection on a daily basis and five suspended trade fairs have also been disinfected.
Zhang Jie, deputy chief of Fengtai, said on Sunday that it plans to set up 24 nucleic acid testing kiosks near the Xinfadi market, aiming to test 46,000 residents living nearby, and "10,881 of them had already been tested as of Sunday afternoon".
Gao Xiaojun, a spokesman for the Beijing Health Commission, said the city has 98 testing facilities, capable of carrying out over 90,000 nucleic acid tests in one day.
To further tighten screening at fever clinics across the city, Gao said on Sunday that all people who visit a hospital for fever will take both nucleic acid and antibody tests, and receive a CT scan and routine blood tests. Inquires into their movement records will also be increased.
"Hospitals where confirmed cases had visited are required to comprehensively screen medical workers or other personnel who had came into contact with them and to properly disinfect wards," he said, adding that the test results for 79 hospital workers so far had all been negative.
On Saturday, the city government also announced that all interprovincial tour groups and sports competition events will be halted. Some tourist attractions, including the Lama Temple, have also been temporarily closed off.
The Chinese mainland reported 57 new confirmed infections on Saturday, including 36 locally transmitted cases found in Beijing and two in Liaoning province, while 19 imported cases of infection were detected in Guangdong province, Chongqing and Shanghai.
Provincial health authorities in Liaoning said the two new local cases added on Saturday were close contacts with one of the infections added on Friday in Beijing. They were asymptomatic at the beginning but re-diagnosed as confirmed cases on Saturday.
Nationwide, a total of 129 patients were under treatment as of Sunday and the number of accumulative confirmed infections had risen to 83,132, with 4,634 deaths.
Following the new infections in Beijing, a number of regions across the country are taking measures to monitor travelers from the capital.
Parts of neighboring Tianjin and Hebei province have released notices requiring thorough screening of people who had traveled to affected areas in Beijing and calling for tighter inspections of fresh produce, meat and seafood products.
Tongliao, a city in the Inner Mongolia autonomous region, said all people who come from areas of Beijing that are at medium or high risk of the virus' spread will be placed under centralized quarantine for 14 days and take multiple tests.
Health authorities in Suzhou, Jiangsu province, said on Sunday that people are discouraged from traveling for nonessential reasons to areas seeing new infections.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/31/159217979988.jpeg
---
By JULIAN SHEA in London | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-06-22 09:22

People walk by Regent street after the reopening of retail stores, amid the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in London, Britain on June 16, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The impact of the novel coronavirus on the United Kingdom's economy has been revealed after figures from the Office for National Statistics showed that in May, for the first time in more than 50 years, the UK government's debt exceeded the size of the economy.
May's headline measure of public sector net debt rose to 1,950 billion pounds ($2,407 billion), which is 100.9 percent of national income, the first time this has happened since 1963.
The British government has paid out large amounts through the furlough scheme, subsidizing the wages of employees who are temporarily not working, and exiting this could prove challenging.
"What will keep both the chancellor and investors awake at night is figuring out exactly how authorities intend to withdraw the life-support machine and exit the fiscal and monetary expansion while preserving demand and stabilizing the job market," Paul Craig of Quilter Investors told the Financial Times.
The UK is not the only major economy suffering, however. Among G7 members, France, Italy, the United States and Japan have also exceeded 100 percent debt, or are on course to do so. Only Germany and Canada are expected to avoid crossing that threshold.
Meanwhile, Health Secretary Matt Hancock has told the BBC lockdown will soon be eased further, amid speculation the two-meter social distancing regulation may be lessened to throw venues such as pubs and restaurants an economic lifeline when they reopen.
"This week we will announce further details of the measures we can take to relieve some of the national lockdown measures at the start of July, including on July 4," he told the Andrew Marr Show.
But the UK's National Statistician Ian Diamond has warned that although there has been a "steady decline" in cases, vigilance remains vital. "My own belief is that this virus is going to be with us for a long time," he said. "We need to be quick in acting to ensure we don't get a large second wave."
His comments came after the confirmation of an outbreak of 58 cases at the 2 Sisters Food Group chicken processing plant in North Wales.
2 Sisters is one of the UK's largest food producers, producing food for high street shops such as Marks and Spencer, and also takeaway food outlets including KFC, although the company said the site affected does not supply branded or retail food customers.
"The health, safety and wellbeing of our colleagues is ultimately the thing that matters most at our business," said a company statement.
"We are a responsible company with people at its core. Without our people we are nothing ... we will not tolerate any unnecessary risks, however small, for our existing loyal workforce at the facility."
Better news comes from the fact that UK visitors will be allowed into Spain without the need for quarantine.
Tourism accounts for more than 12 percent of Spain's GDP, and it is enormously popular with British visitors. After an extremely tight lockdown, when Spain announced it was re-admitting visitors, it seemed Britons may be required to isolate on arrival, in response to a similar scheme being used in the UK, and Spain's Foreign Minister Arancha Gonzalez made a point of highlighting this.
"We will allow British visitors just like the rest of the European Union to come to Spain freely and without the need for quarantine. There will be a triple-check for their origin, temperature and we'll ask everyone to register so we can trace them," she said.
"We're discussing with the UK authorities to see if they would do the same on their side, we nevertheless are doing this out of respect for the 400,000 British citizens that have a second residence in Spain and are dying to benefit from their homes in our country.
"We do hope they (the UK government) will be sensitive to the 250,000 Spaniards that are also living in the UK and would like to enter the UK without a quarantine."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/15/159279879960.jpeg
---
By Zhong Nan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-23 07:30

A freight train, which travels between Yiwu, Zhejiang province, and Madrid, in Spain, is parked in Yiwu. [Photo by Zhu Xingxin / China Daily]
China called for the European Union to remove unreasonable market access thresholds and avoid overregulation of Chinese companies investing in the bloc, experts said on Wednesday.
Officials made the remark after the Academy of the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade released a survey-based report regarding the EU's business environment in 2019 and 2020. The survey was done among Chinese companies operating in the EU.
The officials urged EU nations to stop all forms of discriminatory behavior and shore up the confidence of Chinese and global firms in their markets.
Though the EU and China committed to equitable and mutually beneficial cooperation in bilateral trade and investment in the Joint Statement of the 21st China-EU Summit released in April 2019, the survey found that many EU member states have continued to tighten review for foreign investment, misuse trade remedy measures, discriminate against foreign investment in 5G and other fields and disrupt business operations.
Lu Ming, vice-dean of the academy, said that as the whole world seeks ways to mitigate the economic losses caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the EU should give consideration to the sound development of both its present and long-term economic ties with China, and in the meantime push for opening markets to ensure the stability and safety of the global supply chains.
The European Commission listed China as "an economic competitor" and "a systemic rival" in its strategic outlook report on EUChina relations released in March of last year, in which it put forward 10 actions seeking to "rebalance" its relations with China.
The trade academy's report said that only 24 percent of China's corporate respondents chose the EU as their primary investment destination in 2019, far lower than the 78.63 percent in 2018.
The academy surveyed 163 Chinese companies operating in the EU, including Huawei Technology Co and China Railway Rolling Stock Corp, including field visits at home and abroad to gain a full and accurate picture of their views. It also sent 500 questionnaires to Chinese businesses that have operations in the EU and received 268 valid responses.
It is not surprising for major global economic powers like the EU to remain relatively conservative in regulating foreign companies when their market share in certain sectors is being taken by rivals from other countries, said Jiang Hao, global partner of consultancy Roland Berger.
"Therefore, it is fairly necessary for both sides to enhance communication to resolve key issues, and further make their markets more transparent to let each other understand their values and aspirations," he added, suggesting the two sides develop more third-party markets to enrich forms of cooperation in the post-epidemic era.
Bilateral business ties have been enhanced as China and the EU have maintained exchanges of information and experience in combating COVID-19 and cooperated in diagnosis and treatment, drug and vaccine research and development since February, said Zhao Ping, director of the international trade research department at the academy.
"Those joint measures will be helpful for the EU to abandon prejudice and further deepen economic and trade cooperation with China," Zhao said.
China-EU relations maintained solid and steady development momentum in 2019, officials said. The two sides concluded negotiations on geographic labeling of product origins, and signed two agreements on aviation cooperation. Smooth progress also has been made on the Belt and Road Initiative and the EU's regional connectivity efforts, according to the Ministry of Commerce.
Bilateral trade volume amounted to 4.86 trillion yuan ($686 billion) in 2019, up by 8 percent year-on-year.
With the United Kingdom having formally left the EU at the end of January and with its trade volume no longer part of the bloc's, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations replaced the EU as China's largest trading partner in the first quarter of 2020, the General Administration of Customs announced last week.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/83/158760052158.jpeg
---
By Vladimir Norov | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-04-23 09:09
Members of the epidemic prevention and control work team for Kyrgyzstan gather at Diwopu International Airport in Urumqi, Northwest China's Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region, April 20, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
The COVID-19 pandemic has created an unprecedented crisis. It has almost completely changed the way people live and has become a serious challenge for humanity this century.
For the first time in at least 100 years, the world is facing a global crisis that will change economic, political and social realities dramatically.
In this difficult situation, global solidarity and international cooperation are the only right choices to mitigate the impact of these massive challenges.
At the same time, amid the pandemic, the atmosphere of anxiety and the quarantine measures have been used to spread Sinophobia and influence the public and individual psyche by spreading conspiracy theories about the origin of the virus.
We must first refrain from politicizing the topic of the coronavirus pandemic, which is a challenge to the entire international community and requires concerted action by all states. In addition, the efforts of the World Health Organization to fight the virus should be fully supported.
In recent days, the WHO's activities have come under scrutiny from the world community. It is a matter of concern that some countries question the effectiveness of its work.
The joint statement adopted at the extraordinary virtual summit of G20 leaders on March 26 recognizes the central coordinating role of the WHO in countering the spread of COVID-19. It supported the WHO's efforts in coordinating the international response to the pandemic.
The member states of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a Eurasian political, economic, and security alliance, appreciate and fully support the WHO's activities.
The SCO intends to establish broad cooperation with the WHO to strengthen public health in the organization's space, which is home to almost half the world's population.
There is also a need to look more closely at the good practices of countries such as China, South Korea, Singapore and others in combating the epidemic.
China has adopted a centralized and scientific approach in fighting the epidemic. It has taken measures that are effective and targeted. Comprehensive and concrete actions have made it possible to establish an effective system of disease control, prevention and treatment.
Measures aimed at early detection, early warning, early isolation and early treatment have had positive results.
The Chinese people have shown an exceptionally high degree of responsibility and understanding with regard to the decisions taken and restrictions imposed.
Effective measures to counter the epidemic and provision of reliable and transparent information, as well as recommendations developed by the WHO based on the Chinese experience of fighting the epidemic, gave the world two months of precious time to prepare for the fight against the virus.
China's success has inspired many countries. India, the world's second-most populous country, has been under a lockdown since March 25, and its viral infection and mortality rates are now much lower than in developed countries in the West.
However, the Western public did not respond in a timely manner, and did not take the outbreak seriously. Few in Europe wore masks and few were prepared to follow adequate guidelines for social distancing until they were forced to do so.
From the beginning, the SCO member states realized the seriousness of the situation. They advocated coordinated efforts to combat the pandemic.
Many SCO member states have emergency systems, special government commissions and operational headquarters that are responsible for fighting and containing COVID-19.
The SCO countries maintain close contact with one another at the level of heads of state, as well as heads of ministries and agencies responsible for health and public security. It has implemented measures to provide humanitarian assistance, which was first provided to China.
Now, all the countries are involved in the process, providing one another with financial resources, food, medical equipment and medicine.
The SCO Secretariat, acting as a coordinating body, has put forward a number of proposals and initiatives to jointly combat the virus.
On April 1, a meeting of experts from the ministries of health of SCO member states was held by videoconference, during which participants reviewed the epidemiological situation in the member states and discussed enhancing of cooperation and effective ways of treating patients.
At the same time, the SCO's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure, in close coordination with member states, has paid close attention to transnational and increasingly interconnected challenges, and threats to security in the region in the context of emergency measures taken to combat the virus.
As the coronavirus spreads, more countries are facing a shortage of surgical masks, medical equipment and basic necessities, with some turning to China for help.
China has provided assistance to more than 127 countries and four international organizations, donated $20 million to the WHO, and sent 14 teams of experts to fight the epidemic in 12 countries.
As a result of its successful fight against the virus, China's economic activity is recovering. The international community expects the world's second-largest economy to become a reliable pillar against the backdrop of severely affected global growth.
China's top leadership has taken a number of important stimulus measures to revitalize the country's economy, and it seeks to contribute to global economic stability.
According to experts, despite a 6.8 percent decline in the first quarter, China's economy will grow again in the second quarter of this year.
Foreign investors remain optimistic about China. In the first quarter of the year, foreign direct investment in the nation's high-tech services sector grew 15.5 percent compared with the same period last year.
Western investment funds are showing a growing interest in the Chinese securities market. Analysts say that with continued instability in other markets, Chinese assets may become one of the few sources of profit for investors.
While maintaining key advantages in the form of strong productive capacity and based on a dynamic domestic market, China has been a driving force in the global effort to contain the virus and revive the world economy.
The author is secretary-general of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/24/158760740605.jpeg
---
By Zhong Nan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-29 07:29

Seafood from Norway is displayed at a trade expo in Shanghai. [Photo by Ma Jian/For China Daily]
Though the COVID-19 outbreak has led to delays in bilateral negotiations, major progress on the China-Norway free trade agreement is expected to be made this year, a senior Norwegian official said.
Norway is prepared to work with China both at the global level and bilaterally to strengthen international economic and trade cooperation, said Iselin Nybo, Norway's minister of trade and industry, adding her government has given high priority to the negotiations on a bilateral free trade agreement between the two nations.
According to Nybo, the world is facing a deep economic crisis and to face the challenges ahead, it is important to resist protectionist pressures, keep markets open and work to stimulate renewed growth in world trade.
"There has been good growth in bilateral trade between Norway and China over the last two years. We have been particularly pleased by the strong growth in Norwegian seafood exports to China," she said.
Though there was a decline in bilateral trade in the short term, Nybo hopes for a return to past growth levels in the long run.
The two sides completed the 16th round of negotiations on the China-Norway FTA in November last year. They held consultations on related issues such as trade in goods, trade in services and investment, rules of origin, trade remedy, environment, legal issues, dispute resolution, competition policy, government procurement, e-commerce and institutional terms. China's Ministry of Commerce said both sides had made positive progress in negotiations.
Norway is one of China's important trading partners in Northern Europe as well as one of China's main suppliers of fertilizer, aquatic products and oil in Europe. China exports mainly raw materials, computers, transport equipment, plastic and rubber products, textiles, garments and household appliances to Norway, data from the General Administration of Customs show.
Boosted by surging Norwegian goods imports between January and March, the bilateral trade volume amounted to 20.06 billion yuan ($2.82 billion) in the first quarter of this year, up 88.3 percent on a yearly basis, according to Customs data.
"In the future, we might see a further diversification in trade and an expansion in areas such as technologies for renewable energy, green growth and digitalization," said the Norwegian minister.
Bai Ming, deputy director of the international market research institute under the China Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation, said the two countries have carried out increasingly intensive cooperation and exchanges in fields like trade, investment and technology imports to enrich their commercial relations in recent years.
"China will continue to export consumer goods in exchange for Norway's high-tech products such as electronic and chemical products, shipbuilding, offshore engineering machinery and aquatic products, as well as environmental protection solutions," he said. "Most of their imports are complementary. Therefore, it is not direct competition."
CIMC Raffles, a subsidiary of Shenzhen-headquartered China International Marine Containers (Group) Ltd, delivered the world's largest and most advanced deep-water aquaculture workboat built for Nordlaks Oppdrett AS, a Norwegian aquaculture group, in late March. The ship will be deployed in Hadsel, Norway, for deep and open sea salmon farming operations.
The workboat is 385 meters long and 59.5 meters wide, with a total area of about four standard football fields. It includes six intelligent deep-water cages, and the farming scale can reach 10,000 metric tons, or about 2 million salmon. The workboat is the world's first farming equipment using a single point mooring system, said Ni Tao, CIMC Raffles' executive vice-president.
"Norway's advanced marine engineering design capabilities and China's high-end equipment construction capabilities led to the creation of this vessel," he said. "With the full cooperation of ship owner, design company, classification society and suppliers, we have enriched our experience and capability in the field of deep and open sea aquaculture cages."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/159071084252.jpeg
---
By Zhong Nan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-22 09:31

A heavy-duty truck transports containers at a foreign trade container terminal in Qingdao, East China's Shandong province, on April 15, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
China's comparative advantages in areas like policy facilitation, technology accumulation and labor quality will help the country attract more high-quality foreign investment that values efficiency, market potential and innovation, said a member of the nation's top political advisory body.
Compared with other countries, China has obvious advantages in terms of industrial concentration and supply chain efficiency and the government still has space to create a more advanced business environment to stabilize and retain foreign investment in the next development stage, said Jiang Ying, a member of the 13th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.
Jiang, who is also vice-chair for China unit of London-headquartered Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Ltd, a global auditing and consulting firm, said apart from expanding their presence in areas such as new infrastructure, government procurement and rural consumption, foreign firms should make full use of China's 18 free trade zones to gain more market access and autonomy, as well as participate in the mixed-ownership reforms of State-owned enterprises via public subscription or by becoming a shareholder.
As COVID-19 has caused certain difficulties for global businesses to run their supply chains and funding channels in China, the CPPCC National Committee member urged the government to further support them to gain parts and materials from other countries through chartered air cargo services, and continue to simplify rules for foreign companies to issue bonds, raise funds and to be listed on China's stock markets to ensure their production and operation within the country.
"We are all expecting short term measures to continue supporting the recovery of business and economy, ranging from tax and social benefit support, financing support, higher government purchases, and more tailored steps for small and medium-sized enterprises, export-oriented companies, or businesses with supply chains that are globally reliant," she said.
"More importantly, we hope to hear optimism for the future, from strong domestic consumption, to accelerated digital transformation of the whole societyÔºçfrom business to government, and even more open policy for foreign investment to be an active leader and player in globalization."
Her opinion is shared by Nanda Lau, head of the Shanghai office of global law firm Herbert Smith Freehills, who said China has notably opened up its market to foreign investors by lifting entry barriers. This is particularly so in the financial services sector, as a number of foreign financial institutions are increasing shareholdings in the joint ventures with their Chinese counterparts or setting up wholly owned subsidiaries in China in recent months, taking advantage of the latest liberalization in the sector, she said.
Lau said another exciting regulatory move is the latest decision by the People's Bank of China and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange to remove restrictions on investment quota of the qualified foreign institutional investors and qualified foreign institutional investors. They are conducive to facilitating cross-border capital flows, and strengthening the competitiveness and attractiveness of the China market.
As an overarching framework governing foreign investment, Lau said China's new Foreign Investment Law, which became effective earlier this year, has further enhanced the protection of foreign investors' rights concerning their investment in China, including their intellectual property rights and technology transfer issues.
Based on survey results announced by the American Chamber of Commerce in China and the Japan External Trade Organization, multinationals are not willing to withdraw from China. More companies believe that China's comparative advantage has not changed but improved and they still have full confidence in investing in the country.
Yin Zheng, president of Schneider Electric China, the French industrial group, said China not only attracts global companies by the size of its economy but also as the origin of many innovations. The country remains a strong investment destination.
Yin said a huge amount of investment would flow into new energy and more distributed energy usage in the long run as China is launching a new infrastructure campaign to boost sustainable growth.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/17/159011339505.jpeg
---
By LIU YINMENG in Los Angeles | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-02-28 00:02

A woman wears a face mask at a market in the Chinatown district of San Francisco, California, on Tuesday. [SHANNON STAPLETON/REUTERS]
LuAnn Jalet has been closely following developments regarding the novel coronavirus pneumonia, so when federal and state agencies decided to quarantine patients who tested positive for the coronavirus to a state-owned facility in Costa Mesa, California, in Orange County, she had many questions.
"Why ‚Ä¶ is an almost condemned building being refurbished in the second most highly populated county in California?" asked Jalet.
The Newport Beach resident was among the dozens of concerned neighbors who flooded a federal courtroom Monday for a contentious hearing regarding the authorities' decision to relocate passengers from the cruise ship Diamond Princess in Japan to Costa Mesa's Fairview Development Center, but like many of her fellow Orange County residents, she felt that the majority of her questions had gone unanswered.
"I don't think that the facility ‚Ä¶ can help anyone, it's never been set up as a medical facility," Jalet said. "It was for people with mental disabilities, but never meant to fight a disease that's quickly becoming a pandemic worldwide."
The coronavirus epidemic has infected more than 81,000 people worldwide. As of Wednesday, there were 60 confirmed cases of coronavirus in the US.
An official from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced late Wednesday that there's a new novel coronavirus case in Northern California which is not tied to the Diamond Princess. The origin of the latest case remained unknown as of this writing. The new case brought the total number of confirmed cases in California to 16.
Orange County officials on Wednesday declared a local emergency in handling the outbreak following a similar announcement from San Francisco Mayor London Breed on Tuesday. California's Santa Clara and San Diego counties also previously declared emergencies.
On Monday, a federal judge allowed an extra week for the federal and state agencies to answer local officials' concerns before deciding whether to transport patients to the Costa Mesa facility during a hearing set for March 2 at a federal courthouse in nearby Santa Ana.
US District Judge Josephine Staton said the decision was made to give federal and state agencies "more time to have open, transparent communication with local officials", adding that mistakes are made when things are done in a hurry.
She said the city does not have veto over federal and state governments' decisions in controlling the epidemic.
At the center of the debate is the government's decision to move COVID-19 patients from Travis Air Force Base in Northern California to the Fairview Development Center, which residents have described as a dilapidated structure located on a busy street.
According to local officials, they only received notice from federal agencies at 5:20 pm Feb 19 that health authorities would be moving coronavirus patients to Fairview as early as last Sunday. They officials also said they were not included in the planning process.
City officials in Costa Mesa filed for and were granted a temporary restriction order by Staton last Friday. The Costa Mesa officials said a lack of information and instruction from the government led to their decision.
It was also unclear, even after the Monday hearing, why the Costa Mesa facility had been chosen and what precautions would be taken there to prevent the further spread of the disease, said the city's mayor, Katrina Foley.
"We learned about things in a hearing, and as the judge indicated, normally all the facts are gathered before the hearing," Foley said at a news conference after the Monday court hearing. "The judge's job is just to rule on the legal questions, but we were learning information even as we were sitting there, and this is coming from our federal government. We should all be concerned about it."
City officials maintained that the Fairview center, which is in a residential area close to public soccer fields and a college, is not an appropriate location for housing patients.
"I want to reassure you on behalf of the entire City Council that we will continue to push back against this very bad decision to place people who have tested positive for the coronavirus in the middle of the second most populated county in California," Foley said.
The mayor also questioned the government's decision to cancel an earlier plan to move the patients to a FEMA facility in Anniston County, Alabama, after local residents there expressed concerns.
"There is no reason why that Costa Mesa and Orange County residents have to be treated differently than (nearby Ontario, California), than Alabama, than Nebraska," she said. "Why are were being treated differently? We deserve better."
Legal representatives for the state and federal governments argued in court that they chose Fairview because they wanted to put California patients in a centralized location where they can be monitored and cared for according to CDC protocols. The facility will be used to house only California patients, federal officials said.
Some of the patients are elderly and frail, authorities said, so keeping them quarantined in an in-state facility would be a better option than moving them out of state or keeping them quarantined at home.
They also said some of the patients who tested positive could not return to Travis because they no longer needed treatment. They are now being cared for in Northern California hospitals, which is putting a strain on health officials in that area.
In a response submitted in court Sunday, federal and state defendants attacked Costa Mesa officials for interfering in their handling of a public health crisis.
"Fear of COVID-19 does not justify such unprecedented intrusion into federal quarantine decisions by the specialized agencies responsible for this area," read the federal response.
The Orange County Health Care Agency on Wednesday issued a statement in support of Costa Mesa.
"Protecting the well-being and maintaining the safety of all Orange County residents is our highest priority," said Orange County Board of Supervisors Chairwoman Michelle Steel.
"I support Costa Mesa's request to halt the transfer of coronavirus patients by the Department of Health and Human Services and the (CDC) until we have all the information to ensure all the adequate and necessary safeguards and precautions are established," she added.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/5/158286251529.jpeg
---
By Vincent Martin | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-02-24 19:11

Fruit growers in Haikou, Hainan province, package cantaloupes, which will be sold on Alibaba's online platform and delivered across the country. [Photo by Niu Jing/For China Daily]
In late December 2019, a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) was identified as the cause of a significant number of human cases of a respiratory disease in China. The current outbreak was first detected in Wuhan City, which is a major domestic and international economic and transport hub in China. In a month's time, the deadly virus has turned the world upside down, and fear has spread faster than the virus, which appears to be highly contagious but less lethal than its now well-known predecessors of the same coronavirus family, SARS and MERS-cov.
Although the 2019-nCOV epidemic is primarily a Public Health crisis, experts are already voicing their concerns that the virus could have a much broader impact on the Chinese and global economy, leading to worldwide socio- economic disruptions.
If 2003 SARS epidemic is often taken as a reference point to extrapolate on the course of evolution of this novel coronavirus epidemic, from a public health and socio-economic perspective, China's contribution to the world economy today does not compare to what it was 17 years ago.
It has also come a long way since SARS, in its capacity to handle rapidly and efficiently such emergency situations. China has now become central to the global economy during the last decades, contributing 18.67 percent to the world GDP in 2018, while it accounted for 8.74 percent of world economic output in 2003, according to the International Monetary Fund.
China is also the world's biggest trading nation deeply entrenched in global trade through a multitude of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements. Although the share of agriculture, including forestry and fisheries in the country's GDP is declining, its contribution to national GDP was 7.19 percent in 2018. The country's exports and imports cover destinations and sources spanning all regions of the world and agriculture and food constitutes a significant share of China's trade portfolio. This has subsequently raised questions of the impact of the new coronavirus epidemic on the agriculture supply and demand side, in China and abroad, with possible ripple effects on food prices and markets.
However, as of today, expert's opinions on this matter remain very cautious and the only certainty is that nothing is certain at the moment. The evolution of the epidemic during the coming days and weeks will be crucial, and its impact on the economy or the agriculture sector will very much depend on the time needed to stop the spread of the deadly virus.
Assessing the impact on the agriculture sector is therefore premature and only speculative at this stage and will depend on how long the health emergency lasts and restrictive measures remain in place before businesses can resume normal operations.
Learning from the past and similar Public Health emergencies, restrictions on the movement of goods and people can have significant socio-economic repercussions on people's livelihoods, going beyond the direct impact on health, and affecting the most vulnerable groups. While these restrictions are necessary to limit the spread of a disease, they often lead to disruption of market chains and trade of agricultural products, with significant potential impacts on the populations that depend on them for their livelihoods and their food and nutrition security.
In such cases, local economies are often the hardest hit, as businesses remain shuttered and consumers hunkered down in their homes. Most affected might be medium-sized companies and small businesses as supply chains of their products are disrupted due to restrictions on transportation and people's movements. This current coronavirus epidemic is also happening in the aftermath of the African Swine Fever (ASF) epidemic that started in August 2018 and affected severely the Chinese's pig industry, leading to an increase in prices for consumers and income losses for smallholder farmers.
To counter such adverse effects in rural areas, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) is carefully monitoring the situation and has taken a series of measures to ease the pressure on small businesses, while contributing to the national effort of halting the inter-human transmission. On 27 January, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security and National Health Commission issued a joint information note to farmers for prevention and control of the virus in rural areas. Recognizing the importance of ensuring the supply of food in good quantity and quality during the emergency period, MARA also issued on 30 January 2020 a notice to support and guarantee winter and spring food production during the epidemic period and beyond.
Ultimately, while today's focus is on stopping the interhuman transmission, mitigation and early recovery measures should be anticipated and put in place as soon as possible to minimize the disruptive effect on food systems and market chains, locally and globally. Understanding the impact on people's livelihood in rural areas and studying the origin and emergence of the virus at the human-animal-environment interface are of paramount importance to prevent the reoccurrence of such epidemics in the future.
Under the One Health approach, FAO is working closely with national partners, MARA and the Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences ‚Äì CAAS, among others as well as international organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) to assist in identifying the potential animal hosts of this virus and also to measure the impact on smallholder farmer's livelihood. These were some of the key messages delivered in a statement by the Rome based Food agencies (FAO, IFAD and WFP) on the 5th of February, which are willing to provide all the support needed to the Government of China and the Chinese people in their race to defeat the virus and mitigate its impact on people's health and livelihoods.
The author is FAO Representative in China and DPRK. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/66/158254720815.jpeg
---
By CANG WEI in Nanjing | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-05-15 09:09

Workers make eyewear products at a plant in Danyang, Jiangsu province on July 12, 2018. [Photo/Xinhua]
Qian Xin, an optician in Danyang, a county-level city in Zhenjiang, Jiangsu province, is a happy man these days as online sales of protective eyewear have tripled during the last three months despite the COVID-19 outbreak.
Danyang, China's largest production and export base for optical lenses and frames, is often called the "City of Glasses". Industry officials said most of the companies in the region were facing hard times at the beginning of this year as several export orders were canceled due to the epidemic, despite its key role in the global eyewear industry.
During the epidemic period, most of the classes and other educational activities were conducted via online platforms. Demand for protective eyewear, especially blue-light-blocking glasses, has increased as they reduce the harmful effects of radiation, said Qian.
In 2019, 23 million blue-light-blocking spectacle lenses were sold in Danyang. During the first quarter of this year, the sales of such lenses rose by 103 percent on a yearly basis.
Unlike most of his peers in the catering and travel industries who have incurred steep losses, Qian's business has been in the black during the first quarter and he remains confident on the prospects for the full year.
Sharing Qian's optimism is Yuan Hongjin, secretary-general of the Danyang Glasses Association, who foresees steady development of the eyewear industry this year despite economic head winds from the epidemic.
"Companies have been able to circumvent losses from canceled export orders due to the robust domestic demand," she said.
According to Yuan, the city's total trade value (imports and exports) of the industry fell by 5.8 percent on a yearly basis during the first three months of this year to $97.18 million.
"Danyang plays a crucial role in the global eyewear market as it produces more than 100 million spectacle frames every year. It accounts for 30 percent of the total spectacle frame output in China. The city produces more than 400 million spectacle lenses every year, accounting for 75 percent of China's production and 45 percent of the global total."
She said that the city is also the world's largest production base for spectacle lenses, Asia's largest eyewear distribution center and China's largest eyewear production base. The eyewear industry in the city traces its origin to the 1960s and employs 50,000 people spread across 1,600 companies.
In 2019, total output value of the city's eyewear industry was 15 billion yuan ($2.1 billion). Imports and exports of eyewear reached $444 million in value terms, up 10.13 percent on a yearly basis, according to the association.
Yuan admitted that the pandemic had posed great challenges for the exports of goods. To tackle the challenges that companies face, the association is encouraging more companies to operate online platforms and conduct research on new, smart products, including temperature-measuring glasses and vapor-proof glasses for mask-wearers.
The local government is also helping the eyewear industry by putting up advertisements for the city's eyewear products in social media, high-speed trains and expressway entrances and exits. Tang Longbao, president of the association, believes that the epidemic period is an opportune time for the industry to upgrade, innovate and embrace new market opportunities.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/98/158950833156.jpeg
---
By Wang Jinbin | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-13 09:42

[Cai Meng/China Daily]
Against the backdrop of the raging COVID-19 pandemic, it is essential to speed up regional trade development strategy in Asia. The main reasons include regionalization that has take on greater importance, a global industrial chain that faces the risk of being curtailed, and the trend of reverse globalization.
First, regionalization has take on greater importance, and to a large degree replaced globalization. Under the influence of economic nationalism and mercantilism, some Western developed economies have rapidly deployed and developed their regional trade strategies.
In 2018, we saw the United States-Mexico-Canada free trade area agreement that replaced the North American Free Trade Agreement reached in 1994; the US-Korea Free Trade Agreement; the Japan-led Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, and the European Union and Japan's Economic Partnership Agreement. In 2019, there was also the US-Japan Trade Agreement.
It can be concluded that the more advanced an economy is, the more it intends to use regional trade agreements or RTAs, or upgraded free trade agreements or FTAs, to replace globalized multilateral agreements, with obvious geopolitical features.
Second, there is a risk of curtailing the global industrial chain. RTAs or FTAs have become an important way of cross-regional trade. Some of their important provisions will significantly shorten the industrial chain. For example, the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement stipulates the local production limit of auto parts.
Third, Asian economies are both competitors and partners. The economic level of Asian countries and regions is relatively distinct: there are developed countries such as Japan and South Korea; most of the rest are developing economies. So, their difference in cost and technology determines that there is obviously room for cooperation. At the same time, since most of them are developing economies, there is also some competition among countries with similar costs and technological levels.
However, it should be noted that economies are different from each other in terms of their resources. Even if their cost and technology levels are similar, there is a clear complementary relationship among them, thus a lot of room for cooperation. According to the results prepared by a new International Monetary Fund study, China's importance to the Asian industrial chain is higher than the average level of that to the global industrial chain (see chart alongside). Therefore, further acceleration of Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership or RCEP is essential for common development in the region.
Finally, the market under the impact of the pandemic exposes itself to the risk of "endogenous reverse globalization". As the contagion continuously exerts negative impact on the economy, different countries and regions have adopted policies to hedge risks. Even if the outbreak is to basically end, the weak demand will continue for a certain period of time, due to the impact of the income decline in early days. It means that trade itself will shrink accordingly, leading to the risk of "endogenous reverse globalization".
To lower such a risk in the market, it is necessary to use RTAs to facilitate business activities in the region and to release the potential for demand at different levels, which depends on different consumers' per capita income in the region. Therefore, the establishment of a larger free trade area will help the economic development in the post-pandemic era and reduce the economic losses caused by the disease.
The China-ASEAN Free Trade Area was established in Asia in 2010. It is a free trade area with the largest population established entirely by developing countries. On the basis of the 10 + 1 framework, the RCEP among 10 + 6 (refers to 10 countries of ASEAN and six other countries in the Asia-Pacific region) will become a higher level of free trade regional cooperation agreement following World Trade Organization rules.
Once the RCEP is inked, the total economic volume of the region will reach a level that is comparable to EU28 (or the European Union comprising a group of 28 countries). The RCEP, together with the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement and the EU28, will be called the world's three largest trade areas. It is of great significance to the economic integration in the Asian region.
In the meantime, China, Japan and South Korea have integrated their industrial chain to quite a high degree, which can be drawn from their trade relationship. Japan and South Korea, both advanced economies, have advanced technologies and products in many fields. It has positive significance for China to enhance its own technology and trade. The China-Japan-South Korea free trade area and the RCEP are critical for China to play its role in Asian trade.
Each economy's complete industrial chain will be constrained by its resource, technology and cost, while the trend of globalization will be reversed. In this context, regionalization of trade is a desirable choice that emphasizes cost and efficiency. I expect that the China-Japan-South Korea FTA and the RCEP can be signed as early as possible this year.
Amid financial turmoil brought by the pandemic, it should have been an opportunity for the world to cooperate in surmounting the difficulties. A good example is that in late March, leaders of the Group of 20 major economies vowed to pump over $5 trillion into the global economy to limit job and income losses from the coronavirus.
But in recent months, there have been a lot of developments that can reverse globalization, such as the oil price war, groundless accusations about the origin of the virus and the scramble for scarce resources worldwide.
Crude oil prices have plunged since the beginning of this year. The average price is at its lowest point in more than a decade. The intricate geopolitical relations among the three international giants in crude oil productionÔºçOPEC's representative Saudi Arabia, Russia and the USÔºçmake it difficult for them to reach a long-term agreement in the oil market. Since the outbreak of the epidemic, even a temporary agreement has not been reached. The volatile crude oil market is not conducive to economic globalization.
Measures taken by many economies, like the temporary lockdowns to prevent the rapid spread of the novel coronavirus, have already restricted the global flow of people and resources. They should have helped each other to overcome difficulties, but instead some advanced economies imposed curbs on medical supply exports.
They neglect the fact that a large number of low-income and under-developed economies in the world have very scarce medical resources, and have been waiting for international assistance.
It has been noticed often that some of the world's most important advanced economies tend to protect themselves when facing a crisis, which shows that they lack a sense of international responsibility.
These behaviors pose severe challenges to globalization in the future, but won't be able to stop the process altogether. In the past few decades, most economies have witnessed and enjoyed better labor division and welfare growth brought about by globalization, and they thereby will likely make rational choices.
Wang Jinbin is a researcher at the RUC's National Academy of Development and Strategy, and the executive deputy secretary of the Party committee of the School of Economics at the Renmin University of China in Beijing.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/44/158675056331.jpeg
---
By Hannay Richards | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-23 08:00

US President Donald Trump speaks during a news conference, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, in Washington DC, March 22, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
In all the crises in an individual's affairs there are two broad courses of action to choose from. One can either hold up one's hand and confess to having erred or one can try and sidestep the fallout by trying to pin the blame on someone else.
At a time when the novel coronavirus had yet to make its presence known worldwide, US President Donald Trump, who at that point had yet to be confronted with this choice, was fulsome in his praise of China's efforts to contain the outbreak in Hubei province.
With the benefit of hindsightÔºçand a somewhat jaundiced view of the world perhapsÔºçone might conclude that his bonhomous utterances were born, not of concern for China's plight but rather the belief that China's decision to bring its economy to a halt would be to the advantage of his "America First" campaign.
Now a month later, when he is being heavily criticized for having ignored all the urgings of the World Health Organization and others to ensure the country was prepared for the inevitable spread of the virus on US soil, whatever sympathy there may have been in his remarks has been thrown to wind in favor of a more unsavory turn of phrase.
In reverting to type by firing off blame-and-shame tweets implying the novel virus is one that has Chinese characteristics, he has not only sought to foist on China responsibility for the coronavirus chaos in the United States, he has attempted to do so by pandering to the baser instincts of the crowd.
The outbreak of the plague in San Francisco's Chinatown at the beginning of the last century led to the pernicious prejudice toward Chinese immigrants being indelibly associated with disease, and that long-latent association in the US has been incubated in recent years with the administration's exploitation of China as the cause of anyÔºçindeed allÔºçof the US' troubles. Thus The Wall Street Journal's willingness to indulge the "sick man of Asia" jibe.
The US leader, of course, is well aware, this is not a man-made, made-in-China threat. Instead, as experts have repeatedly made clear, it is just another natural disaster that human nature may have enabled. Trump's "Chinese virus" tweet therefore has simply been played as his "get-out-of-jail-by-framing-someone-else" card.
Having previously refrained from indulging in the stigmatizing of China as the origin of the virus, as others in Washington have doneÔºçtake a bow for that, MikeÔºçTrump has caved in under pressure as the US stock market, on which he has pinned the success of his presidency, has gone into meltdown.
With his administration's mismanagement of the situation precipitating an acute crisis within the US and he himself now encountering flak, the US president has retreated to the comfort zone of his proven supporter-favored approach of if there's a problem blame it on China.
The Chinese, which have been engaging in their own brutal battle with the virus, have naturally been less than enamored of this read-my-tweet passing of the buck, which once again stigmatizes them as a threat and a disease, particularly since their own struggle should have served to forewarn the US of what was to come.
Since it is not a Chinese "demon" but rather a demon that first appeared in China, whether the virus originated in China or not is really immaterial. What is pertinent is that China had to make the initial response to the outbreak after it became clear that a cluster of infections that appeared in Hubei's capital Wuhan was rapidly growing and spreading. While doing so, it has shared its experiences with the international community, along with its repeatedly updated diagnosis and treatment plans and the conclusions of the joint investigation team of 25 Chinese and foreign experts.
However, jingoism and anti-China racism are the tried and tested fail-safes of this US administration whenever the ship of state starts springing a leak. China not unreasonably is far from being gruntled by this practice, and has decided to make its disgruntlement clear. It is unlikely the US president would take kindly to the mess in the US being known as the "Trump affliction".
Couching the virus like a cyber threat may play to the gallery, but to the less partisan wider audience it simply shines a spotlight on the shortcomings of his performance in this time of national crisis.
The author is a senior editor with China Daily
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/78/158492179138.jpeg
---
By James Chau | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-02-06 16:54
Liu Xiaoliang/China Daily
Triggering panic during a public health emergency dismantles the response effort led by health workers
The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) a public health emergency of international concern ‚Äî the sixth time since this alert mechanism was introduced after the SARS epidemic. That said, we need to be measured in our response. It is not a vote of no confidence in China's capacity to control the spread, but an acknowledgement that countries with weaker health systems may be ill-prepared for this outbreak, says WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.
The international repercussions are expanding fast. India is joining the U.S. in evacuating its nationals from Wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak. Air India, British Airways, and Lufthansa have suspended flights to and from mainland China. As of February 4, according to the WHO, nine countries have recorded 27 cases of human-to-human transmissions.
Rumours, fear and racism
The impact is being felt deepest in China itself. Anecdotal evidence is emerging of Wuhan families being "rejected and even hunted". In rural areas surrounding Hubei province where Wuhan is located, vigilantes, some of them armed, are stopping 'outsiders' from entering their villages. In some cases, they are going door to door looking for suspected cases, and daubing homes with language that will encourage stigma.
Infections have spread through the country to every province, municipality, and autonomous region. The number of confirmed cases on the mainland exceeds the global total in the 2003 SARS epidemic. For different reasons, SARS, a different coronavirus of zoonotic origin that was also traced to China, is a public benchmark by which the scale and severity of the Wuhan outbreak is being measured in the media. But convenient side-by-side comparisons are not always accurate, nor are they safe.
I experienced this as a journalist, when during SARS I saw first-hand how rumour and misinformation replaced evidence and honesty. It triggered panic and dismantled the response effort led by health workers and health authorities. This is what I fear again for the Wuhan outbreak ‚Äî compounded in a digital age, where the tools we have to communicate are greater and more immediate.
Videos on social media show chaotic and distressing scenes at hospitals, patients apparently collapsed on floors, and agitated people shouting for treatment. Some of them may be ill, but others may be drawn in by public anxiety, overwhelming exhausted health workers and putting themselves and the people around them at risk.
We can't assume that these videos are related to the Wuhan outbreak. Many of them are posted without a date, location or source. One journalist admitted on Twitter that the footage she shared was "unverified", a disclaimer which doesn't prevent it from being re-uploaded as fact. Other videos showing alleged consumption of exotic wildlife have also been widely posted, suggesting a link to some reports that the novel coronavirus may have originated at an unregulated food market in Wuhan. A viral video of a woman appearing to eat bat soup in China was debunked by an article published in Foreign Policy (the woman was identified as the host of an adventurist-style travel show filmed in a different country).
Words like "dirty", "diseased", and "virus infected" are being used to describe Chinese people. I am deeply concerned, not only because I am of ethnic Chinese descent myself, but because it evokes the painful stigma and discrimination that continues to attack people living with HIV. It is shaming and humiliating, barring them from accessing treatment, and in the case of the AIDS epidemic, contributing to significant loss of life. This is not confined to one group ‚Äî we are all interchangeable as the targets of bullies.
But there is an opportunity to turn this around. Twitter now provides a pop-up message in regions like Hong Kong and countries including Australia, which when you search for 'coronavirus' invites you to "know the facts" and opt for verified information provided by local sources and the WHO. The commitment to engage in accurate and meaningful information surely must be driven by everyone. As consumers of content, we can shape our knowledge by investing in health stories that go beyond the miracle cure or the current outbreak. Will Wuhan become 'yesterday's news', like Ebola and the Australian bushfires before it?
The reality is that Wuhan is about the hundreds who have died, the thousands who have been infected, and the millions who continue to be impacted. It is also about the families who live in lockdown, who fear the unknown, and the health workers who risk their lives by moving to the frontlines of this outbreak. But there is proof for hope: this week, China admitted patients to two new emergency hospitals built and equipped in around 10 days. Together, they can accommodate at least 2,600 beds. Many more beds are to be made available in the sports halls and conference centers currently being converted for temporary medical use. This means Wuhan can better handle the current outbreak, and be properly prepared should it worsen.
Funding public health systems
I will finish with a memory from last September. As heads of state and government gathered at the UN General Assembly in New York, I moderated a small gathering of eminent leaders including Dr. Tedros. Together, they spoke in support of the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board, an independent body that tracks progress in anticipating the next health emergency, and identifies gaps in reaching that critical point.
They warned us that the world is extremely vulnerable to disease epidemics and pandemics that will not only cause loss of human life, but will destruct our economies and create social chaos. It is not a question of "if" but "when". What unites their recommendations is a serious commitment to ensure that public health systems are adequately funded. This would ensure that we don't react to each new outbreak as it happens, but strengthen and support systems even in the absence of epidemics or pandemics.
The Board will no doubt agree that the outbreak in Wuhan is a timely reminder that many of its recommendations must be urgently taken up at the highest levels: commitment and investment by heads of government, strengthening of coordination mechanisms by the UN, increase in funding for preparedness by development partners, and linking preparedness with economic risk planning by major financial institutions. Wuhan is also a reminder that we need vaccines and that vaccines work.
It is more important now than ever to remain calm, and allow our health workers and authorities to do exactly what they are trained to do at this time. As Dr. Tedros said: "This is a time for facts, not fear. This is the time for science, not rumours. This is the time for solidarity, not stigma."
James Chau is the host of The China Current with James Chau, and a Goodwill Ambassador for the World Health Organization and UNAIDS. 

This piece was first published in The Hindu.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-01-28 03:28
China will ban all forms of wildlife trade and implement strict control on activities related to wild animals until the spread of the novel coronavirus is well contained, authorities said.
In the epidemic-stricken Hubei province, 21 zoos have been closed so far to reduce the risk of potential transmission of the disease, according to the National Forestry and Grassland Administration.
The province has sent police officers to supervise any wildlife trade in 297 farmer's markets and 213 restaurants, said the administration on Monday.
Although disease experts in China and abroad haven't identified the origin of the novel coronavirus, provisionally called 2019-nCoV, virologists highly suspect it comes from a wild animal.
According to a notice jointly issued Sunday by the State Administration for Market Regulation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, and the National Forestry and Grassland Administration, the breeding bases of wild animals shall be put in quarantine, and any transportation and selling of wild animals is forbidden until the nationwide epidemic is clear.
It said all forms of wildlife trade in and not limited to farmer's markets, supermarkets, restaurants and e-commerce platforms are now prohibited, and the public can report any offense of above-mentioned rules to hotline 12315. The authorities have urged local governments to conduct stricter supervision, suspend illegal business operations, shut down their sites, and send those who violate the laws to public security bureaus.
---
Susan A. Thornton (right), senior fellow at the Paul Tsai China Center of Yale Law School, attends a seminar organized by the Institute for China-America Studies in Washington on April 25, 2019. [Zhao Huanxin / China Daily]

A former veteran US diplomat has criticized the amount of attention focused on the origin of the novel coronavirus, saying that it has created a "political distraction" at a time of global crisis, and everyone should contribute positively to "bending the curve" of the disease.

Over the past few weeks, there have been conspiracy theories on social media platforms as well as on official occasions discussing the origin of COVID-19, which has led to a pandemic, killing at least 18,000 people and sickening more than 410,000 worldwide as of Tuesday.

"The COVID-19 pandemic is a natural disaster. It is not the doing of any particular country or government," Susan A. Thornton, former US acting assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, told China Daily.

"Political leaders facing public scrutiny and criticism in both China and the US are too focused on the domestic political ramifications of their perceived response, rather than on galvanizing people to work together and marshaling resources for technical experts who know what to advise and do," Thornton said in an interview by email.

US President Donald Trump has repeatedly used "Chinese virus" to refer to the novel coronavirus, seemingly on grounds that he "didn't appreciate the fact that China was saying that our military gave it to them. Our military did not give it to anybody."

Thornton, now senior fellow at the Paul Tsai China Center of Yale Law School, said, "To focus on where the disease came from is a political distraction," adding that it doesn't matter where the first cases were of the 1918 "Spanish Flu" pandemic or the 2012 Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS).

"It is factually true that the first cases were discovered in China, so it is natural for those not given to using technical terms to shorthand China or Wuhan in describing the virus," Thornton said. "It is not racial any more than Middle East Respiratory Syndrome is racist."

But it is "regrettable" that it frequently comes with a clear partisan political agenda that is "highly inappropriate" in this time of global crisis and widespread human suffering, Thornton said.

"It is also irresponsible for media or officials to spread obviously false conspiracy theories about the origins of the virus," she said. "All these stories have been scientifically debunked, and officials should send clear messages accordingly."

In an interview with Axios on HBO that aired Sunday, Chinese Ambassador to the US Cui Tiankai said it is up to scientists to find the answer eventually.

"We have to find eventually — we must have an answer to where the virus originally came," he said. "But this is a job for the scientists to do, not for diplomats, not for journalists to speculate, because such speculation will help nobody. It's very harmful."

Beijing has said that labeling the coronavirus "Chinese virus" or "Wuhan virus" is stigmatization, and World Health Organization officials have warned against calling COVID-19 the "Chinese virus", saying that it could lead to racial profiling.

In the Axios on HBO interview, Cui also said that the WHO has a rule regarding naming new viruses, including never giving people the impression that the virus is linked somehow to a particular location or a group of people to avoid stigma. He said he hoped the WHO rule will be followed.

Thornton said governments and experts around the world are responding in the best way they know how, and it is "distracting and harmful" in a crisis to pick apart the response.

Social media, however, is compounding the problem, spewing fear and blame, which is "counterproductive", she said.

Concerted efforts should also be made to manage risk appropriately to blunt the impact of the outbreak on economies and help avoid a global depression.

"This is at least as important as stemming the spread of disease, as many people will face life-threatening consequences from a severe economic downturn," she said.

Thornton said that government institutions, which have not been polling well around the world recently, have a chance to show their mettle in this crisis. If they fail, they will confirm that people's eroding faith in their ability to perform is justified.

"I hope that they can step up to the plate and lead, as none of us should want to see a world without governments that are able to competently exercise authority," Thornton said.
---
US President Trump. [Photo/Agencies]

A senior global health official and a US mayor on Wednesday warned against using phrases like "Chinese virus" to refer to the novel coronavirus, joining a chorus of voices that called such labeling counterproductive and fuel for xenophobia as the latest research suggests the pathogen has a natural origin.

When asked at a White House briefing about his use of the phrase amid reports of backlash against Asian Americans because of the outbreak, US President Donald Trump continued to use "Chinese virus" and said it's "not racist at all".

At a media briefing on COVID-19 at the headquarters of the World Health Organization on Wednesday, Dr Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's health emergencies program, said, "It's really important that we be careful in the language we use lest it lead to profiling of individuals associated with the virus. This is just something we need all to avoid.

"The pandemic of influenza in 2009 originated in North America, and we didn't call it the North American flu," Ryan said. "So it's important that we have the same approach when it comes to other viruses."

Trump had earlier called the virus straightforwardly coronavirus on many occasions, but he changed his tone Monday on his Twitter account, seemingly on grounds that he "didn't appreciate the fact that China was saying that our military gave it to them. Our military did not give it to anybody."

He continued to use the phrase in two of his tweets Wednesday.

London Breed, the mayor of San Francisco, said the president's repeated references to the virus that causes COVID-19 as a "Chinese virus" are "offensive and counterproductive".

"There is never an excuse for xenophobia. Coronavirus is a global pandemic that is affecting all of us, and it requires all of us to listen to public health experts and respond together," Breed said in a statement. "That's what we're doing here in San Francisco, and that's what we need our federal leaders to do as well."

Kurt Bardella, an NBC News contributor, noted that plenty of others made the same characterization when the virus first hit the news, but they've stopped because they realized the potential harm it could cause. But Trump has not stopped.

"Here, he's antagonizing China at the absolute worst time. We need to be learning from Chinese doctors and officials, not causing an international incident," Bardella wrote in an op-ed Wednesday.

He added that at a time when the president of the United States should be acting as a unifying figure, he is instead sowing the "destructive seeds of xenophobia".

A research paper published in the journal Nature Medicine on Tuesday explored the origins of SARS-CoV-2, another name for the feared virus that causes COVID-19, and found that coronavirus has a natural origin.

"By comparing the available genome sequence data for known coronavirus strains, we can firmly determine that SARS-CoV-2 originated through natural processes," said Kristian Andersen, an associate professor of immunology and microbiology at the Scripps Research Institute and the corresponding author on the paper.

Based on their genomic sequencing analysis, Andersen and his collaborators concluded that one of the possible scenarios is that the virus evolved to its current pathogenic state through natural selection in a nonhuman host and then jumped to humans, according to a news release from Scripps Research.

While the origin of the coronavirus has not been finally identified, NBC News chief foreign correspondent Richard Engel, while weighing in on Trump's use of the divisive phrase Wednesday, said it is a "bat virus".

"It's easy to scapegoat people and that is what has always happened when there have been pandemics or epidemics," Engel said. "This is a bat virus, not a China virus. It doesn't speak Chinese. It doesn't target Chinese people. It targets human beings who happen to touch their eyes, nose or mouth."

Harvard law professor Laurence Tribe remarked on Twitter on Wednesday, "Mr. President, the Coronavirus comes not from Chinese people or 'from China,' but from bats, Bat — flying critters with no nationality or ethnicity, in case you were wondering. Each time you call it 'a Chinese virus,' you display your ignorance and your racism."
---
Global Times | Updated: 2020-05-01 17:44

[Photo/Agencies]
Fourth, is there a risk of leakage from US biological bases overseas?
The US military has many biological laboratories in Southeast Asia and countries including Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Georgia. In Ukraine, it was reported that there are 16 biological laboratories set up by the US. According to a spokesperson from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the US Department of Defense set up biological laboratories with a dual role in a third country on the pretext of combating biochemical terrorism. The possibility cannot be ruled out that it aims to develop or reorganize various dangerous disease pathogens for military purposes and to strengthen its influence in the biochemical sector overseas.
Why has the US built so many biological laboratories in other countries? What's the purpose in locating these laboratories in countries surrounding China and Russia? Do these laboratories meet security standards? Are there hidden dangers of a leak? When can the US respond to the various suspicions concerning its overseas labs?
Only the US government can answer these questions. We need to respect facts, science and life. We call on the US government to clear these doubts in an open, transparent and responsible manner as soon as possible and invite scientists from all over the world to the US to investigate the origin of the novel coronavirus. The truth must be restored, which will help the US fix its reputation crippled by lies.
The author is an observer of international affairs.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/158832751499.jpeg
---
Global Times | Updated: 2020-05-01 17:44

[Photo/Agencies]
Fourth, is there a risk of leakage from US biological bases overseas?
The US military has many biological laboratories in Southeast Asia and countries including Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Georgia. In Ukraine, it was reported that there are 16 biological laboratories set up by the US. According to a spokesperson from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the US Department of Defense set up biological laboratories with a dual role in a third country on the pretext of combating biochemical terrorism. The possibility cannot be ruled out that it aims to develop or reorganize various dangerous disease pathogens for military purposes and to strengthen its influence in the biochemical sector overseas.
Why has the US built so many biological laboratories in other countries? What's the purpose in locating these laboratories in countries surrounding China and Russia? Do these laboratories meet security standards? Are there hidden dangers of a leak? When can the US respond to the various suspicions concerning its overseas labs?
Only the US government can answer these questions. We need to respect facts, science and life. We call on the US government to clear these doubts in an open, transparent and responsible manner as soon as possible and invite scientists from all over the world to the US to investigate the origin of the novel coronavirus. The truth must be restored, which will help the US fix its reputation crippled by lies.
The author is an observer of international affairs.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/81/158832751499.jpeg
---
By ZHOU JIN | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-14 04:18

Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang speaks at a news conference. [File photo/VCG]
China reiterated on Friday that the origin of the novel coronavirus can be determined only by scientific and professional views.
The remarks were made by Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang at a daily news briefing as comments have been made saying the virus might have been brought to Wuhan, the epicenter, by the United States military.
Geng said that working together to combat the disease is the only correct choice for the international community as the virus knows no borders.
Geng spoke in response to a statement on COVID-19 at a meeting of the G20 Sherpas, a policy discussion body.
Geng said that there are discussions about the virus's origin, adding that around the world, including in the US, there are different views on that.
Geng said Beijing firmly opposes certain US senior officials and Congress members making false and irresponsible remarks on the issue to stigmatize China.
Geng called for opposing unilateralism, mutual criticism and stigmatization, and injecting positive energy into global cooperation.
He said China supports the G20 to unite all parties to combat the epidemic, adopt all necessary fiscal and monetary policy tools to strengthen coordination in macro policies, and promote strong, balanced, sustainable and inclusive growth of the world economy.
The necessary measures taken by countries to respond to the epidemic will inevitably affect trade and investment, he said, calling for G20 members to ease the tension in international trade, cancel unilateral tariffs and jointly uphold the global industrial and supply chains.
On Friday, China and South Korea established a joint prevention and control mechanism on coping with COVID-19 and held the first video conference.
The mechanism is not only to implement the important consensus reached between the top leaders of the two countries, but also to provide experience for other countries, he said. The mechanism, headed by the countries' foreign ministries, involves officials from departments of public health, education, customs, immigration and civil aviation.
At the first meeting, they discussed the next steps to strengthen cooperation in curbing the epidemic, such as reducing unnecessary personnel movements, strengthening entry-exit quarantine, sharing prevention and control guidelines and diagnosis and treatment technologies, and taking care of each other's students and nationals, Geng said.
The two sides agreed to hold occasional meetings on the mechanism, according to epidemic work needs.
-->
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/3/158413708709.jpeg
---
By LIU YINMENG in Los Angeles | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-09-10 10:56

Geng Shuang, China's deputy permanent representative to the UN, is seen during the Security Council's conference on the fight against COVID-19 on Sept 9, 2020. [Photo provided to chinadaily.com.cn]
A Chinese envoy to United Nations on Wednesday called on the US government to focus on saving American lives instead of "blame-shifting" to serve its political purposes.
"We urge the administration of this country to take up its responsibility, make real effort, to save lives, to really care about the health and livelihood of the American people," Geng Shuang, China's deputy permanent representative to the UN, said during the Security Council's conference on the fight against COVID-19.
"As diplomats living in this country, we show our sympathy to the American people for their sufferings. They are the victims of the political maneuvering of this administration, and we wish the American people can defeat the pandemic and (go) back to normal lives as soon as possible," he added.
The 15-member UN Security Council gathered Wednesday for an open video conference to discuss the implementation of Resolution 2532, which called for a global cease-fire (exempting military operations against terrorist groups designated by the UN) to combat the spread of the novel coronavirus.
Geng made the rebuttal in response to remarks by a US representative to the UN who attacked China for its "failures at the outset of the pandemic".
"Unfortunately, we might never know for certain how much of the pain and suffering caused by COVID-19 could have been avoided if the Chinese Communist Party had behaved like a responsible government and immediately warned the rest of the world of the virus that they uncovered in Wuhan," said Rodney Hunter, political coordinator of the US Mission to the UN.
Hunter also criticized the World Health Organization (WHO) for an alleged dependence on China and the organization's lack of "independence, transparency and accountability".
Geng said the US representative was abusing the Security Council platform to spread a "political virus" and serve his country's domestic political agenda.
"I think the purpose of today's meeting is to review the implementation of Resolution 2532. It's not about finger-pointing; it's not about blame-shifting. The tone of today's meeting should be unity and solidarity," the ambassador said.
Geng stressed that China has taken "effective, comprehensive measures to control the spread of the pandemic, in a timely, open, transparent and responsible manner", since the outbreak of the pandemic. Its contribution has been "well-recognized and well-acknowledged" by the UN and the WHO, as well as by the international community.
The US, however, as a country with the most advanced medical technologies and facilities, has the most confirmed coronavirus cases in the world. By "trying its best to shift attention and blame others", the administration does not focus on fighting the pandemic, he said.
The US not only attacked China but also the WHO during the pandemic, which runs against the common will of the international community, said Geng, adding, "On this particularly issue, the US is absolutely isolated."
He called on the international community to stand united in the fight against the infectious disease. The virus is the common enemy of people around the world, whether it's China, the US or other UN members, Geng pointed out.
"We are all victims in front of the virus, in front of the pandemic. We should be united and fight together, not fight against each other," he said.
Robert Kuhn, a leading China expert and chairman of The Kuhn Foundation, said the US and China should work together to curb the coronavirus and to prevent future pandemics.
"The two positions should run in parallel, although without the rancor. It is vital, for the sake of the world, that the US and China cooperate in containing and ultimately eradicating COVID-19," Kuhn said.
"At the same time, in parallel, under the aegis of the WHO, China and the world, including the US, should conduct a comprehensive analysis of COVID-19's origins and spread. Lessons should be learned to prevent or mitigate future pandemics," he added.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/97/159989060234.jpeg
---
By Pan Mengqi | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-03 15:20

[Photo/www.thediplomat.com ]
In an effort to unite China and the United States in the fight against the novel coronavirus, 100 Chinese scholars from various fields wrote an open letter to people in the United States.
In the letter, the scholars said China and the US should work together to fight the pandemic, and that politicizing or stigmatizing the virus would not be conducive to global containment. Here is the full text of the letter:
Dear American friends:
We are a group of 100 Chinese scholars representing diverse academic fields including philosophy, political science, economics, medicine, international relations, sociology, law, communications, military science and technology. Our members include a number of university professors from Wuhan. While our areas of expertise are diverse, as intellectuals we all share common concerns about the well-being of all people in China, the US, and every country on Earth.
Recently, we have heard many voices politicizing the COVID-19 pandemic. Facing the most dangerous infectious disease in a century, these criticisms help neither China, the US, nor the world to curb the spread of the virus. Political bickering does nothing to contribute to the healthy development of Sino-US relations, nor will it help the people of the world to rationally and accurately understand the pandemic.
We want to sincerely and frankly share our views with our American friends today.
The COVID-19 pandemic is a global public health crisis of a horrific scale, one not seen in generations; the effort to overcome both it and its impact will be nothing short of an arduous global war. Countries should be working together, not complaining, finger-pointing or blaming one another. The virus does not know any borders, and neither does love, nor friendship. As two of the great countries on Earth, cooperation between China and the US could and should be used to bring about a more positive outcome for all humankind.
Respecting science, cherishing life and protecting people from harm should be our shared goals in the fight against COVID-19.
The COVID-19 outbreak in China is now basically under control. Since the virus first emerged in early January, the Chinese people have made unimaginable efforts and sacrifices to achieve hard-won results.
We are grateful for the support of the international community, including donations from American friends, during the most critical stage of the fight. We respect the epidemic containment programs and policies implemented by other countries according to their own national conditions, and we are willing to share our experiences with other countries and provide all available assistance to them.
At this stage of the pandemic, the exact source and origin of COVID-19 remain undetermined. But these questions are unimportant, and finger-pointing is demeaning and hurtful to everyone. In the end, we will all respect the final determination of scientists. Like many other countries, China is a victim of the virus, but also a success story for overcoming it, and is willing to work with people of other countries to stop the spread of the pandemic.
We sincerely hope to cooperate with the international community, including intellectuals and experts from the US that look to a brighter future. We look forward to the time when doctrines of international cooperation once again flourish around the world. We call on all nations to work together in sincere cooperation to defeat this common enemy of humanity.
Hopefully, we will soon celebrate final victory over COVID-19!
Signed by 100 scholars from China
March 26, 2020
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/45/158590106890.jpeg
---
By LI WENFANG in Guangzhou | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-06-09 08:53

Chinese experts pose with medical workers at the Hospital Militar Central in Lima, Peru, on Tuesday. Invited by Peru's Ministry of Defense, the team visited hospitals and shared its experiences in fighting COVID-19. [Photo/XINHUA]
Editor's note: This series tells the stories of selfless individuals, from medical workers to volunteers, who are bravely fighting the virus outbreak with extraordinary dedication.
Chinese experts sent to Peru, a country in South America, to help fight the coronavirus epidemic shared their experiences in epidemic control and patient treatment, and made recommendations to strengthen the country's healthcare system.
Some of the suggestions included the raising of standards for discharging recovered patients, understanding related medicines and vaccines, protecting medical workers and laying out guidelines for patient treatment, said Guo Yi, the team leader.
All four members of the team are from the Nanfang Hospital of Southern Medical University based in Guangzhou, Guangdong province, specializing in public health management, respiratory and critical medicine, neurology and critical medicine, and hospital infection control.
They gained rich experience during their 40-day stint in Honghu, a city in Hubei province, helping local hospitals in patient treatment and infection prevention. Hubei was hardest hit by the epidemic.
Since their arrival on May 23, the team members have held meetings with hospitals, healthcare administration agencies and Peru's anti-COVID-19 action team in capital Lima. They shared Chinese expertise in epidemic control and patient treatment.
During these meetings, they answered questions about the difference between nucleic acid and antibody testing, the spread of the epidemic, the effects of pharmaceuticals, vaccine development, tracing those who had close contact with infected people, and prevention of infections among the health workers, according to Guo.
"They were enthusiastic. The front-line workers had many questions. The (interactive) sessions were often extended."
She said people there have high expectations for targeted medicines. "There is no targeted medicine against the virus yet. The key lies in infection prevention and control."
Peru has reported 187,400 confirmed cases and 5,162 deaths as of Sunday, according to the World Health Organization.
The Chinese team suggested that mobile cabin hospitals be built to admit patients with minor symptoms to form a layered hospital system so that the general functions of hospitals can be maintained and infections in communities can be curbed.
Peru has a diverse healthcare system, with hospitals administered by entities such as the health ministry, social health insurance agency and the military.
The team visited a number of hospitals, including the Hospital of Emergencies of Villa El Salvador, in Lima. "They wanted us to visit the wards and offer guidance," Guo said.
The team helped devise a plan for changing clothes for health workers in the intensive care units and quarantine wards in some hospitals. "We are concerned about the infection rates among medical workers and offered our suggestions," she said.
The team shared the patient treatment principles, including the time for intubation (the insertion of a tube into a patient's body) or ventilator operation.
It visited Arequipa, Peru's second-most populous city, on Wednesday and learned that two labs in the region were capable of conducting nucleic acid tests.
While testing has largely focused on antibody tests in Peru, the team stressed the importance of nucleic acid tests. Some hospitals, if upgraded, would be capable of such testing, Guo said.
Since several discharged patients had tested positive for the virus again, the team suggested that the standard for discharging patients be raised.
With movement restrictions having been gradually relaxed in the country, the team made suggestions to some district governments about which areas to be opened first and the requirements for reopening.
The team had videoconferences with the people of Chinese origin and Chinese nationals in Peru, sharing information on personal protection and resumption of work after the nationwide lockdown.
The team presented a report on its suggestions to the Peruvian government before concluding its mission.
Talking about her experiences in the South American nation, Guo said she now has a better understanding of the balance between economy and epidemic control.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/64/159166854645.jpeg
---
By Lan Shunzheng | China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-21 07:20

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks during the meeting with British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab (not pictured), at Lancaster House in London, Britain July 21, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Japanese Defense Minister Taro Kono has said that Japan wants to be the "sixth eye" in the "Five Eyes" intelligence alliance that comprises the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and New Zealand. Backing the US' campaign against China, the other four alliance members have also imposed restrictions on Chinese telecom giant Huawei, hardened their stance on the South China Sea issue, and suspended their extradition agreements with Hong Kong.
Japan wants to be the "sixth eye" in the alliance so that it can better "deal" with a rising China.
Although the "Five Eyes" alliance has been trying desperately to check China's rise, it cannot draw the support of the wider international community to oppose China. The US-led intelligence network has its origin in US-UK intelligence cooperation during World War II and came into being after Canada, Australia and New Zealand joined the coalition.
The "Five Eyes" intelligence network includes privileged intelligence sharing among the governments and enterprises of the five countries; it also functions as a tool for political and diplomatic maneuverings. During the Cold War, the alliance's main task was to spy on the Soviet Union, including Soviet citizens, officials, religious leaders, and getting Soviet government information, as well as thwarting Soviet activities around the world and checking its global influence.
In the 21st century, the alliance focused on tackling new global challenges such as terrorism, but since 2009 when the US and its allies thought Washington's "war on terror" had reduced security risks from terrorist networks, the "Five Eyes" shifted attention to rising powers such as China and Russia.
The five countries share similar cultures and values, and have similar standards for safeguarding national security, not least because they are English-speaking countries and a vast majority of their citizens have Anglo-Saxon roots. Therefore, for the five countries, a rising power with a different cultural background and political system poses a high risk to the world order.
At a time when the world is in transition, China is promoting the Belt and Road Initiative, modernizing its military, and securing its islands in the South China Sea to facilitate better global cooperation and safeguard its national interests, while the "Five Eyes" alliance projects China as a serious threat to the world order. And with the US launching a scathing attack on China, the other four alliance members have reduced cooperation with China, even adopted a confrontational approach toward Chinese high-tech companies citing one excuse or the other.
After the five countries blamed China for hacking into their networks and launching cyberattacks against them in December 2018, the alliance intensified its criticisms against China. The novel coronavirus pandemic has given them another excuse to stigmatize China, although the US and UK governments didn't make enough efforts to control the virus in the beginning.
In fact, US officials were busy stigmatizing China by labeling the novel coronavirus the "Chinese virus" even as COVID-19 infections and deaths kept rising in the country.
Amid this mudslinging by the US, when China managed to largely control the virus and resumed economic activities, it dealt a blow to the pride of some so-called democratic countries which consider themselves superior to China.
In the bitter fight against the pandemic, China has won the acknowledgment of the international community, compelling the US to cajole and coerce its allies to boycott China and interfere in China's internal affairs including the implementation of the national security law in Hong Kong to plug the national security loopholes in the special administrative region and the postponement of Legislative Council election in the SAR because of the threat of the pandemic.
The alliance issued a joint statement on Aug 9, asking the Hong Kong government to hold the LegCo election as soon as possible, which is a blatant interference in China's internal affairs. But many countries around the world have deferred elections because of the COVID-pandemic, including "Five Eyes" countries. For instance, on Monday New Zealand announced the postponement of the general election, and the UK deferred the local and mayoral elections in March. Even the US president tweeted on July 30 suggesting that the 2020 presidential election be delayed.
Thanks to China's sincere cooperation with other countries and contributions to the global economy, many countries have a rational view of China. That's why even close US allies such as Germany and France disagree with the US on taking a tough stance against China without a solid reason.
The fact that at the 44th session of the UN Human Rights Council (June 30-July 17) more than 70 nations supported the implementation of the national security law in Hong Kong and said no country has the right to interfere in China's internal affairs shows countries can tell right from wrong. And since the "Five Eyes" don't represent the entire international community, they can't turn the world against China.
The author is a research fellow at the Charhar Institute and a member of the Chinese Institute of Command and Control. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/159797533260.jpeg
---
By KARL WILSON in Sydney | China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-04 10:10
Blunders, laxity contribute to perfect storm that propels infections in Victoria
A mixture of complacency, government bungling, poorly trained aged-care workers and a virus that shows no sign of retreating has created a perfect storm for the southern Australian state of Victoria.
A medical professional administers a test to a member of the public at a pop-up coronavirus disease (COVID-19) testing facility, as the state of Victoria experiences a spike in cases, in Melbourne, Australia, June 26, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Locking down the state capital Melbourne and its 5 million inhabitants for the past three weeks has done little to stop the spread of the deadly coronavirus.
On Sunday, the state's premier, Daniel Andrews, declared a state of disaster, introduced the strictest curfew in the nation's history and sought extra military support from the federal government.
Having conceded that "so far everything the government has tried has failed", Andrews said the state will be closed for the next six weeks despite the economic and social costs.
Wearing face masks is now compulsory throughout the state, all schools are closed, people must remain in their homes, only one person per household can go shopping and exercise for one hour a day.
In Melbourne, the city is now under a curfew from 8 pm to 5 am, with exceptions for working people and medical workers.
The catalyst for the move was 760 cases detected over the weekend with unknown origins, meaning these are not linked to any known outbreaks or positive cases, making contact tracing impossible.
An infectious diseases physician of Australian National University Sanjaya Senanayake is hopeful the harsh new lockdown will be the circuit breaker needed to stop the rising number of mystery cases. "Even just one case by itself is a concern," he said.
"So, 700-odd (cases) is a real problem because it means there is a source of infection out there who is potentially, unknowingly, infecting others as we speak."
Professor Nigel McMillan said one of the problems is that the Victorian government did not get daily infection cases down to zero as in other states.
The program director for infectious diseases and immunology with the Menzies Health Institute in Queensland, McMillan said the government started to relax restrictions on June 1 when the caseload was down to around 10 infections a day. Restrictions were relaxed even more by June 22 when infections were 20-25 a day.
Official judicial review
He said the state government had some issues with the way quarantine was run, which is currently under an official judicial review.
Media reports have alleged low-paid and untrained security staff had intimate contact with overseas travelers in a Melbourne quarantine hotel. Many of the travelers had arrived from overseas hot spots.
McMillan said the new measures announced by the government "may work".
"Many nonessential (in my view) industries still remain open. It's not a New Zealand or Wuhan-style lockdown by any means."
Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt has said the outbreak of the virus from the hotel quarantine program led to "catastrophic human outcomes", including the spread into aged-care staff.
Hunt said aged-care residents represented about 70 percent of the cases diagnosed in Victoria since July 1. There has been "major community transmission as a consequence" of that initial hotel breach, Hunt said.
An insecure, casual workforce has allowed the virus to spread. Aged-care workers often work across multiple facilities to make ends meet, and sometimes work while sick due to poor sick-leave entitlements and long-standing staffing pressures.
Workers acquired the virus in one facility, then spread it when they went to their next shift at another facility.
Andrews said complacency had been one of the main issues that led to the outbreak and its spread.
Liz Hanna, chair of the Environmental Health Working Group at the World Federation of Public Health Associations and honorary senior fellow at the Australian National University, said: "Second waves (of infections) are emerging within many of the initially 'COVID-successful' countries".
"This pandemic has laid bare our inadequacies to monitor, measure and prevent the spread of a zoonotic disease. Prevention includes not letting viruses get into the human population, by preventing exposures."
In her view, Victoria's three outbreak hot spots further highlight systematic failings in Australia's health protection departments.
Worldwide confirmed cases have exceeded 18 million, with the death toll nearing 700,000 as of Monday, according to a tally kept by the Johns Hopkins University.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/159661530559.jpeg
---
By David Blair | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-08 10:04

Volunteers check COVID-19-related medical supplies donated by the Chinese-American community to people in Los Angeles. [Photo/Xinhua]
Although the ultimate origin of the "Spanish flu" of 1918-20 is still heavily debated, the first known documented case was in the state of Kansas in the United States.
The ensuing pandemic, which raged between 1918 and 1920, went on to leave 50 million dead and infected one-third of the world's population.
Fort Riley, a military base in Kansas, recorded the first known infection among soldiers preparing to head to Europe to join the Allied powers in World War I.
While it's unlikely that the "Spanish flu" originated in Spain, scientists are still unsure of its source.
Because wartime censorship prevented newspapers from reporting about it in their own countries, they wrote stories about the flu's ravages in neutral SpainÔºçthus the name Spanish flu as far as is known, and US president Woodrow Wilson at the time never said one word about the flu nor took any steps to limit its spread. Should the US have paid reparations to the victims around the world?
In recent weeks, many US politicians and commentators say China owes other countries compensation for the damage done by the COVID-19 virus. I've hesitated to write about this for fear of giving legitimacy to a ridiculous idea that has little chance of becoming the actual policy of the US government. But, I do think it is important to realize that this notion violates every historical norm and will make a mockery of the rule of law. It also ignores basic tenets of how leaders make decisions in times of crisis.
The state of Missouri has filed a lawsuit against China in US federal court, alleging that China did not do enough to stop the spread of the virus at the outset. At first blush, this seems serious, but anybody can file lawsuits in the US. The case is highly unlikely to be allowed to proceed since US law generally does not allow suits against sovereign nations. I'm confident it's just a publicity stunt.
Some writers and politicians have even suggested that the US government should seize Chinese assets in the US to cover virus-related costs. This idea is mostly just empty rhetoric. There is basically no chance that it could become law. But even talking about these threats raises big questions about the reliability of US financial and legal institutions.
The so-called long arm of US law, which turns the financial system into an instrument of foreign policy, is already threatening the legitimacy and trust of foreigners in US institutions. But even a serious discussion of seizing Chinese assets would be the last straw. Who would ever again put assets in US banks, companies or government bonds?
China has loaned the US more than $1 trillion by buying treasury bonds. Does anyone seriously believe it would be legal or moral for the US government to decide not to pay back these debts? For 50 years, the US government has increasingly borrowed to finance its debtÔºçand substantially from foreigners. The quickest way to bankrupt the US government would be to do anything that even hints at not honoring these obligations.
Many fans of American football are "armchair quarterbacks"Ôºçpeople who sit in their chairs watching television and criticizing mistakes made by the players, usually after the fact. (A quarterback is the player who decides what tactics his team will use during each play.)
Much of the US press and many politicians are the worst kinds of armchair quarterbacks. They criticize decisions made in January based on information not available until April. Some of these attacks are simply mistaken or based on no evidence, but many are intentional, malicious and politically motivated.
Of course, with 20-20 hindsight, armchair quarterbacks claim that some decisions should have been taken earlier. This is a stupid viewÔºçif we could see the future, we would all make better decisions. But no one can see the future.
According to China Global Television Network, famous Chinese respiratory expert and epidemiologist Zhong Nanshan concluded in a study published in the Journal of Thoracic Disease that the epidemic would have grown three times as fast and furious if the Chinese government had quarantined Wuhan just five days later. He also said that acting five days earlier would have cut the size of the epidemic. But, Zhong's study is based on information available in March, not in January. It is simply incredible that any government anywhere could have decided to close down an economy based on what was known in mid-January.
The theory of decision-making provides insights into the dilemmas that officials face when confronted with a potentially catastrophic but highly uncertain event. Historian and nuclear strategist Roberta Wohlstetter's 1962 book, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, about the Dec 7, 1941, Japanese surprise attack on the US Pacific fleet, introduced the concept of the "cost of responding to ambiguous warning". She found that there were, of course, plenty of warning signals that a Japanese attack might be underway on the morning of Dec 7. But, there had been lots of warning signals on many occasions in the preceding years.
After the attack, it was possible to go back and find warning signs that might have given leaders the information they needed to save lives and ships. Leaders were blamed for not spotting or acting on this information. But Wohlstetter showed that they acted responsibly given the real warnings they had and the cost of acting too rashly. National leaders constantly receive reports warning of many kinds of dangersÔºçmost of which do not come to fruition. It would be irresponsible and unsustainable to take very costly steps in response to each alarm bell.
The Chinese government took unprecedented steps to limit the spread of the virus and, in my view, did so astonishingly fast. No one had ever before taken the huge and costly decision to quarantine a large city and heavily populated province before, based on information that was inherently ambiguous. This step saved many lives in China and abroad. Plus, it signaled to the rest of the world the need to take the situation very seriously. This led other world leaders to also act expeditiously on the information available to them at the time.
It's time to stop listening to the armchair quarterbacks and the pundits shouting empty accusations. The economic and healthcare problems caused by the virus are far from over. The world will be a much better place if nations can work together to solve the real, ongoing problems.
The author is a senior China Daily staff commentator.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158891065695.jpeg
---
By DAVID SCOTT CLEGG | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-16 00:52

The author David Scott Clegg.
There are two truths. There used to be one.
Two truths. The narrative we tell ourselves, tell one another, to satisfy our worries, our fears, doubts, uncertainties. To conspire for what we desire, what we "need", even, determined through the narrowest of lens, the shortest of plans in sight, foresight.
Certainly in hindsight. And this truth as narrated, this fiction, keeping us from the one truth that is the only truth. The one truth we came here to know:
That whatever the truth, the game, our being as human in this world, this lifetime, we are in this together. And win or lose we do so ‚Äî as One.
There is a virus among us. A messenger. A teacher. And we so recalcitrant at times the student. So easily distracted from the truth through desires of this world. Power. Privilege. Dominion over another.
The next wave of leader, leading the masses of mankind. But to where exactly? And for what purpose greater than merely the matter of matter? For man is of matter, vibrating as energy, form, for such a brief moment in time.
If there is more beyond this ‚Äî and most believe it so in one form or another ‚Äî then by definitions alone, and the limitations thereof, greater purpose than this is at the center of the life experience. A shared experience.
And therein lay the clue.
Since the pandemic emerged, the US has made it a point to drive a false narrative as a stake into the heart of truth. It remains a master in controlling such narrative, spinning the story for political purpose.
Its current leaders find folly in fiction, jumping from plotline to plotline to see what will stick within the minds of the masses, some of whom would rather choose victimhood over a more empowered state of being.
When an event occurs that serves in shaking, awakening humanity through its own feared mortality ‚Äî an event like COVID-19 ‚Äî people are easily flocked to the game of blame.
Where conspicuous leaders use fear as flame to shift the consciousness, and with it activity, of its people in service to a cause lesser still than the one at hand that all must face together.
President Woodrow Wilson accomplished this in 1916, manufacturing consent for a war few Americans were keen to join. And with its military activity, a virus spread known only in name as Spanish flu, with its origins much closer to home.
President Donald Trump seeks similar manufacture today, waging war through words, tweets. Words without merit, certainly without valor when courage to speak truth is required. A virus weaponized through words alone, politicized through feigned power, privilege.
For true power resides not with titles but in concert with intelligence greater than the little wills of man. Great masters of past ‚Äî Confucius, Lao-Tzu, Franklin, Lincoln ‚Äî knew this. An intelligence that includes everyone, requires all to manifest best. For the only thing holding this together, holding us together, is the shared life experience. And the lessons availed.
The novel coronavirus is just one of many, the latest test to how mankind may choose to live. In fear or in kind.
COVID-19 as with the others will prove more messenger than menace. Here to teach each. About life. For rarely is the issue before us the issue at all. It is in the way we relate to the issues, the challenges we face. This ‚Ä¶ this is the issue. And opportunity.
We will succeed. We will persevere when it comes to this new virus. Not the first virus. Not the last we will see. We will indeed succeed in forming plans, executing strategies, creating vaccines in concert with antibodies.
We will succeed because this is how the story goes. The story of man on earth. Humankind. A narrative as storied as history may provide. Mankind, faced with challenge. And through the innate need to innovate, the courage to cooperate, we find our way through, beyond the challenge we face.
Virus. Disease. Anything that creates dis-ease within ourselves, our systems. And with one another, our sisters, our brothers, as diverse in look and type, as near identical when viewed genetically .
Succeed? Win as societies, as humanity? This will indeed be. But at what cost? And to what end? What are the lessons to be learned? And how willing the student as precursor to greater ability still? And the responsibility in requisite accompany to ability?
With this life experience, but a shared experience. Not only giving life meaning, but allowing us to move beyond illusion and into greater truth. Our reality as one humanity.
For this planet is to a degree an illusion. With our time on it temporary. Serving as playground to some, classroom for all. Living. Learning. Together. As One.
Until time is no longer.
And we long no more.
The author is the founder and chief executive of UNITE Education and former managing director of The HEAD Foundation.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/4/158956600762.jpeg
---
By Xu Shanpin | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-06-10 07:34

Police officers patrol near the Sydney Opera House following the implementation of stricter social-distancing and self-isolation rules to limit the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Sydney, Australia, April 6, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
China has issued an advisory asking its citizens to avoid traveling to Australia because of the rising attacks against people of Asian origin in the country. The Australian government following the United States administration's policy of blaming China for the novel coronavirus pandemic is perhaps the main reason for the ugly racial discrimination in the country.
Like the US, Australia too has politicized the pandemic by stigmatizing China, and pushing for an independent inquiry to determine the source of the virus. By insinuating that China is responsible for the global spread of the virus and pushing for an independent inquiry, the Australian government, think tanks and media outlets have not only added fuel to the US-conjured "conspiracy theory" against China but also damaged Sino-Australian relations.
The coronavirus pandemic has severely impacted countries' public health systems and the global economy. Against this background, after having largely contained the virus at home, China has been supplying respirators, facial masks, testing kits and other medical products, and dispatching medical teams to other countries. It has also been sharing its research results and virus-fighting experiences with the other countries and the World Health Organization to help them contain the pandemic. Besides, China also intends to supply coronavirus vaccine, when one is developed, as a public good to the world. Yet Australia, in tandem with the US, has spared no efforts to slander China.
There is a broad global consensus that all countries should jointly fight the pandemic, not lay a guilt trip on or stigmatize any country. China welcomes impartial, independent investigation into the novel coronavirus based on global scientific cooperation, but opposes presumption of guilt and a probe against a specific country.
Also, medical and health experts should conduct independent investigations only after the coronavirus outbreak is effectively contained. After all, learning lessons from crises is more important than pointing fingers at others. At a time when the world order and the global governance system are undergoing transformation, with emerging countries rising and US hegemony declining, Australia, a Western country dependent on the existing US-led world order, has been feeling uncomfortable about the changes and challenges.
Australia's worries have heightened particularly because of the US' strategic contraction policy which intensified after the US leader gave the "America first" slogan and initiated unilateral actions including withdrawing or threatening to withdraw from global and multilateral organizations and agreements. For instance, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has warned that Washington may stop sharing intelligence with Australia if Victoria state doesn't pull out of a telecommunications infrastructure deal under the China-proposed Belt and Road Initiative.
As it considers its alliance with the US highly important, Australia has echoed the US on various issuesÔºçincluding helping the US to increase its military presence in the Asia-Pacific regionÔºçto prove its loyalty to Washington and to defend Western values, which it believes will enhance its international status and increase its say in the international community.
Besides, since Australia has been accusing China of creating all sorts of problems, from interference in Australian domestic politics and elections to spreading the coronavirus, China-Australia ties have suffered setbacks on the diplomatic, political and security fronts, which eventually have harmed bilateral trade. And despite claiming that it has been trying to improve its relations with China, Australia has done nothing of the sort and thus harmed bilateral political trust.
The structural basis of the Beijing-Canberra relationship has changed, and Australia doesn't have many bargaining chips against China. So it is trying to stimulate Sino-Australian ties by strengthening the US-Australia alliance. This, Australia believes, will increase its bargaining power against and its strategic importance for China.
But since the impact of the coronavirus outbreak on China-Australia relations is not expected to be long-term, Canberra should improve its diplomatic ties with Beijing and put overall bilateral relations back on the track. As for China, it welcomes Australia to participate in equal and open negotiations to address common concerns.
The author is an adjunct researcher at the Center for Australia Studies, China University of Mining and Technology. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/89/159175482810.jpeg
---
By Dong Chuan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-05 07:23
The battle against the COVID-19 outbreak, which has affected almost every Chinese citizen's life, should forge forward strategically without sparing any efforts.
The Communist Party of China Central Committee with General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core has been leading the fight against the COVID-19 epidemic. It has been taking measures to control the epidemic, as well as maintain healthy economic development. So, from the highest authorities to the grassroots departments, all should strictly implement the CPC Central Committee's decisions, and society should unite under the strong leadership of the Party to win the fight against the epidemic.
The aim of the fight is to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus, safeguard people's health, promote scientific research to identify the origin of the disease and develop a vaccine, and help resume production to stabilize socioeconomic order. To make sure it wins the fight against the epidemic, China has mobilized officials, publicity departments and the military to control the virus.
Since economic adjustment measures play a vital role in preventing and controlling any epidemic, it is necessary to take steps to resume full production. Or else, social problems such as unemployment and loss of livelihoods will worsen, and the impact of the epidemic on different industries and industrial chains such as hospitality, catering, tourism and agriculture will increase.
Five departments including the Finance Ministry jointly issued a document in early February vowing to increase funding for enterprises that play a critical role in fighting disease outbreaks, such as pharmaceutical and medical supply companies.
For instance, to support the enterprises that are vital to epidemic prevention and control, the People's Bank of China, the country's central bank, has carried out hundreds of billions of yuan worth of reverse purchases to ease the liquidity strain and encourage prime-based loans totaling 300 billion yuan ($42.75 billion).
And the State Taxation Administration has implemented 18 measures to support the epidemic fight, including preferential tax policies to help enterprises resume production, improved on-site tax payment services to prevent disease transmission, and adjusted tax administration measures to reduce the pressure on enterprises. Accordingly, the local governments have also issued measures to help enterprises resume production.
Also, the international community's understanding and support will help us win the fight against the epidemic. Ever since the outbreak emerged in Wuhan, Hubei province, China has regularly shared information on the measures it has taken to contain the disease with the people in China and abroad, winning the praise of the international community, including the United Nations. And it has constantly maintained that the fight against the epidemic is part of its efforts to build a community with a shared future for mankind.
More important, with the COVID-19 spreading to more countries, including the Republic of Korea, Japan, Italy and Iran, international cooperation has become increasingly important to win the battle against the epidemic. As part of international cooperation, China has already donated 250,000 face masks to Iran.
Since it is important to scotch rumors in order to prevent social unrest and win the fight against disease outbreaks, more than 300 journalists are at the epicenter of the outbreak, Hubei province and its capital Wuhan, to report from the front line about the effectiveness of the measures China has taken to contain the disease.
China has also taken action against non-performing officials and law-breaching individuals to boost epidemic control measures. And the military has made great contributions to the fight against the epidemic, particularly with its medical assistance to the front line medical staff.
China should learn a lesson from the coronavirus outbreak, and intensify reform, especially in the medical and related fields, so as to better deal with such emergencies in the future. Especially, it needs to strengthen its emergency response system, strategic reserve and production, and urban governance. Also, it should more actively promote the modernization of the national governance system and governance capacity.
Moreover, the authorities should make greater efforts to heal the psychological trauma of people, especially those people in Hubei. Under the strong leadership of the Party, China will win the battle against the epidemic and realize national rejuvenation.
The author is a deputy director of international exchanges office at Beijing Language and Culture University, and PhD candidate at the Party School of the Central Committee of CPC. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/158336661818.jpeg
---
By Zamir Ahmed Awan | People's Daily Online | Updated: 2020-03-17 15:51

An employee of Baishitong International Travel Service disinfects a pickup truck the company uses for its food delivery business in Shiyan, Hubei province. [Photo provided to China Daily]
A spokesman for China's foreign ministry, Zhao Lijian, tweeted on Friday that "it might be the US army" that brought the coronavirus to China, giving an official boost to a conspiracy theory that had been allowed to circulate on Chinese social media for weeks. The conspiracy posits that 300 athletes from the US military who last October attended the 7th Military World Games in Wuhan, where the epidemic first broke out, were infected with the virus, causing it to spread in China.
Zhao's comment accompanied a video from a US congressional hearing last week on the country's response to the epidemic. Robert Redfield, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), said in the video that some patients who were previously thought to have died from the flu were found to have actually died from the coronavirus. The video began trending on Chinese social network Weibo, with many commenting that they now firmly believe that the US has covered up facts related to the disease.
The US sees China as a threat to its unique superpower status. China's economic growth had been expected to surpass the US in a few years, and the US has taken all possible measures to halt Chinese growth. The US launched a trade war to "contain" China and slapped hi-tech giant Huawei with sanctions. On top of that, the US put sanctions on important Chinese nationals, preventing them from travelling to the US. Chinese students are under scrutiny and facing severe difficulties there. Confucius Institutes, outlets for Chinese culture and language, have been targeted. But can the US go that far? It's beyond our imagination.
The media has been used extensively to defame and bash China. Even at this very critical time, when China is immersed in the fight against Coronavirus, the US and its allies, and some Western media made derogatory remarks and published fake and humiliating news like "Sick Man of Asia", "Made in China", the Chinese flag with 5 Coronavirus instead of 5 golden stars, and so on.
The US has been using all tools at its disposal to counter China, including diplomatic, political, economic, social, and science and technology, including the health sector. If evidence proves that the origin of the coronavirus was the US, and it was a deliberate attempt to "contain China", it might be really embarrassing for the whole world. The coronavirus outbreak has not only harmed China, but already spread to over 135 countries and taken precious human lives around the globe. This must be a crime against humanity. Even the coming generation will also hate such heinous crimes.
The spread of coronavirus has already been declared a pandemic and the whole world is on high alert. All nations are taking preventive measures to stop its spread and utilizing all possible resources at their disposal. China is the only nation that has had visible success in overcoming the outbreak. Chinese experiences may be utilized as "best practices" to defeat the outbreak. China is a mature nation and a very responsible state. It is also a global power that recognizes its global obligations. The Chinese are generous people and will seek to cooperate with all nations.
According to WHO, the global death toll has now reached 5,720, while 152,428 cases have been confirmed as of Sunday morning, and those figures continue to rise. In China, it has been almost brought under control, and casualities have dropped to almost single digits. Life has been returning to normal and economic activities are being partially resumed. Meanwhile, the epicenter has shifted to Italy, and the whole of Europe is facing a huge threat. The rate of spread in Europe and America is rapid and society is in a state of massive panic. Grocery shops are flooded with customers and people are stockpiling food and basic living necessities. Some countries are facing a shortage of medical supplies, hygiene products and food. People are in a panic and quarrelling with each other over petty issues.
Under this scenario, we should not fight with each other but fight against the pandemic. Join hands and defeat our common enemy - Covid-19. Respect humanity! Rescue human life!
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158443219378.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAOYU | China Daily | Updated: 2021-03-27 08:13

Members of a World Health Organization expert team tasked with origin-tracing of the novel coronavirus travel in a bus after their arrival in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Jan 14, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
China has overcome difficulties to facilitate two trips undertaken by international experts in the country during the COVID-19 outbreak, setting an example for global cooperation and openness, a Foreign Ministry official said on Friday.
The World Health Organization has dispatched two teams of experts to visit China since the epidemic broke out. The trip last February aimed at expanding knowledge on effective disease control measures, and the other from Jan 14 to Feb 10 strove to enhance understanding of the virus' origins.
Yang Tao, director-general of the ministry's Department of International Organizations and Conferences, said at a briefing that during these visits China was coping with local outbreaks or infection clusters, and some experts had to be pulled from the frontline to join the mission.
By addressing challenges and organizing the two visits, China has played an exemplary role in implementing resolutions adopted by the World Health Assembly, he said.
"It shows that China has always been open and transparent. China's prevention and control efforts are conducted in the sunshine, and there is nothing to hide," Yang said.
However, following the recent trip, a handful of countries have jumped to attack WHO experts for patronizing China and conspired to sign a joint statement objecting to an upcoming final report summarizing findings from the trip.
"Such acts are a politicization of scientific questions and a double standard," Yang said.
"Political manipulation will damage the global battle against the disease and may result in more lost lives, which is extremely immoral."
The briefing in Beijing was attended by diplomats from about 50 countries, the Arab League and the African Union.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban receives an injection of China's Sinopharm vaccine against COVID-19 in Budapest, on Feb 28, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
Feng Zijian, deputy director-general of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Friday that experts participating in the recent visit have all agreed the mission had progressed smoothly as planned and they reached their goals.
The team concluded during an earlier briefing that the virus most likely first appeared in humans after spilling over from an animal, and the theory that the virus leaked from laboratories is extremely unlikely.
Feng said that to pinpoint the origin of the virus, it is significant to launch a global search for early infections and early cases testing positive for the virus.
More sampling and testing of bats and other animals susceptible to the virus should be implemented across the globe. The role of cold-chain and cold products in aiding virus transmission is worth exploring further, he said.
Yang added that China is willing to continue cooperation with the international community and will provide assistance within its capacity.
As the first major economy to declare COVID-19 vaccines a global public good, he said, China will not impose export restrictions on vaccines and will help boost vaccine accessibility in developing countries.
The latest data from the National Health Commission show that by Thursday, more than 91.3 million COVID-19 vaccine doses had been administered nationwide, up by nearly 5.5 million from Wednesday.
---
[Photo/Agencies]

Four peer reviews published by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology refute a study that asserts the virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic was created by intentional genetic manipulation in China.

All four published peer reviews found that the study has "serious flaws and errors in the methods and data" that render its conclusions "misinformative".

The study, released on Sept 14, implicates numerous research groups in contributing to the pandemic and calls for "an independent investigation into the relevant research laboratories".

The research was conducted by Li-Meng Yan, who claims to be a former researcher at the Hong Kong School of Public Health, as well as Shu Kang, Jie Guan and Shanchang Hu.

Shortly after the study was released, Rapid Reviews: COVID-19, a journal that seeks to accelerate peer review of COVID-19-related research preprints under the MIT Press, one of the largest and most distinguished university presses and a leading publisher, published four peer reviews of the study.

The journal sought peer reviews from world-renowned experts in virology, molecular biology, structural biology, computational biology, vaccine development and medicine.

An editorial statement in the journal said that reviewers have collectively debunked three claims in the "Yan Report": bat coronaviruses were used as a background strain to engineer SARS-CoV-2; evidence suggests prior screening for a virus targeting the human ACE2 receptor; and the fur-in-like cleavage site is unnatural and provides evidence of engineering.

"There was a general consensus that the study's claims were better explained by potential political motivations rather than scientific integrity. The peer reviewers arrived at these common opinions independently, further strengthening the credibility of the peer reviews," said the editorial.

Insufficient evidence

One of the peer reviews was by Takahiko Koyama of the IBM Research Computational Biology Center in Yorktown Heights, New York. He concluded that "the manuscript does not demonstrate sufficient scientific evidences to support genetic manipulation origin of SARS-CoV-2".

The peer review by Adam Lauring, from the University of Michigan Internal Medicine Department, said the authors of the report "don't contest the natural origin hypothesis with data. Instead, they offer ideas and opinions".

He also questioned the background of the research.

"A key aspect of research ethics and the responsible conduct of research is to include information on who supported the work－financially or otherwise. The authors' affiliation is the Rule of Law Society and the Rule of Law Foundation. It is not clear who supports this foundation or what its purpose is," wrote Lauring. "It is also unethical to promote what are essentially conspiracy theories that are not founded in fact."

Reviewer Marvin Reitz from the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute said: "My opinion is that this is an inept attempt to make the case the virus was man-made. There are no concrete facts in this report. I do wonder why this is coming out now."

https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1496/95/160223070663.jpeg


---
People walk through the streets of Chinatown in New York City on March 23, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]

Asian Americans experienced the biggest spike in serious incidents of online hate and harassment compared with other groups, according to the Anti-Defamation League's annual survey published Wednesday.

About 17 percent of Asian Americans surveyed said that they experienced severe online harassment compared with 11 percent last year, the largest uptick in comparison to other groups, according to the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), which monitors the activities of domestic and international hate groups. The survey defines severe online harassment as sexual harassment, stalking, physical threats, swatting, doxing and sustained harassment.

Half of the Asian American respondents who were harassed said it was because of their race or identity. Overall, 21 percent of Asian American respondents said they were harassed online.

The ADL survey of 2,251 individuals conducted by YouGov, a public opinion and data analytics firm, shows that racist incidents against the Asian community aren't just happening offline.

"The spike in physical violence against Asian-Americans across the nation was whipped up in large part by bigotry and conspiracy theories that grew online, fanned by national leaders, including former President Trump's incendiary rhetoric blaming China for the pandemic and referring to the virus as the 'China plague' or 'kung flu,'" researchers said in the report.

Anti-Asian sentiment increased 85 percent on Twitter after Trump was diagnosed with COVID-19 last fall, the ADL report said. Trump also used the term "China virus" in several interviews.

Asian Americans experienced the most harassment on Facebook, followed by Twitter, Instagram and Google-owned YouTube, according to the survey.

A study published March 17 by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco tracked nearly 700,000 tweets that used either the neutral hashtag "#covid19" or "#chinesevirus" from March 9 to March 23, 2020.

Researchers found evidence of an association between the hashtag #chinesevirus and anti-Asian language. Twenty percent of tweets that used "#covid19" showed anti-Asian sentiment, compared with 50 percent of tweets that used the hashtag #chinesevirus.

Trump's use of the phrase in his speeches and on Twitter paralleled an increase in its use by others online, the report said. The mean number of daily users in the #covid19 group rose by 379 percent after Trump's tweet, compared with an increase of #chinesevirus by 8,351 percent, the report said.

The World Health Organization (WHO) warned in 2015 that naming diseases after specific areas or ethnic groups can perpetuate xenophobia around the globe.

WHO announced the official name "COVID-19" for the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus on Feb 11, 2020. COVID-19 is an abbreviation of "coronavirus disease 2019". "CO" stands for "corona", "VI" for "virus" and "D" for disease.

The WHO, as well as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, issued guidelines for this usage, warning against linking the disease to a specific place or area. Asian American communities have warned for several months that political leaders including Trump linking COVID-19 to China could lead to violence.

ADL CEO Jonathan Greenblatt said the survey's findings, which come amid a growing outcry over the rise in attacks on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders nationwide, show that efforts to curb surging anti-Asian sentiment by social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter and Google's YouTube have fallen short.

The report was issued the day before the CEOs of Facebook, Google and Twitter will appear virtually before the House Energy and Commerce Committee to address how false information around the pandemic and the election spreads online and to discuss their handling of misinformation, disinformation and other harmful content.

In their released planned testimonies, Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and Twitter's Jack Dorsey plan to lay out how their companies have battled misinformation.

"Our society is deeply divided, and we see that on our services too," Zuckerberg said in the remarks. In a statement, Facebook said it doesn't allow hate speech and removes content that attacks someone for who they are, their race, ethnicity or national origin.

Anti-Asian hate crime increased 149 percent in 2020 in 16 of America's largest cities, according to research released in early March by the Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism at California State University. The first spike of anti-Asian crime occurred in March and April, when COVID-19 cases just started rising in the US.

Stop AAPI Hate, a group that tracks discrimination and xenophobia against Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, found nearly 3,800 reported hate incidents targeting Asian Americans in the past year.

But those numbers are probably a small fraction of actual incidents, including crimes. One in 4 Americans have witnessed someone blaming Asian people for the coronavirus pandemic, a new USA Today/Ipsos poll finds.

The poll released on Sunday finds that while a majority of Americans believe the coronavirus pandemic is a natural disaster, around a quarter of Americans blame China for the pandemic. Democrats are almost twice as likely as Republicans to say they have seen blame directed at Asian people.
---
More than 70 scholars in the public health field signed a letter imploring leaders in the US and China to put partisan interests aside and coordinate their responses to the COVID-19 outbreak.

"We commend government agencies in Washington, Beijing and elsewhere for the energy they are expending to fight COVID-19. We want to implore leaders, however, against recklessly politicizing this pandemic," said the open letter issued Friday.

Signatories include Matthew Kohrman, associate professor of medical anthropology at Stanford University; Xi Chen, assistant professor at the Yale School of Public Health; and David Christiani, professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.

In the letter, the scholars said diseases are political and they necessitate governmental action and that no one should try to suggest otherwise.

"Unchecked, they devastate communities and economies, ravaging the most vulnerable among us the hardest," they wrote.

The letter, which was published in The New York Times in a shortened version, encourages global leaders to treat the pandemic as a political foe, because it has led to millions of people put out of work and said it could kill untold numbers of people.

They said "a powerful, multilevel, transnational, coordinated array of political responses must occur".

"The use of government authority, invoking the bully pulpit and the strong arm of local officials, is needed like never before. In other words, more politics, not less, is required when it comes to COVID-19," the scholars wrote.

"But leaders in Washington, Beijing and beyond must avoid infusing the politics needed to tackle this disease with tactics designed to serve their own partisan interests," they added, stressing that their power should be applied "to care for others, to marshal resources for disease prevention and treatment — not to deflect blame, shore up approval ratings, settle scores, or demonize people because of ethnicity at home or abroad".

"Striking a balance, between the right and wrong ways to politicize COVID-19 responses, is hard given the tenets of containment," they said.

The scholars wrote that the public is told to secure themselves, their families and their countries, but diseases know no borders and medical supply chains are international. Therefore, they said, "scientific innovation and crisis management necessitate data sharing".

"Intergovernmental collaboration, as a consequence, cannot be sacrificed to containment. They must go hand-in-hand," they stressed.

They called on leaders to be cautious when deploying their political capital to fight COVID-19 for another reason: "Relationships can take years to nurture and only moments to destroy, especially when an ill-advised tweet, meme or comment is unleashed and spreads globally.

"Do not be flip when it comes to your important relationships," the scholars warned.

They said "there is no place today for politicians who traffic in conspiracy theories or insulting language about virological origins".

"Now is the time, instead, for leaders to re-build global public health alliances, such as the woefully underfunded World Health Organization, to renew scientific exchanges, and to communicate respectfully across borders," they wrote.
---
By MAY ZHOU in Houston | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-10-09 07:23

[Photo/Agencies]
Four peer reviews published by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology refute a study that asserts the virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic was created by intentional genetic manipulation in China.
All four published peer reviews found that the study has "serious flaws and errors in the methods and data" that render its conclusions "misinformative".
The study, released on Sept 14, implicates numerous research groups in contributing to the pandemic and calls for "an independent investigation into the relevant research laboratories".
The research was conducted by Li-Meng Yan, who claims to be a former researcher at the Hong Kong School of Public Health, as well as Shu Kang, Jie Guan and Shanchang Hu.
Shortly after the study was released, Rapid Reviews: COVID-19, a journal that seeks to accelerate peer review of COVID-19-related research preprints under the MIT Press, one of the largest and most distinguished university presses and a leading publisher, published four peer reviews of the study.
The journal sought peer reviews from world-renowned experts in virology, molecular biology, structural biology, computational biology, vaccine development and medicine.
An editorial statement in the journal said that reviewers have collectively debunked three claims in the "Yan Report": bat coronaviruses were used as a background strain to engineer SARS-CoV-2; evidence suggests prior screening for a virus targeting the human ACE2 receptor; and the fur-in-like cleavage site is unnatural and provides evidence of engineering.
"There was a general consensus that the study's claims were better explained by potential political motivations rather than scientific integrity. The peer reviewers arrived at these common opinions independently, further strengthening the credibility of the peer reviews," said the editorial.
Insufficient evidence
One of the peer reviews was by Takahiko Koyama of the IBM Research Computational Biology Center in Yorktown Heights, New York. He concluded that "the manuscript does not demonstrate sufficient scientific evidences to support genetic manipulation origin of SARS-CoV-2".
The peer review by Adam Lauring, from the University of Michigan Internal Medicine Department, said the authors of the report "don't contest the natural origin hypothesis with data. Instead, they offer ideas and opinions".
He also questioned the background of the research.
"A key aspect of research ethics and the responsible conduct of research is to include information on who supported the workÔºçfinancially or otherwise. The authors' affiliation is the Rule of Law Society and the Rule of Law Foundation. It is not clear who supports this foundation or what its purpose is," wrote Lauring. "It is also unethical to promote what are essentially conspiracy theories that are not founded in fact."
Reviewer Marvin Reitz from the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute said: "My opinion is that this is an inept attempt to make the case the virus was man-made. There are no concrete facts in this report. I do wonder why this is coming out now."
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/95/160220910995.jpeg
---
China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-18 07:31

FILE PHOTO: People arrive and depart from Broadcasting House, the headquarters of the BBC, in London Britain July 2, 2015. [Photo/Agencies]
On Friday, China's broadcasting regulator, the National Radio and Television Administration, announced on its official website that it had pulled BBC World News off the air in China for serious content violation. It also said that it will not accept any application from BBC for renewing its license for one year.
The regulator said BBC had violated certain basic principles of journalism and China's national interests by challenging ethnic unity in the country.
BBC, it said, was fabricating lies about China. For example, it had politicized reports about the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic by circulating conspiracy theories and passed off a video showing Chinese police carrying out anti-terrorism drills in Wuhan as instances of Chinese law enforcers "violating human rights".
In reports from the Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region, BBC cooked up stories of "systematic" abuse of women inside "re-education camps". Anybody with a conscience should ask what happened to BBC's journalistic ethics.
China has repeatedly urged BBC to make amends and apologize for its mistakes. The Chinese embassy in London even made video appointments with the BBC news editor on these issues. However, BBC denied the facts.
As stated by a Chinese netizen: "When 1.4 billion people, about 20 percent of the world's total, do not trust BBC, how can it claim to be a trustworthy media outlet? Is there arrogance or ignorance behind its claims? I think both."
Those fabricating lies often defend themselves using the garb of press freedom. However, "press freedom" does not mean the freedom to fabricate lies or bad-mouth some countries. It is common practice for countries to regulate media outlets and the NRTA has done so according to law.
BBC should think about its wrongs, give up its Cold War mentality, and stop manufacturing fake news. We take this opportunity to tell BBC that any move to badmouth China is an offense to the Chinese people.
---
By HONG XIAO and AI HEPING in New York | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-05 08:05

A screenshot of the report of The New York Times.
International public health scholars implore world leaders to cooperate
More than 70 public health scholars signed a letter imploring world leaders to put partisan interests aside and coordinate their responses to the COVID-19 outbreak.
"We commend government agencies in Washington, Beijing and elsewhere for the energy they are expending to fight COVID-19. We want to implore leaders, however, against recklessly politicizing this pandemic," said the open letter issued on Friday.
Signatories included Matthew Kohrman, associate professor of medical anthropology at Stanford University; Xi Chen, assistant professor at the Yale School of Public Health; and David Christiani, professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Tian Dongxia, an associate professor from Guangzhou Medical University in Guangdong province was also among them.
In the letter, the academics said diseases necessitate governmental action and no one should try to suggest otherwise.
"Unchecked, they devastate communities and economies, ravaging the most vulnerable among us the hardest," they wrote.
The letter, published in The New York Times in a shortened version, encourages global leaders to treat the pandemic as a political foe because it has caused millions to lose their jobs and could kill untold numbers of people. They said "a powerful, multilevel, transnational, coordinated array of political responses must occur".
"The use of government authority, invoking the bully pulpit and the strong arm of local officials, is needed like never before. In other words, more politics, not less, is required when it comes to COVID-19," they wrote.
But leaders must avoid mixing the politics needed to tackle this disease with tactics designed to serve their own partisan interests, and their power should be applied "to care for others, to marshal resources for disease prevention and treatment-not to deflect blame, shore up approval ratings, settle scores, or demonize people because of ethnicity at home or abroad", they stressed. "Striking a balance, between the right and wrong ways to politicize COVID-19 responses, is hard given the tenets of containment."
They wrote that the public has been told to secure themselves, their families and their countries, but diseases know no borders and medical supply chains are international. "Scientific innovation and crisis management necessitate data sharing," they said. "Intergovernmental collaboration, as a consequence, cannot be sacrificed to containment. They must go hand-inhand."
They called on leaders to be cautious for another reason when deploying their political capital: "Relationships can take years to nurture and only moments to destroy, especially when an ill-advised tweet, meme or comment is unleashed and spreads globally. Do not be flip when it comes to your important relationships."
They said, "There is no place today for politicians who traffic in conspiracy theories or insulting language about virological origins. Now is the time, instead, for leaders to rebuild global public health alliances, such as the woefully underfunded World Health Organization, to renew scientific exchanges and to communicate respectfully across borders."
A tally by Johns Hopkins University on Sunday showed that novel coronavirus deaths in the United States had climbed by 1,450 in the previous 24 hours, bringing total fatalities to more than 67,600-by far the highest COVID-19 death toll of any country. The US had reported more than 1.15 million COVID-19 cases as of Sunday.
Globally, there were 3,356,205 confirmed cases as of Sunday, including 238,730 deaths, the World Health Organization reported.
People in many parts of the US went to beaches, golf courses and parks over the weekend-or got haircuts and in some cases tattoos-as many states eased stay-at-home rules used to stop the virus' spread.
Former US Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb warned on Sunday that if states allow schools, workplaces and other public areas to "let their guard down", an explosion of new infections could bubble up into a "new epidemic" or "large outbreak". New cases are still happening in about 20 states, he said.
US President Donald Trump said on Sunday he now believes as many as 100,000 Americans could die in the pandemic, after the death toll passed his earlier estimates, but said he was confident a vaccine would be developed by year's end.
Chen Yingqun in Beijing, Xinhua and agencies contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/92/158865135622.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhouxiang | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-02 13:48

A sculpture in the likeness of a coronavirus particle is seen outside a property that borders a road leading to St. Michaels, Maryland, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak in the US, April 27, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
On Friday, the World Health Organization reiterated that the novel coronavirus, which caused a major pandemic in the world, is "natural in origin".
Frankly speaking, that's not a fresh conclusion. As early as in January, there had been wide consensus among scientists that the novel coronavirus could not possibly have come from man-made sources and that its origin was definitely in nature. A few Indian scientists claimed it might have been "man-made" in origin in their shared paper on the pre-publishing website BioRxiv, but they soon withdrew that paper and apologized for that groundless guess.
Yet some US politicians have insisted on conspiracy theories despite the wide consensus among global scientists. In their tweets, public speeches as well as interviews, they repeatedly called for "investigations" of China. Their conspiracy theories against China are so evident in their words and deeds, that one has to wonder why they harbor so much hate and bias against China.
At least one thing is certain -- namely, that the US politicians involved lack the most basic scientific spirit and knowledge. These are the same politicians who openly mentioned injecting disinfectants to cure the novel coronavirus, after which cases of mistaken exposure to bleach doubled in New York alone;
Who went to a hospital without wearing a mask, and was the only person in a photo doing so;
Who threatened to fire a top scientist even though the latter enjoyed wide popularity and credibility, only because he tried to say something different from what the politicians wanted.
US politicians were so busy blaming others that they had no time to protect Americans from COVID-19. By Friday, the number of infections in the US reached 1.13 million, while deaths hit 65,435, topping the world.
Do they mean to make it "America First" in terms of infections? Being elected by US voters and supported by US taxpayers, they are tasked with protecting the US people, but now they have failed in doing that.
Better to spare some time and energy on helping their own people and prevent the novel coronavirus from spreading too much further.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/82/158839948053.jpeg
---
By Ke Meng | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-06 09:22
A person wears a face mask while waiting in line at a coronavirus walk-up testing site at Public Safety Headquarters in Jersey City, New Jersey, US, on April 10, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The global fight against COVID-19 is paralyzed by the absence of collective action among nations.
A lot has been said about the political drivers of this unfortunate situation, such as the leadership deficit as the United States retreats from globalism, and the democracy deficit due to the European Union's unfinished reforms.
A deeper factor that has been overlooked is the empathy deficit, which denotes a lack of willingness of people from different backgrounds to engage in dialogue aimed at mutual understanding.
The rise in populism as well as anti-globalization tendencies are political symptoms of this empathy deficit.
The lack of mutual trust and collective action among the international community to combat COVID-19 is the latest symptom of this deficit. The "disease" of empathy deficit has been plaguing the world long before we faced the pandemic.
It was inevitable that the empathy deficit would shape the world's response to COVID-19. That is why, instead of being united in the fight against the common global threat, a few political groups and countries are advancing narrow and partisan interests.
Their strategy includes stigmatizing the nation first affected by COVID-19, conjuring up conspiracy theories about its origin in order to shift blame, and discrediting policies of the country that successfully contained the outbreak to cover up their own sloppiness in dealing with the crisis.
Such actions disregard the lessons gained by other nations in their struggle against the pandemic, besides reducing trust among nations and preventing much-need-ed collective international action.
The empathy deficit has been brought about by socioeconomic and technological trends.
First is the rising inequality and resultant stagnation of intergenerational social mobility. If people are stuck in their social origins, then how can you expect those from different social backgrounds to have empathy for each other?
Second is immigration under the neoliberal migration regimen, which has allowed people to choose countries of their own liking.
The final trend is technological. For years, personal data (for example, data on online searches and browsing behavior) has been harvested by big technology companies to develop algorithms. As a result, people are confined to their information cocoons, gradually losing their capacity to feel empathic toward each other.
The neoliberal paradigm of globalization and innovation has created powerful socioeconomic and technological forces that isolate individuals, communities and nations, leading to an empathy deficit on a global scale.
The global spread of COVID-19 has alerted us to the dangers of anti-globalization. To reverse this position, global public health governance should be improved through different mechanisms, laying the institutional foundation to nourish global empathy and deepen international cooperation.
A new mode of globalization should be launched in which governments, private companies and NGOs should work together to provide global public goods.
This has already happened during the COVID-19 outbreak. Relying on the institutional infrastructure of the "health silk road", Huawei has provided medical supplies abroad. Several countries, from Ukraine to Uganda, have received relief materials from the Alibaba Foundation.
To sustain the much-needed new mode of globalization that has struggled to emerge from the current crisis, substantive rationality, or normative values, should be instilled into the process to make it go beyond pure calculation of interests so as to be firmly anchored in norms and empathetic attitudes.
Such an empathetic norm cannot be derived from the move to stop funding the World Health Organization during the current crises, or from accusing Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates of treason when he decided to provide an additional donation to the WHO.
It has to be rooted in the idea that treats the human race as a community with a shared future, as exemplified by China's global response to COVID-19.
Indeed, the pandemic is a reminder that, in the words of the English poet John Donne, "No man is an island entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent".
The world is like this. It deserves to be treated like this.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/28/158873778205.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-23 00:18

FILE PHOTO: A medical technologist tests a respiratory panel at Northwell Health Labs, where the same test will be used on the COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, after being authorized to begin semi-automated testing by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in Lake Success, New York, US, March 11, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Despite epidemiologists and virologists around the world agreeing that the novel coronavirus has its origin in nature ‚Äî based on their respective research ‚Äî Fox News is pushing the conspiracy theory that the novel coronavirus originated in the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
After the US administration started brazenly calling it the "Chinese virus" in the middle of last month, the news network seized on this as a rich new vein to exploit for its China-bashing.
It is the worsening situation at home that has prompted the administration's default television mouthpiece to engage in the sort of rumormongering usually found in the more far-flung regions of cyberspace.
While China has seen a rise and fall in both infections and deaths in the space of two months, without the usual plateau and with a low peak ‚Äî which are both attributable to the actions the country took to restrict the transmission of the virus ‚Äî the US is experiencing a long plateau with a high number of deaths and infections. The rate of daily infections in the US is more than 10 times the peak level in China, and has lasted for weeks without showing any signs of ebbing.
With the US administration being berated at home for its response to the pandemic, it has opened two new fronts, trying to blacken China and to whitewash itself.
While still combating the virus at home, now with the focus on imported infections, China too has opened two new fronts ‚Äî reviving the economy and assisting other countries in their battles against the virus. That includes extending a helping hand to the US.
True, as the White House boasted late last week, the number of deaths per 100,000 people in the US is only half or one-third that of some other developed countries. But with only 4.54 percent of the world's population, the US now accounts for one-third of the people infected with the virus worldwide, and one-fourth of all the virus-caused deaths.
American lives will not be saved by peddling rumors. That the US administration has latched onto the conspiracy theory as a way to deflect from its own failings merely highlights its own desperation.
Fox News may be able to fool some of the people some of the time with such false and malicious tatting, but the rising death toll in the US only makes its use and intent more conspicuous.
With regard to the origin of the virus, it is not yet clear who was infection one. But it is known that it originated in wild animals. The US should stick to the facts, one of which is: It is the virus that is the enemy, not China.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/98/158757883915.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-02-19 19:42

Medical workers in Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, on Jan 24, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Lancet, one of the world's top medical journals, published an open letter on Wednesday in support of scientists and public health and medical professionals in China fighting the novel coronavirus outbreak, and to condemn conspiracy theories surrounding the effort.
The letter was launched by 27 public health scientists from eight countries. A petition to spread awareness of the letter and its agenda began on Change.org on Wednesday and was close to reaching its goal of 500 signatories as of 6:30 pm the same day.
Chinese scientists and medical professionals have "worked diligently and effectively to rapidly identify the pathogen behind this outbreak, put in place significant measures to reduce its impact, and share their results transparently with the global health community," the letter reads. "This effort has been remarkable."
"The rapid, open, and transparent sharing of data on this outbreak is now being threatened by rumors and misinformation around its origins," it said. "We stand together to strongly condemn conspiracy theories suggesting that COVID-19 does not have a natural origin."
The letter said scientists from multiple countries have published and analyzed genomes of the novel coronavirus and they "overwhelmingly conclude that this coronavirus originated in wildlife".
"Conspiracy theories do nothing but create fear, rumors, and prejudice that jeopardize our global collaboration in the fight against this virus," the letter said. "We support the call from the Director-General of WHO to promote scientific evidence and unity over misinformation and conjecture. We want you, the science and health professionals of China, to know that we stand with you in your fight against this virus."
Rumors, misinformation and conspiracy theories have caused some Chinese scientists to receive threats of violence against their family and themselves, according to the petition statement.
The purpose of the letter and the petition is to let the "message of encouragement and solidarity" reach as wide an audience as possible at this critical moment of combating the viral outbreak, and quash any unfounded rumors.
Pauline Skarrott, a petition signatory, wrote in a comment that the letter sends support to all frontline staff working in China who are dealing with ill and frightened patients infected with the virus.
"This puts them at great personal risk. They have my respect and gratitude," the comment reads.
A comment by Miles Fahlman said, "I'm signing because of the loss of Chinese healthcare professionals; they are brave and committed in the name of public health. I stand in allegiance with them, long may they live, long may they fight on to a new horizon in China."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/25/158211500273.jpeg
---
By Harvey Morris | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-12 10:17
United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is seen on a video screen. [Photo/Agencies]
The world is facing a parallel threat alongside the COVID-19 crisis, according to United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who warned of a "tsunami of hate" that has accompanied the spread of the virus.
In a global appeal in which the UN chief called for international solidarity, he lamented that "the pandemic continues to unleash a tsunami of hate and xenophobia, scapegoating and scare-mongering".
When Beijing was still tackling the peak of its own health crisis, people of Chinese origin faced physical and verbal abuse in a number of Western countries from those who linked them to the spread of the novel coronavirus.
Since then, such prejudice has spread like the virus to attack any minority that excites the hatred of the xenophobesÔºçmigrants, refugees, Muslims, Jews and even the elderly.
Although the so-called alt-right has been at the forefront of spreading anti-minority smears online, some politicians have contributed to fuelling the phenomenon.
At a time when experts were warning against labeling the new disease "the China virus", United States President Donald Trump did just that, publicly using the phrase more than 20 times in the second half of March.
Since then the pandemic has provoked a bonanza of misinformation from online conspiracy theorists, who have targeted not just minorities but also individuals, such as philanthropists George Soros and Bill Gates.
In a recent broadcast, the far-right, pro-Trump One America News Network linked Soros, Gates, the "deep state" and China to a global conspiracy to establish sweeping population controlÔºçand even threw former US president Bill Clinton into the mix for good measure.
More of the same can no doubt be anticipated in a febrile US election year in which the administration appears focused on blaming everyone except itself for the failings of the pandemic response.
The UN's Guterres, in his Friday appeal, said all societies needed to strengthen their immunity to the virus of hate. And, without naming names, he called on politicians "to show solidarity with all members of their societies and build and reinforce social cohesion".
In the UK, where police recorded a sharp increase in hate crimes against Chinese people as the COVID-19 outbreak took hold, online agitators have aired fake videos that appear to show British Muslims breaking lockdown regulations by attending mosques.
In France, one far-right website listed the names of Jewish experts in charge of the country's health system and denounced the efforts of a Jewish politician to ease the pressure on French prisons as a plot to "liberate 7,000 black and Arab cut-throats".
In Germany meanwhile, experts warned against the rise of what they called "pandemic populism" in which online conspiracists sought to link the health crisis to a range of their favorite political targets. The danger was that even the most outlandish claims could seep into the mainstream media or be spread by unwitting celebrities.
The UN's World Health Organization, already fully occupied with tackling the global response to COVID-19, has complained of an "infodemic "swirling across society.
Despite the concerns the conspiracy phenomenon is provoking among these experts and officials already working overtime to cope with the crisis, there are some signs of a fightback.
In Texas, the San Antonio City Council unanimously passed a resolution denouncing bigotry, anti-Semitism, crimes against Asian Americans and hate speech amid the pandemic.
On a global level, the UN is launching a new communications initiative "based on science, solutions and solidarity to fight misinformation".
"Fear, uncertainty, and the proliferation of fake news have the potential to weaken the national and global response to the virus, bolster nativist narratives and provide opportunities for those who may seek to exploit this moment to deepen social divisions," said Melissa Fleming, UN under-secretary-general for Global Communications, who is leading the campaign.
The campaign involves providing authoritative scientific information to counter myths and partnering with the big tech companies to get those messages online. It will also work more closely with journalists to combat falsehoods, fabrications and misinformation.
The UN and national authorities clearly hope the still, small voice of common sense can overcome the fog horn of nonsense, intentional or otherwise, that threatens to dominate the current debate.
Let us hope it is so. The world can deal with a physical pandemic, but the effort will be that much greater if it has to handle an informational one at the same time.
Harvey Morris is a senior media consultant for China Daily UK
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/14/158925627513.jpeg
---
Global TImes | Updated: 2020-03-19 09:56

Martin Jacques Photo: Sun Wei in London/GT
Editor's Note: Since the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, some Western media outlets and politicians have taken the opportunity to attack China's political system and the Communist Party of China. They have come up with a string of biased and absurd arguments to smear China's virus fight. What's behind those arguments? How can we fairly comment on China's efforts in the fight against the epidemic? Global Times (GT) reporters Sun Wei and Yan Yunming talked to Martin Jacques (Jacques), a senior fellow at the Department of Politics and International Studies at Cambridge University, on these issues.
GT: After more than a month since the outbreak of the coronavirus in China, the epidemic has been largely brought under control inside the country. How do you evaluate China's efforts in the fight against the epidemic?
Jacques: Judging by the situation now, China seems to have got on top of it, with the number of new cases declining. By and large, it looks as if China has managed to restrict the worst of it to Wuhan in Hubei Province. I think that the situation is looking encouraging.
GT: Some people view the epidemic control work as an assessment of different political systems. How do you evaluate the measures taken by different countries such as China, Japan and South Korea?
Jacques: I think that there was a lot of criticism in the West at the outset for a month or two, and it's still there. You can see it and read it that somehow China has made a big mistake, and it was a reflection on the political system and so on. But that position is losing attraction for the reason that China's clearly being extremely effective in dealing with the coronavirus. That position also fails to recognize the huge problems in two senses: one, it was a very big outbreak, and two, from the outset, China did not know what it was - a completely new virus, which was previously unknown to humanity. There clearly were some mistakes early on. We don't really know yet because we don't know the chronology of the narrative, but clearly the problem was concentrated in Wuhan. There was slowness in realising the dangers that were involved, an attempt to delay action, an unwillingness to be open with the public. That was bad. But we must also remember that this was a new virus that no-one knew anything about. China was, if you like, the guinea pig. China's problem and everyone else's problems were fundamentally different. China was faced with a new virus. Everyone else can learn from China. Because of China they know what the coronavirus is. They don't have to start all over again.
But once the Chinese government got into gear on the question, realized how dangerous it was, then China offered a textbook handling of the situation. I think the capacity of the state in China to deal with emergencies of this kind is far more developed and far more capable than could be achieved by any Western government. The Chinese system, the Chinese government, is superior to other goverments in handling big challenges like this. And there are two reasons: First of all, the Chinese state is a very effective institution, able to think strategically and mobilise society. And the other reason is that the Chinese expect the government to take leadership on these kinds of questions and they will follow that leadership.
We have to bear in mind that this was a completely new virus. Of course, mistakes are always made in such circumstances. Most Western countries, probably all, are ill-prepared for what is now happening, despite what China's experience offered them. They are being too slow. They are greatly underestimating the number of cases because testing is far too limited.
GT: Some politicians, such as US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have politicized the epidemic and attacked China's political system and the leadership of the Communist Party. What's your comment?
Jacques: Disgraceful. Absolutely disgraceful. Too many Western politicians and the Western media responded to what was a grave medical health crisis in China in a way that was completely lacking in compassion and simply used as a stick to beat China. And in doing so also explicitly or implicitly, they encouraged a certain kind of racism against the Chinese, not just the Chinese in China, but Chinese everywhere. So the Chinese have had a hard time in relationship to this. There were many articles in the British media of the same ilk. They just used it as a means to criticize the Chinese government. But this argument is getting more and more into difficulties now for two reasons. First, China is dealing with the epidemic in an increasingly effective and impressive manner. The WHO has praised China's contribution in strong terms over the course of the last week. The fact of the matter now is that the Chinese would appear to be on top of the situation. Second, the West is now at the sharp end, it is spreading rapidly in many countries. We'll see how they manage. I am not too optimistic on the basis of the evidence so far. We were too slow to see the danger: too many thought it was a Chinese problem. They have already started to go quiet in their criticism of China and even admit that they must learn from China.
GT: Talking about racist remarks, one article in the WSJ called China "The Real Sick Man of Asia." And some European media outlets said the virus was "made in China." Why has racism risen amid the epidemic?
Jacques: There's a long history of disease being associated with races and ethnicities. This goes back a very long time. HIV was a classic example. It was associated with two groups, gays and Africans. It was called the gay disease. and all sorts of things like that. So I think that is not new. Down the ages, that has been symptomatic of the way in which people react to a disease. It was unfortunately fostered and nurtured and encouraged by parts of the media in this attitude. Of course, people get frightened. They stopped going to Chinese restaurants, for example, because they thought any Chinese they might meet could be suffering from the coronavirus.
But I would make another point as well. The problem is that there's been a turn in the West since around about 2016 to a more negative view of China. Generally, there was a period from about 2000 until around about 2010-2012, when attitudes toward China became more sympathetic because of China's economic growth, because of taking hundreds of millions out of poverty and so on. But that situation, that mood has changed now. Why? I think it's complex, I think in the West now there's a deep doubt, a deep self-doubt, because it's never really recovered from the financial crisis. There is now a recognition, not only of China being on the rise, but that its rise is going to be sustained, it is for the long-term; that China is going to be a formidable player on the world scene. Indeed, it already is. One important illustration is China's advances in technology. So the mood toward China has changed in the West to a much harsher, a much more critical attitude. And anything that arises that can be used against China is being used against China. I could talk about the newspapers in this country. And it's not just on the right. It's on the left. The Guardian newspaper's got a very poor record on handling China over the last several years. Unfortunately, it was rather better a few years ago. One factor in all this is Trump, because with the shift in America, the trade war and so on, China-bashing has become fashionable.
GT: You mentioned that the WHO has praised the effective methods taken by China, acknowledging that China has made enormous sacrifices to stop the virus from spreading to the rest of the world. However, some people are questioning the relationship between China and the WHO, believing that this praise is because of pressure from China. What's your view?
Jacques: I suppose there are those in the West who are annoyed that the WHO has been so objective and sympathetic toward China; and in response they accuse the WHO of being too close to China and so on. Who would you back? The WHO or people like Trump? I think you should choose the WHO because they know what they're doing. They know what they're talking about. They deal with countries all over the world, especially the developing countries. They know that China, by and large, understands these questions much better than the rich countries. And also the truth of the matter is that China is going to be very important in handling health questions around the world, and it has a very good record itself on improvements in health facilities and healthcare.
GT: Recently, the Lancet magazine published a joint statement in support of the scientists, public health professionals, and medical professionals of China in combating the coronavirus, denouncing the conspiracy theory that the virus does not have a natural origin. What's your take on the so-called manmade biochemical weapon?
Jacques: We live in the era of conspiracy theory where we've got a prime minister in Britain and a president in the US whose view of the world bears only a limited relationship to the reality. This is the era of fake news. This is the era of sort of anti-science. And in that situation, all kinds of essentially false ideas and prejudice can thrive, and are thriving. The rise of racism in many countries is an example of this. My own view when it comes to medical questions is that I listen to the scientists.
GT: The epidemic will inevitably have a big impact on the world economy, as countries have restricted trade and tourism. What influence will the epidemic have on globalization? Will it be a short-term or long-term effect?
Jacques: The short-term effect is going to be much worse than SARS. At the time of SARS, the global economy was growing at around 4 percent a year, and now it's limping along at a much lower rate than that. The Chinese economy is much more important in the world now than it was then. At the time of the SARS epidemic, the Chinese economy represented about 8 percent of global output; today it represents over 19 percent of global output. So anything that happens to China now in the way of impeding its economy or paralyzing its economy is going to have much bigger global consequences than it did then.
So you've got two problems: one, much lower global growth, and two, the absolutely pivotal importance of China compared with the situation in 2005. So I think we're looking at China and the world being very negatively affected by what's happened. I think the world economy could go into recession as a consequence.
In the longer run, the Chinese economy will obviously recover. I think it only lost one percentage point in GDP after SARS. I'm expecting a 4 percent or 5 percent growth rate this year as a consequence of what's happened. The general external environment for the Chinese economy is not as good as it was before. We know the Chinese economy is growing more slowly, at around 6 percent now compared with 10 percent then. And we know in some senses it's finding some serious headwinds. I think we need to be very cautious about how we see the economic future, and certainly in the short term, but also maybe a bit longer than what we would normally regard as the short term.
GT: What about the impact on the world's political landscape? The US has not yet shown leadership as a superpower, but has taken the lead in cancelling flights between the US and China. What's your comment?
Jacques: I think it's still a little bit premature to make a judgment about the likely political effects. If you just stick to the question of how the epidemic has been interpreted or used politically, then in the short run, it has been absolutely in accord with the way in which the political situation globally has deteriorated in the sense that the US and Britain essentially used the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic as a means of attacking China and its governing system in a rather unpleasant way, and in a new kind of way, given the nature of the epidemic. But you can now see also that situation beginning to change. I think the West is being forced to retreat because of the effectiveness of China's actions in relationship to the epidemic, and also because now the West is getting more and more troubled by the spread of the coronavirus in the western and other parts of the world. Because China has handled the epidemic so successfully it would appear that China is going to get a lot of credit for the way that it has handled it.
The WHO has said that China has shown how to handle it, that the rest of the world needs to learn from China, and China deserves the world's gratitude. So I think that already you can see a situation developing where China emerges with a significant public relations credit from this situation.
The other side of the coin is how will the whole epidemic play into, for example, what's happening in US-China relations? I think we can probably be more affirmative about where things are likely to go in this context. The turn against China in the US is not temporary. It is for the long term. This is clearly evident with Trump. But if you look at the candidates in the Democratic primaries, even those on the left are hostile toward China. So I think that relations between the US and China are going to become more difficult. They're not going to be mended. We've got a temporary ceasefire on the trade agreement, but the tech war is intensifying. So I think we're moving toward a more bifurcated world. I think that the epidemic will probably have the effect of encouraging that process.
GT: Some believe the epidemic will accelerate the decoupling of China and the world, especially the West. Do you agree?
Jacques: I think probably that will be the case. I think that the effect of the epidemic will be, if anything, to intensify the process of decoupling. This is proceeding apace, and it's clear that America is seeking to try and reduce its dependence on China and to make it more difficult for Chinese tech to develop, by discouraging American tech firms from having a trading relationship with China.
In fact, that process seems to be not just continuing, but perhaps accelerating. The US forbids people in China from flying to the US and a lot of other countries have followed suit. That adds to this atmosphere of you go your way, we'll go our way. We don't want to cooperate with you. We want to reduce our cooperation with you. We do have certain things in common but a lot of things we don't have in common.
The fact that this has been accompanied by such China-bashing in the West, running down China's governing system, encouraging racism toward Chinese people - that can only reinforce this process.
GT: What kind of experience and lessons can this epidemic offer the world in terms of public health systems, urban governance and international cooperation?
Jacques: I think the great lesson is going to be that disease knows no barriers. There are no borders. It can and does go anywhere, everywhere. The initial reaction was to say this is a Chinese disease, which is absolute nonsense. But now as it spreads around the world, we can see we're all in the same boat. We have to learn from each other, and it is one of the great humanitarian issues. We're all human beings. We share the same problems. We all get ill. We all have the same fears of getting ill. So this is an issue that essentially is not a political issue. It's a humanitarian issue, and as such it requires cooperation, collaboration, and pulling together.
After attacking China early on, now people are saying we need to learn from China. Look at what they've done, the quarantining, look how they managed to contain it. We need to learn from each other in this situation. Until very recently it was essentially seen as a Chinese problem. Not now. It's spreading all over the place. I think it has the capacity to bring the world together. That would be the most optimistic note I could strike in relation to the epidemic.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/158458352049.jpeg
---
By Denis Simon | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-26 07:17

A woman waits to enter a tent erected to test for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) at the Brooklyn Hospital Center in Brooklyn, New York City, US, March 19, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The novel coronavirus pandemic has caused global havoc. A growing number of countries are struggling to contain the spread of the virus, and many of them lack the necessary medical equipment and healthcare infrastructure to respond to such a fast-moving, unrelenting pandemic.
The United States, despite its modern, advanced medical system, is now feeling the impact of the pandemic in a way few people, especially officials in the White House, seemingly anticipated. To the great chagrin of many, the US leader initially referred to the novel coronavirus as the "Chinese virus", a name that is both highly offensive and insensitive.
True, he stopped using the offensive term on Tuesday, but by using such racist terms for the virus, some US officials have helped intensify the discrimination against Chinese (and other Asianorigin) people. Which suggests the US leader and his officials were more interested in blaming China for the pandemic than actually addressing it.
The novel coronavirus may have been first detected in China, but there is nothing inherently Chinese about the virus. Nor is there evidence to support the conspiracy theorists on both sides who claim that it is some form of biological warfare. Scientists around the world are carrying out research to determine the origin of the virus, but any effort to link it to China or the Chinese people would be misjudged and insulting. That some people continue to use of terms such as the "Chinese virus" on social media has left a broad spectrum of the Chinese people even more indignant and alarmed about the racial prejudices that continue to exist in the US and other countries.
But if one thing has become clear in this crisis, it is that the US and China must work together to address the tumult caused by the pandemic. They must marshal together the leading scientists and medical experts in both countries to bring the virus under control, because at stake, without exaggeration, is the future of the global economy and the well-being of the people across the world.
The tremendous disruptions the coronavirus outbreak has caused in the global supply chain have not only led to the closure of hundreds of thousands of businesses and factories in China but also created shortages in critical supplies needed to address outbreaks in the US and Europe. With the economies of China and the US both severely affected, it will take a huge collaborative effort between Washington and Beijing to reinvigorate the world economy once the spread of the virus begins to ebb.
In other words, now is the time to build bridges rather than using insulting language that seeks to dismantle them. The world today desperately needs the Chinese and American researchers and healthcare experts to share their data and experiences, and use their combined strengths to contain the outbreak.
On Tuesday, many people felt a sense of relief seeing the US leader change his tone when addressing the American public and the world about the key actions needed to bring the virus under control.
On March 18, China didn't report any new local cases of novel coronavirus pneumonia, the first time since the outbreak. Which came as a huge relief to the Chinese people, because after the coronavirus epidemic broke out in Wuhan, Hubei province, it required extensive State intervention to bring it under control, including locking down the entire province of Hubei.
There are many lessons the US can learn from China's experience in fighting the epidemic. Chinese tech giants Alibaba and Baidu have established a unique digital information platform to share China's experiences so that other countries can benefit from them as the epidemic continues to intensify globally.
As an American and as a citizen of the world, I'm glad the US leader has finally chosen to stop calling the novel coronavirus the "Chinese virus", and I hope he keeps it that way.
The US must set an example for the world by rising above the use of such racist and offensive terms and working to unify people against a global threat. We must do everything in our power to build trust and establish a common purpose between nations. This is the time for the US to demonstrate the inspired leadership the world so desperately needs. As the first governor of Massachusetts John Winthrop put it centuries ago, "We must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill. ‚Ä¶ The eyes of all people are upon us."
The author is a scholar of US-China relations, executive vice-chancellor of Duke Kunshan University and a Sino-US joint venture in eastern China. The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/29/158518104702.jpeg
---
By WANG MINGJIE in London | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-07-07 09:27
Evidence mounts for circulation far from China before first known case
A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The novel coronavirus might not have originated in Wuhan, according to an Oxford University expert who argues there is increasing evidence suggesting the virus existed well before it came to light last December.
Tom Jefferson, senior associate tutor at the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine at Oxford University, and visiting professor at Newcastle University, said the detection of SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19, in waste water and sewage across the world, suggests the virus may have been around for some time before the first case was reported in China.
In June, the University of Barcelona announced that traces of the novel coronavirus had been found in a sample of Barcelona waste water collected in March 2019, nine months before Chinese officials confirmed the first cases.
Italian scientists said sewage water from Milan and Turin contained genetic virus traces on Dec 18, long before the country's first case was reported.
Recent findings from researchers in Brazil echoed that of Spanish and Italian sewage studies, as the coronavirus was detected in sewage samples in central Florianopolis back in November.
"The isolates may not have been infectious, but it would point to SARS-CoV-2 having been around a lot longer than late 2019. It is possible that other isolates may be found," Jefferson said. "So, Wuhan may not be the origin of the infection but just the place where a set of as yet unknown circumstances triggered a virulent change in what was possibly a low-level transmission.
"These could have been the same in Codogno, Italy, where the first COVID-19 European case is thought to have taken place followed by a very rapid spread in February."
Writing in The Telegraph newspaper, Jefferson and Carl Henegehan, a professor at Oxford's Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, call for an in-depth investigation in the outbreak, similar to that carried out by John Snow, who in 1854 investigated a cholera outbreak in London.
A member of the German Army adjusts the googles of a health professional outside the houses of employees of the Toennies factory, who are under lockdown after a coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak in the meatpacking plant, in Verl, Germany, June 23, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Localized outbreaks in meatpacking factories have occurred in Germany, France, Spain, the US and the UK. In Leicester, a rapid preliminary investigation into a COVID-19 outbreak by Public Health England describes the number of new infections and their locations. The report found "no explanatory outbreaks in care homes, hospital settings, or industrial processes".
Incomplete picture
Jefferson believes the current theories of how SARS-CoV-2 is spread do not entirely fit the facts.
"Isolated outbreaks in meat-processing plants around the world cannot be easily explained by droplet and respiratory spread," he said. "Contact and oro-faecal transmission are likely to complete the picture. It is even possible that droplets are aerosolized with contaminated toilet flushing one of the potential means of transmission.
"The data show the spread of the virus in workplaces is trending up while transmission in most other settings is in decline. We need John Snow epidemiological-type fieldwork to formulate and test hypotheses and work out what's going on.
"A better understanding of the transmission of COVID-19 could cause a substantial shift in the current measures recommended to prevent infection."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/5/159409504423.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/73/159409504431.jpeg
---
By Lia Zhu and He Wei | China Daily | Updated: 2020-08-03 06:35

A TikTok logo is displayed on a smartphone in this illustration taken Jan 6, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
With US President Donald Trump proposing a ban on TikTok, critics said the move will not solve "security risks", while American values could be challenged if the popular app actually goes dark.
Trump said on Friday that he planned to terminate the videosharing app in the US through "presidential authority". It's not clear how he might implement the ban, but following the announcement, Microsoft has reportedly paused negotiations with TikTok's Chinese parent company Byte-Dance to buy its US operations.
"We're looking at TikTok. We may be banning TikTok. We may be doing some other things," Trump told reporters as he left the White House for a trip to Florida.
"President Trump has said 'enough' and we're going to fix it and so he will take action in the coming days with respect to a broad array of national security risks," Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News Channel on Sunday.
While the two companies are waiting for clarity from the White House, the TikTok community is pouring out its frustration over the proposed ban and is expressing support for the company on social media. The app has gained more popularity during the COVID-19 pandemic as many view it as a source of entertainment and education. Many young TikTok users are so desperate to keep the app around that they launched a movement called "saveTikTok" on social media.
TikTok star Griffin Johnson tweeted on Saturday that it had given him "a lot of friends & memories that I will forever be thankful for".
TikTok CEO Kevin Mayer said in a blog post on Wednesday that the reason his company was under scrutiny was because of its Chinese origins.
Heather Evans, director of Frontier Technology Research at Asia Society Northern California, said the proposed ban didn't come as a big surprise as "there's a lot of distrust and uncertainty about this popular app", which is largely due to TikTok's parent company being based on the Chinese mainland.
She noted that TikTok is actually a global app, it has recently recruited Mayer, a former Disney executive, as its CEO and the headquarters of ByteDance are in London.
Evans said the scrutiny should be seen in the context of the "rhetoric" on US-China decoupling. "In this context, it appears in order for TikTok to be able to continue to operate and serve the 100 million active American users, it needs to be decoupled from its parent company based in China. We are looking at a traffic light right now," she said.
Under the grand framework of China-US strategic gaming, the rise of TikTok is symbolic of the challenge to US dominance in information technology, said Shen Yi, professor and director of the Research Institution of Global Cyberspace Governance at Fudan University in Shanghai.
"A Chinese company has managed to create a dynamic videosharing ecosystem, by out-rivaling the likes of Facebook in a realm that has arguably the highest monetization potential," he said. "This is likely to cause fury in the White House."
Shen said TikTok's success, especially its popularity among the younger generation of American users, stands to showcase the reality of China to local audiences and could help destroy the "evil China image" that the Trump administration has long been fabricating. "This is a fight for supremacy over discourse and ideology."
Besides, Shen said, anti-Trump voices are also giving the US president some personal incentive to ban the app. "Every move he takes now is serving his bid to be reelected."
From a business perspective, Shen said the incident might propel companies expanding overseas to find a truly neutral third-party as an avenue for registration. It also calls for new international rules for cyberspace governance that are transparent.
Chen Zilei, director of the Japanese Economy Research Center at Shanghai University of International Business and Economics, agreed, saying the emerging IT sector is in dire need of international regulation.
"Countries including the US and India have been taking on China's IT players frequently, citing national security concerns. But this highlights the lack of widely acceptable international rules on service trade industries, especially in emerging industries."
Niu Xinchun, a researcher at the China Institute of Modern International Relations, said banning TikTok would have quite a negative effect on the US itself. "First, it would increase distrust and uncertainty in cooperation between China and the US. Second, it would also reduce the market's confidence in the US and damage its own interests."
To counter the claims that Beijing might access the user information or influence content on the platform, TikTok has announced measures including opening up its algorithms and moderation policies, so outsiders can access the algorithms it uses to sort and share users' videos.
ByteDance has reportedly offered to sell the US operations of TikTok to stop the Trump administration from banning the app. Microsoft is among the potential buyers it has talked to.
Although Trump apparently preferred to ban the app entirely, saying, "As far as TikTok is concerned we're banning them from the United States", there are divisions within the White House about the appropriate course of action, according to a Wall Street Journal report.
One of the fears is a public backlash if the administration bans the app. Among those who have raised concerns about a ban of TikTok is the American Civil Liberties Union.
"Banning an app like TikTok, which millions of Americans use to communicate with each other, is a danger to free expression and technologically impractical," said the ACLU.
Samm Sacks, a senior fellow at Yale Law School's Paul Tsai China Center, shared a similar concern in an article. She said banning TikTok would paradoxically contribute to the erosion of online freedom and openness, while doing little to address the underlying security issues.
Doubts over potential risk
As to TikTok's potential risk to national security, cybersecurity experts argued that this is largely theoretical and that there is no evidence to support the Trump administration's claims.
James Lewis, senior vice-president at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, told CNN that he doubted TikTok was a good intelligence tool for China, as there are far more effective alternatives when it comes to obtaining privileged information.
Videos of lip syncing and dancing are of limited strategic use even for what the Trump administration brands as an "adversary government", said Sacks.
TikTok is the latest Chinese tech company to be targeted by the Trump administration. It has previously raised similar "national security" concerns about Huawei and ZTE.
Last week, the US Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs approved a bill to ban the app on government-issued devices. The Pentagon has advised employees to remove it from their phones. The US Navy and the Army also have banned the app on government-issued phones.
Sacks likened the administration's move to playing a game of whack-a-mole against "a rotating cast of Chinese tech companies".
"The US would be wise to spend more time developing legislation and standards for how all companies, regardless of country of origin, protect online privacy and secure data," she said.
Pan Mengqi in Beijing contributed to this story.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/66/159641352459.jpeg
---
By Martin Sieff | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-30 09:26
The ugly and often hysterical racist campaign blaming China for the origin and spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) is clearly meant as a slur on the nation that has in fact suffered badly from the virus and done the most to get it under control and conquer it.
The intention behind the slur, driven by the US government and conservative politicians within the United States, is clear and many of the more outspoken and less skillful propagandists trying to spread this parallel slander and lies have been very open about it: They gloat that the pandemic will tarnish China's reputation as a far more successful model for economic and social development than the United States.
In fact, the opposite is happening: The campaign of slander is already backfiring badly on its perpetrators. Worse yet, it is further dividing and poisoning the international community when global cooperation is absolutely essential for controlling and then eliminating the virus epidemic, as the government of China is rightly pointing out.
Just over a century ago, the great influenza pandemic of 1918 proved to be one of the most devastating natural disasters ever to hit the human race. Lessons drawn from it and compared to the global situation today are deeply instructive.
The 1918-1920 pandemic hit 500 million people and killed 50 million of them (including a 19-year-old uncle of mine in Northern Ireland). It started in the United States at a US Army camp outside Kansas city. But nobody ever called it "The American Epidemic" or "American Influenza."
On the contrary, in a classic case of misdirection, the flu was labeled in the US and other Western media, and to this day remains remembered as "The Spanish Flu," largely because the US government was angered at the temerity of the government of Spain, a neutral country in World War I, to take its own measures to try and keep the virus out.
The United States then as now was waging major wars around the world. President Woodrow Wilson was advised to stop the flow of troop ships taking hundreds of thousands of US soldiers to Europe to fight Germany in World War I. He proclaimed that waging the war had to come first.
Wilson never took the great pandemic seriously and notoriously hummed popular nursery rhymes about it in the White House. No federal lockdown was proclaimed. Most of the major cities of the United States including New York did not even try to impose quarantines or close places of public entertainment, at least until it was too late.
Today too, we see, cheap, complacent holier-than-thou American judgmental xenophobes scapegoating China and other nations rather than seeking to cooperate constructively with them and learn vital lessons.
China in the early stages of the pandemic was routinely criticized by US politicians and pundits alike for supposedly cracking down too hard and energetically on the spread of the virus.
In fact this was precisely the right thing to do. Far from trying to sit on and suppress the facts, the Chinese authorities reacted with great energy and effectiveness as fast as they could.
As a result, China today is the only nation in the world where the curve of transmission of the outbreak is not just slowing down but has actually flattened out. Far from imposing a new totalitarian nightmare out of George Orwell's 1984 on the Chinese people, the Beijing government's actions were exactly what were needed to protect them.
Instead of condemning Beijing for a reaction that clearly has already saved hundreds of thousands and perhaps millions of lives, Washington and other Western governments should be reaching out first to emulate those policies and second to cooperate far more closely in implementing them.
The accusation that China tried to keep the outbreak a secret and prevented crucial initial warnings reaching the West in time is also an unfounded and easily exposed lie.
Writing in the British newspaper The Guardian on March 18, Richard Horton, editor of the globally respected medical weekly The Lancet documents how a group of Chinese doctors sent a full warning to the West about the nature of the virus and the threat it presented in mid-January,
Horton said, "Under immense pressure, as the epidemic exploded around them, they took time to write up their findings in a foreign language and seek publication in a medical journal thousands of miles away. Their rapid and rigorous work was an urgent warning to the world. We owe those scientists enormous thanks."
The White House, the State Department and leading United States senators still do not express thanks.
This pandemic crisis is a potentially epochal moment when the human race can and should come together against a common menace to all decent peoples and civilizations. To paraphrase the legendary US founding father Benjamin Franklin, We all either hang together or hang separately.

The author is a senior fellow at the American University in Moscow. The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/23/158553368536.jpeg
---
A screenshot of  New York Times.

Local unexplained influenza

According to an ABC report on July 12, 2019, a deadly disease broke out at the Greenspring, retirement community in Springfield, Virginia.

The community is only an hour's drive from Fort Detrick base. Some people suspected that the outbreak in the community last year was actually the novel coronavirus, but the reporter who reported the news denied this claim, saying that the local health department's test conclusion was caused by Haemophilus influenzae. However, many netizens recommend testing the community members to see if they had the novel coronavirus antibody.

According to the Fairfax County Health Bureau, on June 30, 2019, the community discovered the case of this unexplained respiratory disease for the first time. As of July 15, 2019, the number of deaths related to the disease in the community rose to 3, a total of 63 community residents were sick, and 19 staff members also showed symptoms.

It was reported that the patient's symptoms include "fever, cough, body pain, wheezing, hoarse voice, and general weakness", and some patients also have symptoms of pneumonia.

To this day, the origin of COVID-19 remains unidentified. But experts and scientists around the world agree that the place where the earliest cases were reported is not necessarily the origin of the virus.
---
Fort Detrick Biological Base is situated in the US state of Maryland. It was little known to the residents of the state let alone the general public. At least that was the case before many Americans started suffering from an unknown respiratory infectious disease before the outbreak of COVID-19.

Since the outbreak, Fort Detrick has been mentioned more and more frequently.

The reason why the base had come under the spotlight was the unexplained outbreak of a deadly respiratory disease near it several months prior to the epidemic in China. This was covered by the US media. More importantly, last July, Fort Detrick was mysteriously closed, and the US government has so far been unwilling to explain the sudden closure.

Questions have been asked in the United States, and calls for clarification on a possible link between the closure of Fort Detrick and an outbreak of "large-scale influenza" and COVID-19 are getting louder.

A screenshot of the White House petition website.

On March 10, a netizen named B.Z. launched a petition on the White House petition website. The petitioner listed the timeline related to the COVID-19 outbreak and the Fort Detrick, hoping that the US government would give a reasonable explanation:

7/2019: The top secret US army's medical research institute of infectious diseases at Fort Detrick was closed;

8/2019: A large-scale outbreak of "influenza" killed more than 10,000 people;

10/2019: The United States organized Event 201 — A Global Pandemic Exercise with the participation of the Deputy Director of CIA;

11/2019: An outbreak of pneumonia of undetermined origin was found in China;

2/2020: The epidemic became global;

3/2020: A large number of English-language news reports about the closure of Fort Detrick were deleted from online access.

What makes things even more puzzling is the Event 201, a Global Pandemic Exercise, mentioned in the timeline above. This exercise, organized in October, 2019, has attracted continued international attention for the similarities between its scenario and the development of today's pandemic.

According to the official website of "Event 201", the exercise was to simulate an outbreak of a novel zoonotic transmitted from bats to pigs to people that eventually becomes efficiently transmissible from person to person, leading to a severe pandemic. The pathogen and the disease it causes are modeled largely on SARS, but it is more transmissible.
---
[Photo/Sipa]

Politicians and scholars Tuesday called for China and the US to work together on a global public health response rather than decoupling amid the coronavirus pandemic.

During a virtual panel discussion around the theme of "Risks of US-China 'Decoupling'", held by the Bloomberg New Economy Forum, Chinese Ambassador to the US Cui Tiankai called for "a serious rethinking of the very foundations" of the bilateral relationship at this critical moment.

"For the last few years, there's been so much talk about strategic rivalry among the major powers, perhaps between China and the United States about the so- called Thucydides Trap," he said.

"Look at the situation now. An invisible virus has had such a big impact among all of us; very few people ever anticipated this," he said.

"So I think we really have to think hard. What are the real threats to the globe? What are the real threats to humanity? And what are the shared vulnerabilities for all of us, including for China and the United States, and where our true common interests lie, and how should we define a relationship on the basis of such perception and recognition?" Cui said.

"So hopefully, this pandemic will really teach all of us a good lesson," Cui added.

Cui reiterated China's efforts in keeping transparency in the process of diagnoses, medical treatment and scientific research since the outbreak.

Cui stressed that China always stands for a dialogue, and is supportive and open to all kinds of mechanisms, and almost all the changes were initiated by the US side.

"So we've been trying to meet that requirement to adjust," he said.

"Of course, we need more political dialogue and other things. And for the current priority, a joint effort to combat COVID 19," he said.

Cui said China is making efforts in facilitating the flow of medical supplies to the US.

So far, China has supplied the United States with more than 1.4 billion face masks," Cui said, or one mask for every Chinese, about five masks for every Americans. "I don't think many people are aware of these numbers, but we should do more," he said.

Kevin Rudd, former prime minister of Australia, and president of the Asia Society Policy Institute, believes the strategic dimensions of the bilateral relationship have continued to unravel, so it's hopeful "a tactical pause in hostilities" could be reached in facing the pandemic together.

Rudd said that "before the COVID-19 crisis began, we had the beginnings of a tactical pause in hostilities with the phase one trade deal, then COVID arrived, and then everything degenerated rapidly at virtually every level of the US-China relationship", he said.

Rudd said that strategically, the relationship is now in fundamental disrepair. The machinery that had previously existed through the strategic and economic dialogue has virtually been rendered redundant.

"On top of that, [there is] the bilateral slagging match about the origins of the virus," Rudd said. "So the challenge right now is for something to be salvaged out of the ashes of this."

Rudd said right now the two countries should mostly focus on concrete collaboration on vaccine development "and frankly, collaboration in third countries", he said, adding that it's better to address COVID-19 jointly "rather than competitively".

Susan Shirk, research professor and chair of the 21st Century China Center, School of Global Policy & Strategy, at the University of California, San Diego, echoed Rudd's views. "They need to work together to help the developing world and the vaccine-development and distribution," she said.

Shirk said active efforts have been made by philanthropists like Alibaba's co-founder Joe Tsai and universities and scholars including herself to try to build connections to address the immediate needs of medical equipment.

She appealed to "clear away the red tape and the difficulties and the movement of medical supplies".

"Believe it or not, the Trump tariffs still exist on some of this equipment," she said.

Shirk called for cooperation at the governmental level.

"This does have to be led at the leadership level, at the political level, because as we noted earlier, we've seen public opinion growing more hostile, being led by the politicians."

As US President Donald Trump tweeted on Monday that he will temporarily suspend immigration into the US amid the pandemic, Shirk said it's "so alien to American tradition. What makes America great is immigration, and the talented people around the world, including in particular Chinese people, have been a vital ingredient in American innovation in recent years," she said.
---
On April 21, 2020, Ambassador Cui Tiankai joined a conversation hosted by Bloomberg New Economy Forum, sharing his views on China-US relations against the backdrop of fighting COVID-19. [Photo/china-embassy.org]

Emphasis should be on working together during pandemic, panel members say

Politicians and scholars called on Tuesday for China and the United States to work together on a global public health response rather than decoupling amid the novel coronavirus pandemic.

During a virtual panel discussion around the theme of "Risks of US-China 'Decoupling'", held by the Bloomberg New Economy Forum, Chinese Ambassador to the US Cui Tiankai called for "a serious rethinking of the very foundations" of the bilateral relationship at this critical moment.

"For the last few years, there's been so much talk about strategic rivalry among the major powers, perhaps between China and the United States about the so-called Thucydides Trap," he said.

Thucydides, an ancient Athenian historian, wrote about the likelihood of conflict between a rising power and a currently dominant one.

"Look at the situation now. An invisible virus has had such a big impact among all of us; very few people ever anticipated this," Cui said.

"So I think we really have to think hard. What are the real threats to the globe? What are the real threats to humanity? And what are the shared vulnerabilities for all of us, including for China and the United States, and where do our true common interests lie, and how should we define a relationship on the basis of such perception and recognition?" he said.

"So, hopefully, this pandemic will really teach all of us a good lesson," Cui added.

Cui reiterated China's efforts in maintaining transparency in the process of diagnosis, medical treatment and scientific research during the outbreak.

Cui stressed that China always stands for dialogue and is supportive and open to all kinds of mechanisms. He said almost all changes in their relationship were initiated by the US.

"So we've been trying to meet that requirement to adjust," he said.

"Of course, we need more political dialogue and other things, and as for the current priority, a joint effort to combat COVID-19," he said.

Cui said China is making efforts in facilitating the flow of medical supplies to the US.

China has supplied the US with more than 1.4 billion masks, Cui said, equivalent to one mask for every Chinese, some five masks for every US citizen. "I don't think many people are aware of these numbers, but we should do more," he said.

Kevin Rudd, former prime minister of Australia and president of the Asia Society Policy Institute, said the strategic dimensions of the bilateral relationship have continued to unravel, so it would be good to reach "a tactical pause in hostilities" to face the pandemic together.

"Before the COVID-19 crisis began, we had the beginnings of a tactical pause in hostilities with the phase one trade deal. Then COVID arrived, and then everything degenerated rapidly at virtually every level of the US-China relationship," he said.

Rudd said that strategically, the relationship is now in a fundamental state of disrepair. The machinery that had previously existed through the strategic and economic dialogue has virtually been rendered redundant.

He said that "on top of that" are the bilateral criticisms about the origins of the virus. "So the challenge right now is for something to be salvaged out of the ashes of this."

Rudd said right now the two countries should focus mostly on concrete collaboration on vaccine development, "and frankly, collaboration in third countries". He said it's better to address COVID-19 jointly "rather than competitively".

Susan Shirk, research professor and chairwoman of the 21st Century China Center, School of Global Policy and Strategy, at the University of California, San Diego, said, "They need to work together to help the developing world and vaccine development and distribution."

Shirk said efforts have been made by philanthropists like Alibaba co-founder Joe Tsai and universities and scholars including herself to try to build connections to address the immediate needs of medical equipment.

She appealed to "clear away the red tape and the difficulties" to facilitate the movement of medical supplies.

"Believe it or not," she said, the tariffs initiated by US President Donald Trump "still exist on some of this equipment".

Shirk called for cooperation at the governmental level.

"This does have to be led at the leadership level, at the political level, because as we noted earlier, we've seen public opinion growing more hostile, being led by the politicians."

Shirk called Trump's announcement via tweet this week that he will temporarily suspend approvals for US permanent residency "so alien to American tradition. What makes America great is immigration, and the talented people around the world, including, in particular, Chinese people, have been a vital ingredient in American innovation in recent years," she said.
---
China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-30 09:31

Premier Li Keqiang meets the press after the closing of the third session of the 13th National People's Congress at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, capital of China, May 28, 2020. Premier Li took questions from Chinese and foreign reporters via video link. [Photo/Xinhua]
Bloomberg News: The origins of COVID-19 are still a mystery. Scientists think if we can find out where it came from, we could prevent future pandemics. There have been calls for an international independent inquiry into the origins. What is China's stance on how such an inquiry should be carried out? What should such an inquiry do and what should it not do?
Premier Li: China and many countries believe that it is important to get a clear idea about the sources of the coronavirus. At the recently held World Health Assembly, a resolution was adopted, and China is one of the co-sponsors of this resolution. We believe that getting clear about the sources of the virus on the basis of science will help us better carry out containment of COVID-19, and also contribute to protecting life and health of people around the world.
The novel coronavirus disease has caught all countries by surprise. It is a completely new disease to humankind. So far, I'm afraid there is still more to the virus that we do not yet know. Viruses respect no borders, and they are the common enemy of the whole world and entire humanity. Nowadays, all countries are still working hard to contain the spread of the virus, and we are gaining experience along the way. We must work together to keep the virus in check. Research efforts need to be intensified for breakthroughs in vaccines, effective medicines and testing reagents, as they will be powerful weapons to help us succeed in checking the virus. China and many other countries are making investments into R&D of these products, and we are open to international cooperation. The deliverables of the R&D will be global public goods that we are ready to share with others. They will help the entire humankind in defeating the virus.
With painstaking efforts, the Chinese people have successfully brought the spread of the virus under control. And China has taken an active part in international cooperation against the virus. We have all along acted with openness, transparency and a sense of responsibility. We have shared information in a timely way with the rest of the international community. The virus is still spreading around the world. And in China it has not come to a complete end yet; there are still sporadic cases. Scientists have cautioned us to stay on high alert to prevent a resurgence of infections. We must continue to adopt a factual, science-based, open and transparent approach in dealing with COVID-19. Any infection, once detected, must be promptly handled, and no cover-up will ever be allowed.
Many people say that COVID-19 will not come to a stop any time soon and we may have to live with it for quite some time to come. All countries now are confronted with dual challenges. It's like doing double exams. We have to contain the spread of the virus, and at the same time do our best to get life and work back to normal. I'm afraid there is a certain level of trade-off between these two goals. Things would be quite different if we had only one task. So we will have to do our utmost to strike a delicate balance and continue to explore our way forward. In this process, international cooperation is vitally important. Whether it's fighting the virus or growing the economy, we must come together in a sense of partnership to eventually fight back the onslaught of the epidemic.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/30/159080447808.jpeg
---
By ZHOU JIN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2021-02-03 07:22

Foreign Ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin. Photo from the Foreign Ministry website
China urged the United States on Tuesday to reflect upon and correct its wrong remarks and the practice of interfering in China's internal affairs under the pretext of Hong Kong issues in order to avoid damaging mutual trust and cooperation.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin made the remark after US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said that the US must open its doors to those who wish to leave Hong Kong, as the United Kingdom has said it will do.
Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs and allow for no foreign interference, Wang said.
Any illegal activities should be punished by law, which is a principle applied in every country and region under the rule of law, he said.
He said if the US agreed that this principle is also applied to the lawbreakers involved in the Capitol Hill incident, it should reflect upon and correct its move to openly support lawbreakers in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
In response to Blinken's claim that China lacked transparency with regard to the trip by World Health Organization experts to the country, Wang said the ongoing visit is part of a global study on origin-tracing of the virus and the Chinese government has provided tremendous support and assistance.
China has been open and transparent in conducting origin-tracing communication and cooperation with the WHO and experts from the organization have paid three visits to China, Wang said.
Clues, reports and studies have shown that the COVID-19 pandemic broke out in many places around the world as early as the second half of 2019.
According to a study published in November in the medical journal Clinical Infectious Diseases, infections could have occurred in the US in December 2019, more than a month before the official report of the first US COVID-19 case.
Beijing hopes Washington will adopt an active, scientific and cooperative attitude as China does, maintain transparency and invite WHO experts to carry out origin-tracing research in the US, Wang said.
zhoujin@chinadaily.com.cn
---
By ZHOU JIN | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-10 07:07
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo addresses a news conference at the State Department in Washington, US, April 7, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Stigmatization of China will not get any backing, the Foreign Ministry said on Thursday, calling for the people of the United States to avoid copying certain US politicians who politicize the COVID-19 pandemic in an attempt to divert attention and shift blame.
Spokesman Zhao Lijian made the remark after US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, in a radio interview on Wednesday, accused China of lacking transparency in dealing with COVID-19 and stated that the virus originated in Wuhan, China.
Smears and criticism against others will not kill the virus, Zhao said, adding that China hopes the people of the US will also win the battle against the disease.
There are no grounds to say China engaged in a cover-up and lacks transparency about the pandemic, the spokesman said, adding that there is an open channel for the US to get information and data about the novel coronavirus from China.
"China has done what we can and should do. As to whether the US has fully and effectively used the precious time China bought and the important information China provided, whether it has taken timely measures to contain the virus, I believe that history will be the judge," Zhao said.
China was the first country to report the pandemic to the World Health Organization, but that does not mean that the virus originated in Wuhan, he said.
A pandemic may first break out in any region, country or city around the world, but the origin of the disease is a scientific issue that requires research by scientists and medical experts, he added.
"Any responsible country will firmly oppose the practice of unreasonably labeling the virus," he said.
In an editorial published on Tuesday, the journal Nature apologized for early involvement in associating the virus with Wuhan and China, saying such a link "was an error" and it "takes responsibility and apologizes" for that.
The virus does not recognize borders, races or social systems, Zhao said, adding that all countries should make the safety and health of its people a priority and provide adequate and efficient guarantees.
Also on Thursday, in responding to Finland's accusation that the protective masks it purchased from China are unsuitable for use in hospitals, Zhao said China will further verify the case, calling for avoiding drawing conclusions before it is fully investigated.
According to Zhao, Finland purchased the supplies from an intermediary business in commercial procurement, and the customs export clearance procedures were listed under nonsurgical masks.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/51/158647712558.jpeg
---
By Liu Yuxi | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-12 10:04
The COVID-19 is a major public health emergency with fast spreading speed, wide range of infections, and difficult containment. Since the outbreak, President Xi Jinping has personally presided over China's epidemic response and projected calm and confidence.
China has mobilized nationally and responded rapidly, adopted the most comprehensive, rigorous and thorough measures, making concerted efforts and progress in racing against time and fighting against disease.
The spread of the epidemic in China has been effectively controlled through arduous work. Over the past week, the overall situation of the epidemic in China has shown a stable trend and the medical treatment methods and programs are becoming more and more effective.
The cure rate of cases of confirmed infections in Wuhan, Hubei province and the whole country continues to rise. The number of newly cured and discharged cases exceeded newly confirmed cases, accounting for more than 55 percent in nearly 20 days. The number of new cases of confirmed infections has reached zero in most provinces and cities.
The outbreak in Hubei province has also been contained with newly confirmed cases in many places returning to zero. Facts show that China has effectively controlled the spread of the epidemic which is completely preventable, controllable and treatable.
President Xi has personally promoted and guided the international cooperation against the epidemic. In the spirit of openness, transparency and responsibility, China has timely shared information and experience with other countries.
China's efforts and commitment have been highly appreciated by the international community. Recently, the China-WHO Joint Expert Mission on COVID-19 released a report after a nine-day field trip to China, fully recognizing China's "bravest, most flexible and most aggressive" prevention and control measures and encouraging other countries to learn from China's successful experience against epidemic.
Since the outbreak of epidemic, AU and African countries have stood firmly with China. Many state leaders have sent messages or called us to support China's fight. Governments and peoples of many African countries have offered assistance.
African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat addresses the opening of the 33rd Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Heads of State and the Government of the African Union (AU) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Feb 9, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
AUC chairperson Faki repeatedly expressed his solidarity with Chinese people. Some African students in China volunteered to go to the front line of this battle or worked as volunteers. The unbreakable shared future and profound friendship between African and Chinese is embodied in the action of our African friends. A friend in need is a friend indeed. We will cherish the generosity and brotherhood of Africa and keep them in mind forever.
Now the epidemic outside China has become severe with the COVID-19 spreading to more than 70 countries including several African countries. China is worried about and feels the same for what African people suffering now. "Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations".
Just as China helped Africa to cope with Ebola in 2014, we will never be absent when African countries need us. Mission of China to AU is attaching great importance to the disease prevention and control cooperation with AU related organs, keeping close coordination with them and updating the latest information.
Embassies of China to African countries are also guiding all Chinese in Africa to cooperate with local prevention and control work, requiring people who just came back from China to do self-quarantine for two weeks.
China has provided the first batch of testing kits to AU and will offer more medical supplies soon. We will also promote the implementation of healthcare initiative among "eight major initiatives" of FOCAC, the construction of African CDC and cooperation in the field of public health and disease control between China and Africa.
The COVID-19 is a common challenge for humanity. It is yet undetermined where the virus originated. Wherever its origin may be, China and all the other affected countries are victims faced with the challenge in containing its spread.
Standing at the forefront of the fight, China has served as a strong line of defense against the spread of the epidemic for the world. Human society shares a future where everyone has a stake. Globalization connects us which requires cooperation and joint response of the international community including African countries in fighting the epidemic.
Guided by the vision of building a community with a shared future, as well as a health care community for mankind, China will actively participate in regional and international cooperation against the outbreak and deeply engage in international public health governance. Only with cooperation and joint response of the international community can we defeat the outbreak and safeguard regional and global public health security.
The author is the ambassador and head of the Chinese Mission to AU.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/95/158398574292.jpeg
---
By Ouyang Jiu | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-23 11:26
Thanks to the arduous efforts and sacrifices of the Chinese government and people starting over three months ago, there are growing indications that the situation in China is changing for the better. As we are doing our best to control the outbreak of COVID-19 at home, China is also assisting countries and regions in need. The Chinese government and non-government actors have sent, and are sending, many shipments of urgently needed medical supplies to over 140 countries and international organizations, which has won recognition from the international community. Leaders of some countries greeted and received in person Chinese experts and supplies at the airport, and many foreign people gave praise to the news, sharing countless touching stories.
However, some people misunderstand the efforts and goodwill of China to help the world against the virus, and believe China harbors evil purposes. All these claims caught Chinese people by surprise. Recently, it was advocated by some that China should take responsibility for the epidemic. Some made allegations that the virus originated in China, some accused China of concealing information in the epidemic's early days and some concluded China should take the blame. This is not the truth, and it makes no sense.
The issue of the origin of the novel coronavirus is a serious question that should be studied by scientists and medical experts and requires professional assessment based on the facts. Before that, the blame game is neither meaningful nor useful to easing the situation. After the outbreak, China adopted the most comprehensive, rigorous and thorough measures of virus control, and carried out international cooperation actively in an open, transparent and responsible manner.
Facts speak louder than words. On Jan 3, China started to send timely updates to the World Health Organization and other countries about the pneumonia outbreak. On January 11, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention put online five whole genome sequences of the novel coronavirus and shared data with the world and the WHO. We notified the WHO and the international community of human-to-human transmission in a timely manner. China's actions and measures are clear and traceable. China's transparency and contribution to fighting the virus have been applauded by many national leaders, experts and international media and it's agreed China bought precious time for the international community to prepare.
Some people distorted China's goodwill and labeled China's international cooperation fighting the outbreak as "model exporting". China's national system has indeed shown its strength. However, as President Xi Jinping has always emphasized, China does not import foreign models, nor does China export its own model. We have no interests in making comparisons.
The Chinese people will not forget the international community's support and assistance at its most difficult time. Pakistan donated masks from its national hospital stock, a little girl from Mongolia donated her pocket money and the Myanmar government donated rice to China. China is a grateful nation. Now we are actively participating in the international cooperative effort fighting the outbreak and providing aid to other countries in need to the best of our ability. This is not intended to export anything. On the contrary, China is making such efforts to reciprocate the goodwill it received earlier during the epidemic and shoulder its responsibility as a major country. The only things China exports are its practices and experience fighting the outbreak. Our intention is to help other countries defeat the pandemic and save lives. Nothing more.
The virus respects no borders and doesn't care about national or racial differences. The weapon we need is solidarity. China will keep doing its best to help the international community fight the epidemic. We hope all parties take a fair and objective view on China's efforts and goodwill, and join hands to defeat the pandemic as early as possible.
The author is an observer of international issues.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/87/158761464830.jpeg
---
By Hujjatullah Zia | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-15 07:18

Shi Yu/China Daily
As the coronavirus pandemic spread across the world, China became the target of harsh rhetoric and disinformation campaign even though it has made remarkable achievements in containing the virusÔºçeven lifting the lockdown on Wuhan, capital of Hubei province and the epicenter of the outbreak in China after 76 daysÔºçat a time when the rest of the world is still grappling with it.
Associating the pandemic with China or the Chinese people will prove counter productive, because hate crimes, including attacks on people of Asian originÔºças reported from several cities in the WestÔºçwill do no society or economy any good.
Many believed the pandemic would bring all countries on a global platform to cooperate in the fight against this common human enemy. Instead, irresponsible remarks have fueled tensions.
As a non-traditional security threat, the pandemic is no different from terrorism: it doesn't discriminate on the basis of country, color, creed or class. As Mike Ryan, head of the World Health Organization's health emergency programs, said: "Viruses know no borders, and they don't care about your ethnicity, the color of your skin, or how much money you have in the bank". The WHO has even advised against scapegoating a country or people, while praising Beijing for its transparency in the fight against the virus.
Since we live in a "global village" and share a common destiny, the outbreak has put the life of all at stake and the imminent economic crisis will wreak havoc on people across the world. As such, we should all make greater efforts to build a community with a shared future for humankind.
During my stay in China for almost one year, I heard officials reiterating on different occasions the importance of cooperation, people-to-people exchanges and peaceful coexistence to promote global social harmony.
With this policy in mind, China has expanded cooperation with many countries in the fight against the virus. For instance, China was the first country to send medical experts and supplies to Serbia, which sought China's help. Many other countries, including Afghanistan, have also received medical help from China.
This is a time for global cooperation, not blame games or stigmatizing others. It is also a time to bridge the gaps and build trust. It is not the time for finger pointing or doubting the role and neutrality of international organizations such as the WHO whose funding the US administration has threatened to freeze. So all countries should seize this opportunity to cement their ties by helping each other and resolving differences through dialogue.
In particular, the US and China need to cooperate in the fight against the virus to prevent the pandemic from causing more damage to the global economy.
The US administration initially downplayed the virus threat. Even weeks after Singapore and the Republic of Korea implemented emergency measures, the US remained in denial. As a result, more than 553,000 people had been infected and nearly 22,000 killed in the US by Tuesday. Perhaps the US administration misconstrued its own "America first" policy as "America alone" policy.
Despite people continuing to fall victim to the pandemic in the US, Italy, Spain, Iran and elsewhere, some countries are still engaged in finger pointing and trading insults. Washington is not even considering easing sanctions against Teheran so the latter can better fight the outbreak.
But since blame games and hostility will not save human lives, all countries should join hands in order to prevent more human fatalities. And even after the pandemic is contained globally, they need to continue cooperating to deal with the inevitable economic fallout of the epidemic.
As such, the global focus should be on how to effectively contain the outbreak. China has sent out a clear message that all countries should come together and share their experiences in the fight against the pandemic, while developing a vaccine and devising a detailed plan for treating COVID-19 patients.
The author is a writer with Daily Outlook, an independent newspaper in Afghanistan. The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/72/158690919534.jpeg
---
Cui Tiankai, Chinese ambassador to the US. [Photo/Agencies]

China's top envoy to the United States on Wednesday called for an end to the blame game and urged the two countries to rebuild trust and focus on the COVID-19 pandemic.

In an op-ed piece published in The Washington Post, Chinese Ambassador Cui Tiankai railed against what he said was "the absurd mind-set of 'always blame China'", which he said has been undercutting international efforts to curb the virus.

"Blaming China will not end this pandemic. On the contrary, the mind-set risks decoupling China and the United States and hurting our efforts to fight the disease, our coordination to reignite the global economy, our ability to conquer other challenges and our prospects of a better future," Cui wrote.

"The United States would not emerge as a winner from this scenario," he added.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Wednesday continued to fault China for the initial outbreak of the novel coronavirus and pushed back against suggestions that he and other Trump administration officials have issued conflicting statements about the exact origins of the outbreak.

Meanwhile, White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany said at a news briefing Wednesday that the relationship between Washington and Beijing is one of "disappointment and frustration". McEnany also accused China of withholding information about the virus.

"Behind the mind-set of 'always blame China' is a kind of dirty politics, championed by a few people who shift the spotlight for political gain," said Cui. "In their manipulation, China has to be wrong."

In his opinion piece, the ambassador insisted China has done its best to share information about the virus.

He noted that on Dec 27, a doctor in Hubei province reported three suspicious cases. In the following four days, local and central governments conducted investigations on the ground. Then, on Jan 3 — within a week — China began briefing the World Health Organization (WHO), the US and other countries about the outbreak.

On Jan 12, China released the whole genome sequence of the virus, which has proved critical for diagnosis and treatment of the disease globally.

"We shared information with the United States at the earliest possible time and have been supporting its fight against the disease," Cui wrote.

The two countries' centers for disease control and prevention and other government agencies have been in close communication since Jan 4, the day after China briefed the WHO. In their phone calls, President Xi Jinping gave detailed accounts of China's measures to President Donald Trump, according to Cui.

"It is time to end the blame game. It is time to focus on the disease and rebuild trust between our two countries," he wrote.

Douglas H. Paal, a distinguished fellow in the Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said Ambassador Cui deserves credit for trying to prevent emotions from overtaking good judgment in US-China relations.

"Many others share my belief that the world's leading countries need to cooperate multilaterally to mitigate and ultimately prevent the spread of the virus," Paal told China Daily.

"The temptation to put one's own people first is understandable, but viruses don't respect borders," he said.

Cheng Li, director of the Brookings Institution's John L. Thornton China Center, cautioned that mutual animosity risks putting the bilateral relationship, as well as world peace, in jeopardy.

"Instead of blaming each other, the most important thing is for the two sides to work together firstly on the medical and public health fronts, and so all the other issues should be secondary," Li said.

"There's no reason that the United States and China should not cooperate at this critical moment," he said.
---
Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]

China opposes any arbitrary international inquiry into the COVID-19 pandemic that would presume its guilt and politicize its investigation to stigmatize China, Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng said in a recent interview with a major television broadcaster in the United States.

Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Wednesday that the Australian government will continue to push for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus and China's early handling of the outbreak.

On the same day, the White House ordered US intelligence agencies to find out whether China or the World Health Organization hid information about the virus early on in the outbreak.

Le said in the National Broadcasting Corp interview on Tuesday that China is "candid" and "open" to international investigation, and it supports professional exchanges between scientists.

"What we oppose, however, is unfounded charges against China. One should not accuse China first and then run so-called international investigations just to make up the evidence," he said.

Instead, he said, the international investigation should have a solid basis.

"Why is this investigation only targeting China?" he asked. "Is there any evidence to show that China does have problems? Why isn't there any investigation of other countries?"

Le refuted claims holding China accountable or demanding it make reparations, saying such remarks are a "preposterous political farce".

These is no international law that supports blaming a country simply for being the first to report a disease, neither does history offer any such precedent, he said.

China has made sacrifices in curbing the virus and won precious time for the world's battle against it, Le said, adding that China deserves fair recognition, not groundless accusation.

The unreasonable and legally unfounded demand for Chinese reparations is no different from blackmail, he said, adding that the intention is to shift blame to China for the accusers' own inadequate response.

Noting China is a partner fighting the virus alongside the US, rather than an opponent, Le called upon the two countries to set aside differences and contradictions and cooperate to overcome difficulties.

"Whatever the differences or disagreements between China and the US, they pale when we consider the well-being of the Chinese and American peoples and their shared aspiration for a better future," he said.

zhoujin@chinadaily.com.cn
---
By MO JINGXI | China Daily | Updated: 2021-01-07 07:04

Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying is seen during a regular news conference in Beijing on Jan 6, 2021. [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]
China is still in consultation with the World Health Organization over details for a visit by international experts to trace the origins of COVID-19, Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said on Wednesday.
"We hope that the specific dates and arrangements of their visit can be decided as soon as possible through our discussions. We will timely inform the media as long as we have further information," Hua told reporters at a regular news briefing in Beijing.
On Tuesday, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at a news conference that China has still not authorized the entry of a team of international experts for virus origin-tracing.
"The epidemic situation globally is still severe and in China we are also working to prevent and contain the virus. Our health departments and experts are wholeheartedly in the stressful battle," Hua said.
The spokeswoman noted that China is still overcoming its own difficulties to advance internal preparations and create conditions for the experts to come to China.
"The origin-tracing is a very complicated matter. To ensure the work of international experts goes smoothly, we need to undergo necessary procedures and make specific arrangements," Hua said.
She pointed out that China highly values anti-epidemic cooperation and has been open, transparent and responsible on COVID-19 origin-tracing.
China was among the first countries to cooperate with the WHO on COVID-19.
In February and July last year, faced with arduous tasks of domestic epidemic prevention and control, China twice invited WHO experts to come to the country for origin-tracing and formulated the China part of a global scientific cooperation plan on origin-tracing.
In October last year, China agreed with the WHO on the members of the international expert team.
"We had frequent interaction and held four conferences via video link in October and December last year. We candidly talked about our results in origin-tracing and recently we have been adopting a positive and constructive attitude in discussing the origin-tracing cooperation with the WHO," Hua said.
---
By Ouyang Xueyan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-13 07:24
All hypotheses are still open in the World Health Organization's research into the origins of COVID-19, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a briefing on Friday.
---
By Wang Xiaoyu | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-26 19:38

Ministry of Foreign Affairs holds a briefing for foreign diplomats on China's cooperation to combat COVID-19 outbreak in Beijing on March 26, 2021. [Photo by Wang Xiaoyu/chinadaily.com.cn]
China has overcome difficulties to facilitate two trips undertaken by international experts in the country during the COVID-19 outbreak, setting an example for global cooperation and openness, Yang Tao, director-general of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Department of International Organizations and Conferences, said on Friday.
The World Health Organization has dispatched two teams of experts to visit China since the epidemic broke out. The trip last February aimed to expand knowledge on effective disease control measures, and the other one from Jan 14 to Feb 10 strove to enhance understanding of the origins of the virus.
Yang said at a briefing during these visits, China was coping with local outbreaks or infection clusters, and some experts had to be pulled from the frontline to join the mission.
By addressing challenges and making the two visits happen, China played an exemplary role in implementing resolutions adopted by the World Health Assembly, he said.
"It shows that China has always been open and transparent. China's prevention and control efforts are conducted in the sunshine, and there is nothing to hide," he said.
However, following the recent trip, a handful of individuals have jumped to attack WHO experts and conspired to sign a joint statement objecting to an upcoming final report summarizing findings from the trip.
"Such acts serve as politicization of scientific questions and uphold a double standard," Yang said.
"Political manipulation will damage the global battle against the disease and may result in more lost lives, which is immoral."
The briefing in Beijing was attended by diplomats from 50 countries, the Arab League and the African Union.
Yang added China is willing to continue cooperation with the international community and will provide assistance within its capacity.
As the first major economy to declare COVID-19 vaccines a global public good, he said China will not impose export restrictions on vaccines and will help boost vaccine accessibility in developing countries.
---
China Daily | Updated: 2021-03-31 06:55
On Monday, the World Health Organization announced it had received the report of the expert team that visited China to conduct field research in Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, where the first cases of COVID-19 were detected in China and reported to the WHO.
The report was scheduled to be released to the public on Tuesday. However, it had already been leaked to some Western media outlets, many of which have been quick to cast aspersions on it. CNN quoted US Secretary of State Anthony BlinkenÔºçhitherto unknown to be a virologist or expert in eco-virologyÔºças having expressed concerns about the "methodology and the process" of the expert team.
And The New York Times, also in its expert capacity, backed him up by declaring the report "does little to allay Western concerns". Given the blame game the West has been playing during the pandemic with China as the whipping boy, it was to be expected that the report's findings would be disparaged.
Yet for all the attempts to pin the blame for the pandemic on China, the report states that: "The findings suggest that circulation of SARS-CoV-2 (the scientific name for the virus) preceded the initial detection of cases by several weeks. Some of the suspected positive samples were detected even earlier than the first case in Wuhan, suggesting the possibility of missed circulation in other countries."
Heaven forbid that the Western countries should have to point their accusing fingers at one of themselves. Which is why they have doubled down on attacking China by throwing suspicion on the integrity of the members of the WHO's expert team, with Blinken claiming "the government in Beijing apparently helped to write" the report.
In fact the report is based on the field work of the team of international and Chinese experts who visited nine sites, including the Wuhan Institute of Virology, and conducted talks and interviews with medical staff, research staff, recovered patients, and the families of medical workers who died of COVID-19, as well as ordinary residents in Wuhan.
The criticism turns a blind eye to the facts that the international experts from dozens of countries spoke highly of China's cooperation, and that the report was drafted and finished by WHO experts.
The Western politicians and media outlets denigrating the work of the team and the report on its findings are intent on making the research into the origins of the pandemic a political tool to serve their purpose of impugning the integrity of the Chinese authorities. Yet their efforts do not alter the fact that China has cooperated with global experts in an open, transparent way, nor will they dissuade it from continuing to cooperate to learn more about the origins of the virus so the world can be better prepared to prevent a pandemic in the future.
While the West views China as the enemy, for China, the enemy is the virus. Science is science, it should be free of politics. It should be for the common good.
---
By ZHAO HUANXIN in Washington | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-12-02 09:15

People wait in line to get tested for COVID-19 at a testing site in Washington, DC, the United States, Nov 23, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
The novel coronavirus infected people in the United States in mid-December 2019, a government study has found, adding to growing evidence that COVID-19 was likely present in countries such as the US, Italy and France sooner than previously thought.
Scientists at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found evidence of infection in 106 of 7,389 blood donations collected from residents in nine states across the US as early as mid-December, according to their study published online in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases Monday.
The new study provides a perspective into unraveling the mysterious origin of COVID-19, as other scientific papers also suggested the novel coronavirus emerged in France in late December and in Italy even earlier ‚Äî around the time or before it was officially identified in China.
As of Tuesday, there had been at least 63.6 million confirmed cases of the virus, which claimed the lives of more than 1.47 million globally, including nearly 270,000 in the US, according to John Hopkins University data.
China reported cases of what people then called "pneumonia of unknown cause" on Dec 27, according to a white paper "Fighting COVID-19: China in Action" published in June. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it received China's official report on the cluster of cases on Jan 3.
The specimens for the US study, gathered by the American Red Cross between Dec 13 and Jan 17, were sent to the CDC for retrospective testing to see if any had antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the respiratory virus that causes COVID-19.
As a result, scientists found anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in 39 samples from California, Oregon, and Washington state, collected as early as Dec 13-16. Their presence indicate that isolated infections may have occurred in the western portion of the US in mid-December, according to the CDC scientists.
The state of Washington was where the first patient in the United States was given a diagnosis of infection with the virus by the CDC on Jan 20. The state reported at least 165,000 confirmed cases as of Tuesday, with more than 2,770 deaths.
Antibodies also were found in 67 samples in Massachusetts, Michigan, Wisconsin or Iowa, and Connecticut or Rhode Island, collected between Dec 30 and Jan 17.
"These findings suggest that SARS-CoV-2 may have been introduced into the United States prior to January 19, 2020," the authors wrote.
Empty Blood sample kits rest on a desktop between tests, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak continues, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Serology Testing site in Washington, DC, June 16, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The Wall Street Journal, in reporting the research on Tuesday, said the results add to "growing evidence" suggesting COVID-19 was present outside of China earlier than previously known.
"The findings significantly strengthen evidence suggesting the virus was spreading around the world well before public health authorities and researchers became aware, upending initial thinking about how early and quickly it emerged," it said.
Researchers found the virus, for example, in a retrospective analysis of a specimen from a patient who was hospitalized in France on Dec 27, 2019, the Journal reported.
That was weeks before the first cases were confirmed in France on Jan 24, 2020.
In Italy, where the first COVID-19 patient was detected on Feb 20, researchers are providing evidence that the virus may have been circulating since September 2019.
The Italian researchers' findings, published by the National Cancer Institute's scientific magazine Tumori Journal on Nov 11, show that 11.6 percent of 959 healthy volunteers participating in a lung cancer screening trial between September 2019 and March 2020 had developed coronavirus antibodies.
A further specific SARS-CoV-2 antibodies test was carried out by the University of Siena for the same research titled "Unexpected detection of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the pre-pandemic period in Italy", according to a Reuters report.
It showed that four cases dated to the first week of October also were positive for antibodies neutralizing the virus, meaning they had got infected in September, according to Giovanni Apolone, a co-author of the study quoted by Reuters.
WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said his agency is committed to doing everything it can to find the origins of the novel coronavirus, as it can help the world prevent future outbreaks, but he urged countries not to politicize the hunt.
"What has been a barrier and trying to derail us from what we have been doing scientifically was the politicization of the study of the origin of the virus from some quarters," Tedros said at a daily briefing in Geneva on Monday.
An international team of experts will start the study from Wuhan to know what has happened there, and then "based on the findings we have there, to explore if there are other avenues that we have to explore", the WHO chief said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/59/160687834195.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/36/160687834327.jpeg
---
By Danah Zohar | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-29 11:00
When China's Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi met senior US diplomats in Alaska on March 18, he told them they must replace their "zero-sum mindset" with a "win/win mindset". The days of one superpower dominating the world, he said, were over, and all major powers, including the US and China, must develop a cooperative relationship that worked best for the mutual benefit of all. In saying this, Yang went straight to the heart of the thinking that sets America firmly in opposition to China's rise.
Zero-sum thinking has been central to Western culture for thousands of years. The West has always been a culture of One Truth, One Way, One God. Moses declared this on Sinai when he set Western monotheism on its path, Aristotelian philosophy embedded it with either/or logic, and in the 17th century, Newtonian physics declared "one best path from A to B" as absolute scientific truth. This mindset finds its most extreme expression in America's simplistic, black and white, with us or against us mentality. "One best way" has shaped American domestic and foreign policy, and it is central to American national identity.
Every day, Americans are reminded they live in "the greatest country in the world" and US-style democracy is the best, only morally just way of governing a nation. Generations of their politicians have sent American soldiers to war to fulfill the mandate of a "Manifest Destiny" to carry the burden of world leadership. Asking Americans to give up their zero-sum mindset is asking them to give up their religion, their logic and their sense of national purpose and identity. But this sets them, and perhaps the world, on a tragic path.
People convinced their way is the best way, indeed the only viable way, feel threatened by difference. America feels a need to dominate even allies who mainly share its values and its way of doing things. How does it then deal with a country so different from itself as China, or with concepts so foreign as a multipolar world or "a community of nations with a shared future"? How is it to understand China at all except through the lens of its own thinking, and thus as "an existential enemy" set on replacing it as the world's supreme power? As the psychologist Abraham Maslow said, "If the only tool you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail." If you believe there can only be one winner in a struggle for global power, then China's proposal everyone can be a winner in cooperative world order can only be a lie or a trick, intended to make the US drop its guard.
But China's win-win mindset is as old as the West's zero-sum thinking, and has its origins in a situation not too dissimilar from today's interconnected and interdependent world. During the reign of China's first historically recorded dynasty, the Shang (1600-1046 BCE), the Zhou tribe, who ruled one small state, managed to defeat the combined armies of many larger states, and the King of Zhou found himself ruling over most of what was then China's entire geographical area. But there were constant uprisings and rebellions against him. The Zhou realized they were not strong enough to maintain their position by force, so the king conceived the entirely new tianxia ("all under heaven") governing model. Instead of ruling by domination, the Zhou would now position themselves as one among a vast network of cooperating states. All member states of this network would naturally find it more in their own interest to cooperate with each other ‚Äî and the Zhou ‚Äî than to seek dominance for themselves. This multi-state network occupied all of what was then the known world, so tianxia was the first model for global governance. It has been China's win-win model for negotiating ever since, in both business and diplomacy. It is a model urgently needed in our 21st century world.
When Apollo 11 landed on the moon in July 1969 and signalled back a view of Earth from the moon's perspective, we saw the planet for the first time in a way we had never imagined ‚Äì a small, vulnerable sphere suspended alone in what appeared to be the vacuum of empty space. It made our world, and us, feel small and vulnerable, and our sense of earth's smallness and the interconnectivity and interdependence of our lives upon it has since been reinforced by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have been reminded still more forcefully that we live in a world of "zero distance", and of the vulnerability of our entangled lives. We have also seen we had in place no global response to this global crisis, and what that has cost us.
The most serious problems facing all nations today are global ones, which require a cooperative global response. Many are existential problems that, if not addressed, will result in global disaster and perhaps human extinction. Consequences of the disastrous inaction and lack of cooperation in response to COVID-19 are a harbinger of far worse consequences if similar inaction and failure to cooperate typify the global community's response to climate change, mass migration or nuclear war. America may find it painful to give up its zero-sum mindset, but nothing less than all our survival depends on it.
Danah Zohar is a visiting professor at Tsinghua University and the China Art Academy and an entrepreneurial mentor at Haier.

The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not necessarily represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
If you have a specific expertise and would like to contribute to China Daily, please contact us at opinion@chinadaily.com.cn , and comment@chinadaily.com.cn
---
By Tom Fowdy | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-03-13 09:13

[Photo/China Daily]
Wars, both literal and metaphorical, are costly and tragic. An aggressor can attack by surprise, quickly overwhelming your own forces and making a series of early gains.
Sometimes aggressors, despite early gains, end up losing their conflicts, with their opponents emerging stronger.
China is not fighting a conventional war, but a pathological one against COVID-19, as well as a narrative-focused one against some Western media. The virus made sharp initial gains in Wuhan and the whole of Hubei province, which proved costly.
The Western media induced an all-embracing narrative and offensive against China's political system to highlight what they argued was a failure of its governance. Those media outlets apparently believed in the early stages that China's containment efforts would fail.
As the virus gained traction in Hubei in late January, scores of Western newspapers preached the virtues of liberal systems in preventing outbreaks, while arguing that this was evidence that China was an unreliable destination to do business.
The US commerce secretary quickly proclaimed this was good for jobs in the United States, while other politicians in Washington lined up to taunt China.
The situation at the time, of course, seemed severe, with the country's economy on an effective lockdown, workers stuck at home and a grueling fight ahead to contain it. This was the early offensive by the opponent that made gains.
As March emerged, the situation changed. The number of new cases in China, including Hubei, started to decline rapidly. New outbreaks of the virus started to emerge all across the West, with the origins in some cases not known to be linked to travel.
An outbreak began in Northern Italy, soon followed by Germany, France, Spain and the US. Washington's own response to the virus has been particularly incompetent, with the government failing to produce an adequate number of test kits and checks to keep pace with a rapidly spreading disease.
The obsession with attacking China clouded the judgment of policymakers who refused to give Beijing's approach merit and thus let their own guard down.
Locking down Hubei successfully prevented a greater nationwide spread, while the rapid pace of testing by the Chinese government and strident steps to identify cases quickly sapped the momentum of COVID-19.
When President Xi Jinping visited Wuhan on Tuesday, his presence heralded a symbolic turning point that China had, in a rapid space of time, overcome the worst.
China now emerges from the coronavirus outbreak in a position of strength. The narrative has changed. The Western media were critical, yet the Western public can see quite clearly what Beijing has accomplished with some resilience.
An elderly gentleman I met in Sunderland in the United Kingdom last week praised China's efforts and wished Britain's government could be as vigilant.
Undoubtedly, China is now in a position to help others as they struggle. For example, it has donated masks and supplies to Iran and Italy, Japan and South Korea.
Despite making an argument that the virus was an opportunity to be "less dependent on China", the world now needs to be "more dependent on China"Ôºças Beijing's economy will be crucial to helping the West escape from spooked markets and crashing interest rates.
As a whole, the opening segment of a war never truly determines its final conclusion. China has emerged from a position of weakness in its fight against the COVID-19 to a position of strength.
The Western media and politicians jumped at the opportunity to attack Beijing, but grossly miscalculated the implications for themselves. It is time to acknowledge China's success and work together in combating this pandemic.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/29/158406493812.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-08 06:00

Chen Ying, a nurse at the Forth Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, kissed her boyfriend between a window after working consecutive 11 days, on Feb 4, 2020. She finally married her fianc√© Huang Qianrui, in Yiwu, East China's Zhejiang province, on March 20, 2020. [Photo/CCTV News]  A picture on Feb 5, 2020, showing a young man reading Francis Fukuyama's The Origins of Political Order while resting at the Jianghan cabin hospital received widespread praise on social media platforms, with netizens nicknaming him "calm man" and "reading man". [Photo by Yuan Zheng/for chinadaily.com.cn]  
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/98/158631146089.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/158631147063.jpeg
---
By ZHAO HUANXIN in Washington | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-12-11 07:11

Passengers wearing protective face masks walk at Fiumicino Airport in Rome, Italy on June 30, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Italy has now traced its earliest novel coronavirus case back to early December 2019, researchers said in a new study published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in the latest research suggesting that the disease hit Europe earlier than believed.
"We identified severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA in an oropharyngeal (back of the tongue and throat) swab specimen collected from a child with suspected measles in early December 2019," Antonella Amendola of the University of Milan and other authors wrote in the CDC's Emerging Infectious Diseases journal.
SARS-CoV-2 is the respiratory virus that causes COVID-19, while RNA, or ribonucleic acid, is a nucleic acid present in all living cells.
That was about three months before the first identified coronavirus case in Italy, they said in an early release of their article for the February 2021 issue of the journal.
"This finding expands our knowledge on timing and mapping of novel coronavirus transmission pathways," the Italian authors wrote.
COVID-19 symptoms can appear as early as two days after infection or as late as 14 days, according to the CDC.
That could mean the coronavirus was circulating in Italy as early as the end of November 2019, as reported by Bloomberg on Wednesday, which cited the same research.
The new study provides further perspective into demystifying the origins of COVID-19, as other scientific papers have also suggested that the novel coronavirus appeared in the United States in mid-December 2019 and in France in late December, before or around the time the virus was officially identified in China.
China reported cases of what was then called "pneumonia of unknown causes" on Dec 27. The World Health Organization said it received China's official report on the cluster of cases on Jan 3.
In the Italian case, researchers said the boy, who lived in the surrounding area of Milan and had no reported travel history, had a cough and rhinitis on Nov 30 and was taken to a hospital emergency room with respiratory symptoms and vomiting a week later.
"These findings, in agreement with other evidence of early COVID-19 spread in Europe, advance the beginning of the outbreak to late autumn 2019," the authors noted.
In France, researchers found the virus in a retrospective analysis of a specimen from a patient who was hospitalized on Dec 27, 2019, weeks before the first cases were confirmed in France, on Jan 24, 2020.
The Italian researchers pointed out, however, that earlier strains also might have been occasionally imported to Italy and other countries in Europe during the late autumn period, but those importations could have been different from the strain that became widespread in Italy during the first months of 2020.
Italy was the first Western country severely hit by COVID-19, with the first known COVID-19 case reported in the town of Codogno, in the Lombardy region, on Feb 21.
However, some evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been circulating unnoticed for several weeks in Lombardy before it was first officially detected, according to the CDC journal article.
Italy logged 499 coronavirus-related deaths on Wednesday, raising the total to more than 61,700 since February, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK.
Researchers in the country have never stopped their quest for the exact timeline of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy.
Traces in Italy, US
Environmental surveillance has "unequivocally" demonstrated the presence of the virus, at concentrations comparable to those obtained from samples collected at later stages of the pandemic, in the untreated wastewater of the Milan area as early as mid-December 2019, according to the article.
Another research article, published on Nov 11 by the National Cancer Institute's scientific magazine Tumori Journal, shows that 11.6 percent of 959 healthy volunteers participating in a lung cancer-screening trial between September 2019 and March 2020 had developed coronavirus antibodies.
Scientists at the US CDC also found evidence of novel coronavirus infection in 106 of 7,389 blood donations collected from residents in nine states across the US as early as mid-December, according to their study published online in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases on Nov 30.
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-13 03:45

FILE PHOTO: Peter Ben Embarek, a member of the World Health Organization (WHO) team tasked with investigating the origins of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), attends the WHO-China joint study news conference at a hotel in Wuhan, Hubei province, China February 9, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
The head of an independent international expert team, which has just completed its trip to China to study the origins of the COVID-19 virus, described the mission as a success on Friday.
Team lead Peter Ben Embarek told a World Health Organization, or WHO, virtual press conference that he thinks the mission has been "successful in many ways."
Ben Embarek, a Danish food scientist, said the team has gained a better understanding of the start of the event, about what happened in December of 2019, and where it is believed to have originated.
"We have also much better understanding that there was no widespread, no large clusters of the disease in Wuhan, or in elsewhere around Wuhan, in the months prior to December 2019," he said.
He called the trip a good start. "But we have made a lot of progress," he said.
Ben Embarek dismissed the suggestion that the team going to Wuhan earlier would have made a big difference.
He explained it was not possible to go in February 2020, during Wuhan's lockdown, which lasted two-and-a-half months. In the summer, planning started on assembling international experts and Chinese experts, as well as making working plans.
Ben Embarek praised the thousands of Chinese researchers working on the subject over the past year.
"If we had come much, much earlier, we wouldn't have had the same material to look at," he said.
The lead of the international team, comprising experts from 10 different countries and several international organizations, explained that when an emerging disease outbreak happens, the natural first reaction is to treat patients, understand the disease and find cases, instead of trying to figure out what happened.
Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Program, agreed, saying "your first job is to put out the flames (and) get the epidemic under control, and when you can, you go back and look at the trail. "
Ryan cited the study of the origins of the Ebola outbreak. "It took us years and years to even begin to understand the origin of Ebola", he said, adding that even today, many unknowns still remain on how the Ebola outbreak started.
"The point at which you see the flame is never usually the point where the fire starts," he said, reiterating that the first job is to put out the flame of an outbreak.
WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that the expert team is working on a summary report which is expected to be published next week, with a full final report expected to be published in the coming weeks. There will also be a news conference when the summary report is made public.
"We have always said that this mission would not find all the answers, but it has added important information that takes us closer to understanding the origins of the virus," Tedros said.
On Friday, the WHO said that the number of reported cases of COVID-19 globally has declined for the fourth week in a row, and the number of deaths also fell for the second consecutive week.
Tedros said that these reductions appear to be due to countries implementing public health measures more stringently.
"We should all be encouraged, but complacency is as dangerous as the virus itself," he said.
"Now is not the time for any country to relax measures, or for any individual to let down their guard," added the WHO chief.
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-01-14 20:22

A staff member sprays disinfectant at a community which was classified as a medium-risk area for COVID-19, in Yuhua district of Shijiazhuang, North China's Hebei province, Jan 12, 2021. [Photo/Xinhua]
A World Health Organization-led team of scientists from different countries arrived in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Thursday, hoping to trace back the origin of the outbreak of the novel coronavirus from the city.
Perhaps not surprisingly that has prompted a revival of the finger-pointing at what are alleged to have been China's early mistakes.
But as the WHO has stressed, the purpose of the joint scientific research is to try and prevent such a devastating pandemic from happening again, by identifying the animal hosts from which the virus jumped to humans. It is by no means to hold any party accountable for the outbreak of the virus.
In other words, tracing the origin of the virus is scientific work, and politicizing it will only contaminate the atmosphere in which it is being carried out.
There are many hypotheses as to the origins, the evolution and the spread of the virus. As Mike Ryan, the executive director of WHO's health emergencies program, said, "they all make for great stories, but at the moment, there is no proof that any of the hypotheses for generation or transmission are so."
That is why the WHO firmly opposes any speculation about the origins of the virus. Stigmatizing and politicizing the virus unavoidably harms international solidarity in the fight against this common enemy.
China has been open, transparent and responsible in its cooperation with the WHO, and it is one of the first countries to initiate virus origin tracing work with the world health body.
Just as it is the responsibility of everyone to play their part in containing the virus, it is the responsibility of all countries to try and help the world better understand the virus and its origins, so as to help get the pandemic under control as soon as possible. China is demonstrating its commitment to this work.
China will do all it can to help the WHO team in their research as that will be conducive to knowing the origin of the virus. Yet it should be borne in mind that looking for the origin of a virus is no easy task. There are unlikely to be any quick answers. Despite this, it is believed that the input is worthwhile as any findings the team does come up with will be important public health information.
All countries should reject any attempts to politicize the WHO-led team's visit to Wuhan, and cooperate with the WHO faithfully, as China does.
It is hoped the research in Wuhan can produce valuable findings that enrich the understanding about the virus for the future well-being of all.
https://img2.chinadaily.com .cn/images/202101/14/6000411fa31024adbdae9c40.jpeg
---
By David Bartosch | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-18 09:50

CHINA DAILY
A towering tsunami is rolling toward mankind. It's an enemy to all humans: a devilish virus, knowing no boundaries, no differences of class, ethnic origins, political systems or convictions. To defeat it, we also have to overcome our boundaries, distinctions of class and ethnicity, of conviction and differences of interest. We have to stand united as one ‚Äì immediately! The West, staggering inexperienced into this, is (too) slowly learning from China, which gained experience from the SARS crisis in 2003 as well as the current successful containment of COVID-19, a virus more contagious than SARS and in some situations airborne.
When it became known, I stayed in China. I saw officials from all over the world voicing support, as auxiliary goods were sent while expats were flown out of Wuhan. "Wuhan Jiayou!" became known worldwide. This was good. But quite a few privately owned Western media were spilling racist filth at China, bashing China all over the Western world. I was extremely angry, because I knew that, at the same time, thousands of Chinese doctors and nurses willingly sacrificed their own lives not just to protect their own country, but conscious of the need to protect the whole of mankind!
The lack of empathy and gratitude as well as preparative foresight left me speechless. While China was buying the West valuable time, this time was wasted. The events in China were mostly perceived as if taking place on another planet, as if unrelated. Even today, as this is written, I saw a photo of a really huge and dense crowd of people at a concert in the UK. Didn't they see what's going on in Italy? They seemed not to be aware of the grave danger in the slightest bit! In many Western countries, even the system to test for the infection with COVID-19 hasn't been working properly in this crucial stage!
A German proverb says: "A bag of rice fell over in China." It means that you don't find at all interesting what someone is telling you. This also has been the attitude of the German health minister who has missed out on three months of valuable time to prepare Germany. But he wasn't the only one in the West who did not realize that it wasn't a bag of rice that was falling over in China, but the provision of a valuable orientation for immediate preparation for the worst-case scenario, which has now occurred. Doesn't that reflect a giant lack of responsibility or duty with regard to self and others, to family, to society, to humanity?
While the death toll rose and rose, with elderly people being left at home to die in a grim Italian warlike situation, people across the borders were, apart from gathering in large, dangerous crowds to buy toilet paper, living their lives as usual, with some happily infecting each other in dance clubs (which started the epidemic in Berlin), densely gathering on playgrounds with their kids without any protective measures, running marathons (like still recently in Frankfurt), and, as I heard from a more cautious friend back home, even angrily staring at single individuals who had the alarming audacity to wear protective respiratory masks! Tons of misinformation is circulating in English and other Western languages. I found the claim that the virus would be destroyed by temperatures higher than 26 to 27 C. How come that we (36 to 37 C) can be infected then? Why do Western official bodies not provide the open source Chinese information in translations to their populations? Everybody could immediately learn that the virus can even remain at 75 C for up to 15 minutes in water.
The British chief health adviser Sir Patrick Vallance openly said that he wanted 60 percent of the British population to get infected with COVID-19 ‚Äì to achieve what he calls "herd immunity". It left me shocked that from one day to the other, this "knight" presented his decision that every EU-freed Briton shall be part of an amorphous "herd" in just one day the Western individual with its brain-tattoo of individual human rights melted to the matter of a perverse calculation. Finally (to use the current death rate in Italy as a yardstick here) more than 7.6 percent of the "herd" (approximately 3 million British citizens in relation to the Italian situation) were able to rejoice to be granted the "individual right" to die for one "nobleman's" "herd immunity"! Hurray!
What is more absurd: The statement itself, or that an open protest of 600 British scientists was even necessary to stop this? And is it stopped? Britons are still on the dance floor. Is every "advisor," every citizen in the West aware that no country is isolated? Policies which deliberately or even passively lead to the spread of COVID-19 will lead to more infections in poorer countries. If the Western infection rate is not slowed down (like in South Korea), COVID-19 will ignite hell on earth in these less-developed regions. This can only be mitigated, if all developed nations work together with China. All have to pull all levers to contain this spread as much as possible. It needs the responsibility of every single individual! Every minute counts!
We have to prevent COVID-19 from reaching us, moving everything to higher ground, to pull the system of our lives out of its deadly and devastating reach. Avicenna said: "There are no incurable diseases ‚Äì only the lack of will. There are no worthless herbs ‚Äì only the lack of knowledge." Where there is a will, there is a way! We need a 100 percent cooperative approach and an active, hopeful attitude! Looking for solutions everywhere, approaching new ideas and older materials of science in new ways, thinking out of the box, overcoming prejudice and bias, examining naturopathy, traditional medical systems in Africa, India, China and elsewhere ‚Äì all of this must also be part of it now! What if a cure for COVID-19 is growing in the burning rainforests of Brazil or Borneo without us knowing?
The author is a professor at Beijing Foreign Studies University.
The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/95/158449697488.jpeg
---
By Wang Xiaodong | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-01-11 13:13

A computer image created by Nexu Science Communication together with Trinity College in Dublin, shows a model structurally representative of a betacoronavirus which is the type of virus linked to COVID-19 shared with Reuters on Feb 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
An international expert team from the World Health Organization will arrive in China on Thursday to conduct joint scientific research with Chinese scientists on the origin of the novel coronavirus, the National Health Commission said on Monday.
No further details were disclosed in the brief statement released on the commission's website.
China has attached high importance to tracing the origins of the novel coronavirus and supports cooperation between China and the WHO on the issue, Zeng Yixin, vice-minister of the commission, said at a news conference on Saturday.
China has had detailed discussion on the visit to Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, by WHO experts and agreement has been reached between the two sides. Preparations have been made for cooperation in scientific research during the visit in China, he said.
China hopes the cooperation can contribute to finding the origin of the novel coronavirus and improve knowledge of the virus, which is very important for the prevention and control of outbreaks of new infectious diseases in the future, he said.
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-01-16 05:02

The emblem of WHO. [Photo/Agencies]
The World Health Organization said on Friday its international expert team in China is "very happy to be there" and "very happy to be working with their Chinese counterparts".
Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO's technical lead on COVID-19, made the comments during a virtual news conference.
And the organization called on critics to give the team the time and space it needs to do its work.
Van Kerkhove said the team is currently in Wuhan, undergoing a period of quarantine and liaising with Chinese counterparts by video link.
Once the quarantine period is over, members will meet their counterparts face-to-face, she said.
Van Kerkhove said the field study of an outbreak takes time and includes a series of other studies, many of which have begun.
And she stressed that the WHO will not be giving day-to-day updates.
"What we need to do is to let them do the work," the United States epidemiologist added.
Van Kerkhove and Bruce Aylward, a senior advisor to the WHO director-general, spent time in China early last year.
"We are grateful for the opportunity to have worked directly, scientists-to-scientists, to be able to have that level of interaction," she said.
And she cautioned people to be careful about using the phrase "patient zero" because it suggests there was a case that kicked the pandemic off, and that it will be found.
"We may never find who the patient zero was," she said, in response to a question about the study of a case found in Italy in November of 2019.
Mike Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Programme, echoed her views, saying there is no guarantee answers will be found, as has been the case in the study of some other emerging diseases.
"It's a difficult task to fully establish the origins," he said. "Sometimes, it can take two to three or four attempts to do that in different settings."
Ryan also emphasized that it's very important for the team to "have the space to do the work".
"We can't debate this every day, what they do today and tomorrow and the next day. They have to have the space to do the work," he said, while adding that the team will be in touch with the media in the field, and that there will be regular briefings.
On Friday, the WHO's director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, warned people not to lower their guard, because cases and deaths from COVID-19 are continuing to rise rapidly in some parts of the world.
Some countries in Europe, Africa, and the Americas are seeing spikes in cases, with multiple factors driving transmission risk, according to the WHO.
"This is because we are collectively not succeeding at breaking the chains of transmission at the community level or within households," Tedros said.
At his request, the WHO emergency committee on COVID-19 met virtually on Thursday and issued a statement on Friday.
On the subject of variants of the virus, the committee called for a global expansion of genomic sequencing and the sharing of data, along with greater scientific collaboration to address critical unknowns.
On vaccines, it underlined the need for equitable access through the COVAX facility, as well as technology transfer to increase global production capacities.
https://img2.chinadaily.com .cn/images/202101/16/600202eda31024adbdaed556.jpeg
---
By Zhao Yimeng and Liu Kun | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-12 09:15

WU HEPING/FOR CHINA DAILY
Psychologists say prejudice puts people under greater stress. Zhao Yimeng and Liu Kun report.
A World Health Organization survey published in the week before World Mental Health Day on Oct 10, said the COVID-19 pandemic has affected critical mental health services in 93 percent of the 130 countries that participated. Moreover, demand for such services was growing.
In response, WHO said the goal of this year's campaign is to obtain increased investment in mental health.
China has largely contained the pandemic, and sporadic outbreaks have quickly been brought under control by regional lockdowns and mass testing. However, mental health in the post-pandemic era will be a major global issue as experience of similar acute situations shows that the need for psychosocial support will continue to rise in the coming months and years.
Speaking on World Mental Health Day, Lu Lin, director of Peking University Sixth Hospital and a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said society should accept and care for people who have developed mental issues as a result of the pandemic in the same way it treats people with diabetes or hypertension. "We shouldn't stigmatize or discriminate against people," he said.
According to WHO's website, social stigma related to the virus may involve groups of people being labeled, stereotyped, discriminated against, treated differently or experiencing a loss of status because of a perceived link with COVID-19.
Such treatment may not only be aimed at those infected with the disease, but also negatively affect their family, friends and communities.
Stereotypes
During the initial phase of the pandemic, when it was transmitted quickly, especially in Wuhan, Hubei province, people with links to the city and Hubei in general found themselves being stigmatized.
In a wider context, the same thing happened to Asian people in some Western countries.
Some Chinese didn't dare to wear masks overseas as they were afraid of mistakenly being seen as having the virus, provoking discriminatory behavior or even physical attacks.
Jiao He, a Chinese woman who works in Washington, said she was always anxious during her daily subway commute in March when she didn't wear a face mask and the disease was still spreading in Asian countries.
" (People with) Asian faces were experiencing discrimination because of the virus. I was afraid that if I, an Asian woman, wore a protective mask I would be attacked. I also worried about becoming infected with the virus," said Jiao, who noted that such prejudice has declined in recent months.
Meanwhile, in China, people from Wuhan were alienated both during and after a two-month lockdown.
Even people in low-risk areas, such as Beijing, were seen to frown and step away when they entered an elevator or confined space and saw someone who was not wearing a mask or who was sneezing and coughing.
Stigmatization and discrimination harm the mental and physical health of people infected with the disease and those related to them, said Xiong Kewei, a member of the science popularization team at Beijing Normal University's Faculty of Psychology.
"People may feel the social rejection and condemnation, which may generate feelings such as shame, fear and self-abasement," he said.
To avoid that, some infected people were unwilling to tell others, even medical professionals, about their true condition, meaning they often missed the optimum treatment time and made the situation worse.
Sometimes families concealed the truth from other people to assuage the patient's negative feelings.
Inquiries, inconvenience
On Jan 22, the day before the lockdown was imposed in Wuhan, a 71-year-old resident who only wanted to be referred to as "Peng" took a trip to Lianjiang, Guangdong province, with his wife.
The day after the couple arrived, a Lianjiang resident saw Peng's car and called the police to report that a vehicle bearing Wuhan plates was parked outside a hotel.
That led to police, staff members from the local center for disease control and prevention, and community workers all visiting Peng's hotel room to make inquiries.
The hotel manager parked the car in the yard, but it was reported for a second time by a local who recognized the license plate. Later, as Peng drove to a post office in Lianjiang, he was tailed by a police car the whole way.
Peng said the queries and treatment didn't affect him mentally or physically, but he felt vexed by the constant time-consuming interruptions. "I was really annoyed at first, feeling disturbed and uncomfortable. Later I got used to it," he said.
Two months later, after returning to Wuhan, he set out for Zhanjiang in Guangdong. This time, to be safe, he carried a certificate showing that he had tested negative for the virus.
Once again, his car was reported, and people living near his hotel even threatened not to pay their property fees until Peng had been investigated. The problem was finally solved when the senior's health codes were printed out and copies were attached to the hotel elevator and his car.
According to Li Feihan from BNU's psychology faculty, such unequal treatment could trigger negative emotions including anger, anxiety and depression.
Anger
Chen Hang, a graduate of Zhongnan University of Economics and Law in Wuhan, said he was initially angry about being labeled a "Wuhan person". "After all, Wuhan residents didn't do anything to cause the epidemic," the 22-year-old said.
He became more understanding after putting himself in the position of people from outside the city.
"I more or less understand their mindset. We cannot stop outsiders viewing us with suspicion, but (to ease people's anxiety) we tried not to leave the city without a pressing reason. I also appreciated the local government's efforts to distinguish between people from Wuhan and the source of the virus," he said.
Xiong, from BNU, said the stigma may linger long after the pandemic and cause mental anguish.
Chen recalled how a friend from Wuhan was quarantined for 14 days after arriving in Guizhou province, even though Wuhan had been classified as a low-risk area and he was carrying the result of a negative nucleic acid test.
"While that could not be regarded as discrimination, the local policies were really confusing," Chen said.
Even after the lockdown was lifted, people from Wuhan and Hubei returning to other parts of the country for work experienced difficulty buying travel tickets with their Hubei ID cards. Some employers asked them to delay their return.
"For the employers, these were just regular preventive measures, but the employees may have felt that their companies were less than supportive," Li said. "Prejudice and fear still existed."
Those feelings were illustrated when some people who had bought goods online refused to accept items shipped from Wuhan and blamed vendors for increasing their risks.
Peng and Chen said they experienced or witnessed less prejudice as the pandemic was gradually brought under control and Wuhan began to return to normal.
Chen said he was happy to try to forget the discrimination he had experienced.
Peng said, "I will always remember the feeling, but it hasn't led to any severe trauma."
Li said the speed of recovery of those affected depended on how society reacted after the pandemic.
"Those who endured such prejudice might feel better if other people reflected on the stigma they projected, which was unintentional but still resulted in discrimination and attacks driven by prejudice," she said.
Health-related social stigmatization isn't just confined to COVID-19, though. AIDS patients and people with mental illness or infectious diseases have long been targets of such discrimination. That has led academics to ask if such stigma can be eradicated.
In his book Social Psychology, David Myers, a psychology professor at Hope College, Michigan, said prejudice comes from many interrelated factors, so there is no simple remedy.
Nevertheless, it is possible to devise techniques for reducing prejudice, such as trying to create cooperative, equal relationships.
According to Li, the simplest, most direct way of reducing pandemic-related stigma is to develop empathy. "If you are from Wuhan, how do you expect others to treat you? If a relative has a confirmed infection, how do you expect others to treat your family?" she said.
Xiong said realizing stigma is in play is the first step to making changes, so when people are actively aware of their thoughts and actions and are willing to avoid prejudice and negative results they adjust their behavior to avoid problems.
"Knowing the truth about the virus and what happened in Wuhan will also dramatically reduce prejudice-objective, detailed, scientific information about the pandemic will help," he said.
Character link
Li said the degree of prejudice is closely connected to each person's character, such as their openness to new things and the value systems they use. A flexible person who is happy to accept variety and uncertainty may quickly reflect on prejudice and its influence and then amend their attitude and behavior.
She noted that acknowledging the origins of certain fears and taking protective measures can boost a person's sense of security and reduce stigma. She added that the media can play a role in helping people to realize the implicit bias, discrimination and origins of their stigmatizing behavior.
She noted that policymakers should also consider the possibility that unequal treatment results from certain policies.
"Decision-makers can amend preventive measures to ensure flexibility-meanwhile, the media should educate the public about illnesses to avoid the spread of inaccurate information," she said.
At a news conference in May, Chen Xuefeng, deputy director of the Institute of Psychology at Chinese Academy of Sciences, said local authorities are legally obliged to prevent discrimination in employment.
"Such discrimination is contrary to social justice. Hurting a certain group may result in hurting every single person in society. In other words, discriminating against others may hurt you, too," he said.
Li said false information spread on social media was one of the main sources of panic during the pandemic, and while hashtags can provide easy classification of subjects they can also drive a specific perception of the messages and the limited information they contain.
"Powerful voices online may not have a comprehensive understanding of the pandemic, but their actions may reinforce prejudice. As such, we would suggest that people refrain from posting on social media sites around the clock," she said.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/67/160515092768.jpeg
---
By John E Scanlon/Robert B Zoellick | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-27 07:31

SHI YU/CHINA DAILY
In 2010, poaching and illicit trafficking had brought tigers in the wild close to the point of no return, and the poaching of African elephants and rhinos for their ivory and horn had reached unprecedented levels, with an estimated 100,000 elephants being killed for their ivory in the 2010-12 period alone.
Recognizing the inadequacy of the global response to these highly destructive crimes, the International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime was launched at the Global Tiger Summit in Saint Petersburg, Russia, on Nov 23, 2010.
United under the banner of ICCWC, the executive heads of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, Interpol, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Bank and the World Customs Organization agreed to usher in a new era in wildlife law enforcementÔºçone in which wildlife criminals would face a more determined and coordinated oppositionÔºçrecognizing the multiple impacts of these crimes, as well as the "possible risks to human health through the spread of disease".
Ten years on, we see that tiger numbers are rebounding, and the disturbingly high levels of poaching of elephants and rhinos and the smuggling of their ivory and horns have been steadily declining. At the same time, though, we are witnessing record levels of poaching of pangolins for their meat and scales, with the trafficking of many other species, including fish and timber, continuing to surge.
Yet today we better understand how these crimes deprive governments of revenue, degrade ecosystems and their ability to sequester carbon, and exacerbate corruption, insecurity and poverty. In 2019, the World Bank assessed the full economic value of these crimes, as they affect all species of wildlife trafficked, including fish and timber, at $1-2 trillion a year.
Today, the world is feeling the full brunt of a pandemic, which most likely had its origins in wildlife, with the UN Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services' report on biodiversity and pandemics giving a compelling account of the links between wildlife trade, consumption, emergence of diseases and biosecurity.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we are seeing more local restrictions placed on wildlife trade, markets and consumption that pose a risk to public health, a trend that is sure to continue, and should be addressed under international law. Ensuring such high-risk wildlife trade and consumption do not simply move underground requires a scaled-up enforcement effort.
Yet remarkably, despite its destructive nature and the severe health risks it poses, there is no global agreement on tackling wildlife crime, as there is, for example, on tackling human trafficking.
Humans and wildlife are losing, and the stark reality is that, left as it is, our system is not going to end these highly destructive crimes or prevent the next pandemic.
In 2020, in the face of such a massive ongoing onslaught on wild animals and plants, and what it means for biodiversity, climate change and public health, we need to do much more if we are to win this fightÔºçto scale up our enforcement, financing and laws.
As for the ICCWC, it should continue to strengthen its collaborative enforcement work. It should draw upon the IPBES' biodiversity and pandemics report, which was released in October, and make more efforts to combat trafficking in species that have high potential of spreading diseases.
Besides, development banks must allocate more funds for tackling these highly destructive crimes. They can build capacity, create supportive networks, and help stop illicit financial flows. This is now a necessity, given how the tourism economy, natural wealth and biosecurity are all intertwined.
States on their part should seize the moment to transform international laws. They should embed preventing and combating wildlife crimes into the international criminal law framework, thereby giving us our best shot at reining in these heinous crimes and preventing future pandemics.
They can do this by developing a fourth protocol on wildlife crime under the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, which would ensure countries cooperate to prevent and combat trafficking in wildlife, and respect one another's laws on the conservation and use of wildlife.
As the ICCWC approaches its 10th anniversary, it can claim to have achieved much of what we had hoped for when we signed up a decade ago. We are in a better position today than in 2010 to combat wildlife crimes because of its collective efforts. However, the fight is far from over; in many senses, it has just begun. We cannot stand by and watch wildlife crimes continue to escalate, given the risks it poses to people and the planet, without also scaling up our international response. Now is the time to further ratchet up global efforts to combat wildlife trafficking. And we urge businesses and banks, including those involved in trade and finance, to champion the issue.
A protocol on wildlife crime would be the first time a crime that has a significant effect on the environment is specifically enshrined in international criminal law, reflecting the level of international cooperation that is required to combat wildlife crimes in the post COVID-19 world.
The world's youths are taking a massive hit from the pandemic. We owe it to them to scale up our collective efforts and to pass on a legal framework that is fit to deal with future problems, one that gives us the best chance of avoiding future wildlife-related pandemics and all the misery that comes with it.
John E. Scanlon is former secretary general of CITES, and Robert B. Zoellick is former president of the World Bank.
The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
If you have a specific expertise and would like to contribute to China Daily, please contact us at opinion@chinadaily.com.cn , and comment@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/78/160643671361.jpeg
---
By Joseph Li | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-03 13:47

Leung Chi-chiu, a doctor specializing in respiratory science, talks about various issues on the COVID-19 outbreak during an interview with China Daily on Thursday. [PARKER ZHENG / CHINA DAILY]
Hong Kong may need to introduce more-stringent measures if the COVID-19 situation cannot be effectively controlled in the near future, said Leung Chi-chiu, a doctor specializing in respiratory science.
He believes infections from Hong Kong students and travelers returning from overseas before March 19 seem to have slowed because they have nearly completed their incubation periods. But now is the time to focus on local infection cases and prevent major outbreaks in the community.
Leung is currently the chairman of the Hong Kong Medical Association's Advisory Committee on Communicable Diseases. Prior to retirement from the government last year, he was a consultant doctor with the tuberculosis and chest services division of the Department of Health.
The confirmed cases reached 802 as of Thursday ‚Äî rising by 37 from the day before. For the past week, the average number of daily cases was over 40, hitting 65 ‚Äî the highest daily tally on March 27.
"The current virus situation in Hong Kong has come to a tipping point," Leung told China Daily in an exclusive interview.
"The number (of confirmed cases) is seesawing between 40 and 50 cases per day, and the origins of 10 or more cases cannot be detected. The longer the situation is deadlocked like this, the more difficult it will be to control the situation.
"We hope large clusters of local infection cases will not occur within the next three to seven days. If clusters of infection cases continue to emerge, with 10 or more cases a day having unknown origins, the government will need to tighten control of risky premises, such as banning dining-in services at restaurants and other establishments."
On Wednesday, the government announced it would ban entertainment venues such as mahjong parlors, karaoke lounges and nightclubs for 14 days in an urgent move to minimize social gatherings, after fitness centers, cinemas, and billiard and game centers were banned last week. However, beauty parlors and massage centers are spared.
High risk jobs
"I think this is a loophole (not to ban beauty parlors and massage centers," he added. Beauty and massage services are risky services, he said. This is because beauticians and masseurs have close body contact with the customers, and 90 percent of customers do not wear face masks. He noted the recent case of an infected beautician who had provided treatment to a customer with the coronavirus.
Leung added that stringent control measures cannot be enforced indefinitely. This is because people's patience will run out and there will also be a high price to pay economically.
He urged people with jobs that put them at risk to be particularly vigilant.
Healthcare workers, employees at homes for the elderly, and disciplined services officers should be particularly vigilant. These people should avoid large gatherings and going to other risky places. If they get sick, they will not only harm themselves but also family members, colleagues and friends, and further spread the virus into the community, Leung said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/78/158589379820.jpeg
---
By KARL WILSON in Sydney | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-07-28 08:59
A university student wears her mortar hat following her graduation ceremony from the School of Commerce at the University of Sydney in Australia, in this April 22, 2016 file photo. [Photo/Agencies]
China has overtaken the United States as Australia's biggest partner in scientific research, according to a new report, despite attempts by the country's defense and security services to have Australian universities distance themselves from their Chinese partners, most of which are universities.
"Global collaboration on research is critical if we are going to solve the world's greatest challenges," a spokesperson for the University of Sydney said while commenting on a report by the Australia-China Relations Institute.
The University of Sydney has been collaborating with Chinese researchers since the 1960s on projects that the university said have improved the lives of countless people around the world.
"We now publish over a thousand academic articles with Chinese co-authors a year, and we have 340 academics," the spokesperson said.
One of the authors of the report, ACRI Director James Laurenceson, said Australia's scientific successes have long involved working with international partners. "And with the scale of scientific research undertaken in China much greater than in Australia, it is in Australia's interests to engage.
"It is also difficult for China to misappropriate scientific knowledge from Australian researchers that has yet to be created and that is openly shared once it is," he said.
When research with international partners involves sensitive technologies and projects of a classified nature, or is expected to yield commercially valuable intellectual property, controls exist to manage the risks, Laurenceson said.
"These controls are regularly reviewed to ensure they remain 'fit for purpose', and universities have a strong track record of compliance," he added.
Allan Behm, head of the International and Security Program at The Australia Institute in Canberra, said Australia has spent decades on scientific cooperation with China in areas such as biological science, medicine, photovoltaics, agricultural science and many other disciplines that could assist the fight against COVID-19 and research for a vaccine.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, Australian and Chinese researchers have been working closely to find a vaccine.
Perth-based Linear Clinical Research has been working closely with China-based global biotechnology company Clover Biopharmaceuticals on trials of a vaccine since April, when global trials began.
According to the ACRI report, 16.2 percent of Australian scientific publications involved Chinese researchers in 2019, compared with 3.1 percent in 2005. Research collaboration last year with US scientists was next at 15.5 percent, followed by the United Kingdom, 11.7 percent; Germany, 5.9 percent; and Canada, 5 percent.
Australia's scientific partnership with China is apparent in both quantity and quality, said the report, "The Australia-China Science Boom".
"Of Australian research in the top 1 percent of most-cited scientific publications globally, the number involving China-affiliated collaborators grew by 12.8 percent in 2018.
"In contrast, the number involving collaborators from Australia's other top five research partnersÔºçthe US, UK, Germany and CanadaÔºçall fell," the report said.
Australia's collaboration with China is most prominent in materials science, chemical engineering and energy, according to Scopus, a database of peer-reviewed research.
"Research collaboration with China brings risks requiring management, including those related to national security," the ACRI report said. However, it added that "collaboration also brings benefits. And these benefits are now being threatened by allegations and headlines not well-supported by facts."
Andrew Norton, a professor of higher education policy at Australian National University in Canberra, said international collaboration was vital for Australia, since it could never compete with the vast research resources of countries such as China and the US. He said Australia relies on international research.
"That's the danger of being overly restrictive in our relationship with China," Norton said.
The University of Sydney spokesperson said: "Researchers in Australia and China share many aspirations; recent examples include partnerships to create healthy and livable cities, tackle food insecurity, and advance our understanding of cognitive neuroscience and brain disorders.
"We are also working with researchers in China and around the world to uncover the biological origins of the coronavirus and work on solutions to recover from this pandemic."
The Australian government funds The Australia-China Science and Research Fund, which supports strategic science, technology and innovation collaboration between Australia and China.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/159590327607.jpeg
---
China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-06-16 09:35

Passengers wearing protective face masks wait for the arrival of a train amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, at a train station in Tokyo, Japan June 9, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
TOKYO - A Japanese minister has poured cold water on reports that the country - now seeing fresh cases of the coronavirus - is gearing up to ease an entry ban on visitors from low-risk nations.
Foreign Minister Toshimitsu Motegi said on Monday it was not true the government had decided on the relaxation of the ban.
Motegi's comment came after Tokyo reported increases in coronavirus cases on Sunday.
The Tokyo metropolitan government said 47 new infections were recorded from the previous day. Days earlier, Tokyo Governor Yuriko Koike had lifted restrictions to allow all business to reopen.
The Tokyo government is asking people working at nightclubs and other entertainment establishments to regularly take coronavirus tests.
A panel of experts was to set up on Monday in response to what some fear could be a new wave of infections, Koike said.
She had earlier said that if the number of infections spiked anew in the capital, the city authorities would once again request that businesses and people restrict their activities.
The Yomiuri newspaper reported last week that Japan may allow people to make business trips to and from Australia, New Zealand, Vietnam and Thailand in the next few months.
On Monday, Motegi said the government is examining ways to ease entry bans, taking into consideration many factors, and would ease restrictions in stages if it decided to do so.
Across the country, infections had risen to 17,529, according to the latest figures from the health ministry and local authorities on Sunday.
In neighboring South Korea, the number of new virus cases stayed below 40 for the second straight day on Monday, but cluster infections and cases with untraceable origins continued to haunt officials in the Seoul metropolitan area.
The country added 37 new cases, including 24 local infections, raising the total to 12,121, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
A door-to-door trading establishment in southern Seoul has emerged as a new hotbed for community spread. As of Monday, cases traced to the retailer reached 169, up by five from the previous day, the Yonhap News Agency reported.
In the city's southeast, a logistics center operated by an affiliate of retail giant Lotte Group reported a new case over the weekend.
Health authorities said the country has been experiencing an increase in the number of cases for which the infection routes are unknown.
Elsewhere in Asia, Indian Home Affairs Minister Amit Shah has offered 500 railway carriages for use as makeshift coronavirus hospital wards as the capital New Delhi struggles to contain a spike in cases.
Shah was set to convene a meeting on the deteriorating situation in the capital, with all the major political parties represented.
Delhi has about 9,000 beds dedicated to COVID-19 patients among public and private hospitals, but a state government panel of experts has said that Delhi will need at least 15,000 beds by the end of June.
Xinhua - Agencies
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/10/159228042219.jpeg
---
By XU WEI | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-06-23 06:52

President Xi Jinping talks with European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen in a videoconference in Beijing on June 22, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Chinese leader proposes working together to safeguard international peace, stability
President Xi Jinping called on China and the European Union on Monday to expand common interests and solve difficult issues during the process of cooperation and development and to build a bilateral comprehensive strategic partnership with global influence.
In a videoconference with European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, Xi reaffirmed China's commitment to deepening reform and expanding opening-up, which will provide a new round of cooperative opportunity and room for development for the EU.
China is a partner, rather than a rival, and there is no fundamental conflict of interests between the two sides, he said, adding that the cooperation and consensus between them far outweighs competition and differences. He urged both sides to respect the other, seek common ground while shelving differences and keep enhancing mutual understanding and trust.
China and Europe should be the two major forces that safeguard global peace and stability, and Beijing is willing to communicate with Brussels over major issues, he said.
China and the EU have extended each other support and help since the COVID-19 pandemic broke out, Xi said.
Beijing stands ready to work with Brussels to make bilateral relations even more stable, mature and elevated to a higher level during the post-pandemic period, he said.
China, as an ancient country with a long history and a developing country full of vitality, will always pursue peace instead of hegemony, he said.
The country has focused all its policies and efforts on enabling its people to live better lives, and it will continue unwaveringly to follow a path of peaceful development, he added.
Xi expressed his belief that the EU will keep heading toward unity, stability, openness and prosperity, saying that China stands ready to bolster strategic cooperation with the EU to jointly cope with global challenges.
China and the EU must be the two big markets that drive global growth and prosperity, and the two economies must assume their roles as the twin engines of the world economy, he said.
The two sides must jointly support businesses reopening in a scientific and orderly manner, step up coordination in macroeconomic policies and ensure stable and unimpeded global industry and supply chains to lead the global economic recovery, he said.
Xi underlined the significance of ensuring two-way opening-up of markets, saying bilateral investment talks must be expedited and bilateral cooperation in green and digital areas must be strengthened to form a green development partnership.
The two sides must step up trilateral cooperation with Africa, he said.
China and the EU should uphold multilateralism and improve global governance, Xi said, adding that China will also be an advocate of multilateralism and adhere to its vision on global governanceÔºçconsultation and contribution for shared benefitsÔºçno matter how the international landscape changes.
Xi expressed China's appreciation to the EU for its firm commitment to upholding multilateralism, its participation in the global pandemic response and the bloc's decision to scale up investment in international organizations such as the World Health Organization.
He said China is willing to step up coordination and cooperation with the EU over major international and regional issues, step up dialogue and cooperation over global public health governance and forge a global community of health for all.
The first official meeting between Chinese leaders and the new EU leadership was held as they celebrated the 45th anniversary of diplomatic relations.
Last year, the EU was China's biggest trading partner, and China was the EU's second-largest trading partner.
The meeting was held after the virtual 22nd China-European Union leaders' meeting, co-chaired by Premier Li Keqiang and Michel and von der Leyen via videoconference.
Li said the two sides must work toward reaching a comprehensive, balanced and high-level investment agreement before the end of this year and enable the signing of bilateral agreement on geographical indications on products' origins.
The two EU leaders voiced their hope that talks on the EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment can be concluded this year as scheduled, and that the two sides can bolster cooperation in areas such as connectivity, trade, investment and the digital economy.
They said the COVID-19 pandemic has not weakened either of the two sides' intentions to work together and the two sides have supported each other and shown solidarity during the coronavirus response. The EU is willing to bolster cooperation on economic recovery with China and further open up markets while jointly upholding multilateralism and free trade, they said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/35/159287101545.jpeg
---
By ZHOU JIN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-05-19 10:44

A Staff worker unloads the medical supplies from China at the airport in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on March 22, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Diplomatic envoy applauds China's 'unprecedented' response to pandemic
The joint fight against COVID-19 will create more opportunities for China and Ethiopia to strengthen their bilateral friendship, especially in the field of public health cooperation, according to the African country's ambassador in Beijing.
The two countries have actively exchanged information since the outbreak and Ethiopia expects China to continue supporting its public health system and offering assistance on prevention and treatment of the coronavirus, Ethiopian Ambassador to China Teshome Toga Chanaka told China Daily in an interview.
In April, the Chinese government sent a group of 12 medical experts with medical equipment to Ethiopia. Sister cities and provinces across the country have collected medical supplies for their counterparts in Ethiopia. Chinese charitable foundations and enterprises have also donated materials.
Toga noted that COVID-19 has tested the capacity of health systems, political leadership, social systems and cultural values.
He said that the mobilization capability and people's willingness to comply with the directives of the government were a rarely found experience elsewhere and something others can learn from China.
The government, health workers, the Chinese people, the media and all other sectors of society have demonstrated to the world the way to protect lives and deal with such a daunting challenge, he said.
"China has done its part in an unprecedented way," he added.
Based on China's experiences, Toga said Ethiopia has taken a series of measures to combat the disease, such as enhancing public awareness, introducing mandatory quarantine for all international arrivals and suspending social, business and religious gatherings.
As of Monday, there were 317 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and five deaths in Ethiopia, according to the World Health Organization.
Noting that the pandemic is a global challenge and is not confined to any particular territory, the ambassador said that global cooperation and a global strategy are necessary to cope with the disease.
The WHO is well positioned to lead the global response, he said, adding that "it is time for more concerted and coordinated global effortsÔºçisolated and national efforts alone could not do the job well".
Regarding earlier reports of mistreatment of African people in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou, the ambassador said as there is no policy to target and treat Africans differently and all testing and quarantine procedures and protocols put in place apply to Chinese as well as foreigners. "The happenings in Guangzhou should not lead us to make a generalized conclusion," he said.
He added that there are over 4,000 African students in Wuhan, the nation's hardest-hit region, who have bravely and courageously fought the virus with their Chinese colleagues.
The local community in Wuhan, the universities, the city authorities and volunteers looked after and cared for African students, the ambassador said.
"There were no reports of discrimination because of their origins. I think this is a very important point we cannot forget," he said.
China and Africa should always work together based on friendly consultation and mutual respect, Toga said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/4/158986107755.jpeg
---
By ANGUS MCNEICE in London | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-04-25 15:10

Ambassador Liu Xiaoming
Liu: 'Countries of the world belong to one and the same community'
Chinese Ambassador to the United Kingdom Liu Xiaoming has condemned a "political virus" that he says has emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic in which some politicians and world leaders have resorted to "blaming and scapegoating" China in order to further their own agendas.
Liu said that the novel coronavirus "does not respect borders or discriminate between races" and said that global cooperation is the most effective weapon if the "international community is to claim victory against the virus".
The ambassador made the comments in an online discussion on COVID-19 with Stephen Green, a member of the UK's House of Lords and chairman of the London-based public policy center Asia House.
"The ongoing battle is leading proof that the countries of the world belong to one and the same community with a shared future. We need global united action," Liu said.
Liu strongly condemned attempts to blame China for the pandemic, and he said those who do so are blatantly politicizing a global public health issue.
"Such a move will only drive a wedge between countries, undermine international cooperation and harm the interests of all mankind," he said."In the face of the crisis, blaming and scapegoating are futile. Arrogance and insolence will only poison cooperation between countries."
During the question and answer session, Liu was asked if China will provide investigators with full access to all the relevant data, locations and witnesses in any future international inquiries into the origins of the pandemic.
"It's up to the WHO(World Health Organization)," Liu responded."That's why we support the WHO.We have to play by international norms, international rules, not by some other country's rules."
Liu went on to condemn courts in the United States that have explored legal action against China over allegations the country had not done enough to contain the virus.
"It's absurd," he said. "This is not the first time some politicians and some people want to play world police. This is not the era of gunboat diplomacy, this is not the era when China was a semi-colonial, semi-feudal society. This is the third decade of the 21st century. Those people, I cannot understand them, these people still live in the old days, thinking they can bully China and bully the world."
Liu said that China has been open and transparent since the start of the outbreak. He moved to correct reports in some British media outlets and elsewhere that China delayed alerting the international community after the medical system was first alerted of the virus in late December.
"The government adopted very swift actions, and notified the WHO four days later, and shared information seven days later with the Americans," he said.
Liu said he was pleased that the UK has confirmed it will continue to support the WHO, after the US threatened to halt funding the organization earlier this month.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/32/158780187956.jpeg
---
By REN QI in Moscow and WANG XU in Tokyo | China Daily | Updated: 2020-05-05 08:59
People ride their bikes and jog at Parco Talenti park, as Italy begins a staged end to a nationwide lockdown due to the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in Rome, Italy, May 4, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
While worst-hit European nation moves again, Russia, Japan weighed down
Italians were free to stroll and visit relatives for the first time in nine weeks on Monday as the country hardest hit by Europe's coronavirus outbreak eases the world's longest nationwide lockdown.
Four million workers were expected to return to their construction sites and factories as the economically shattered country tries to get moving again.
Restaurants reopened for takeaway service. But bars and even ice cream parlors remained shut. The use of public transport was discouraged and everyone will have to wear masks in indoor public spaces.
On the eve of the easing of the lockdown, the number of new deaths from COVID-19 dropped to 174 on Sunday, Italy's lowest daily figure since the start of the lockdown on March 10, according to the health authorities. The country's death toll stood at 28,884 on Sunday.
The lockdown will be eased in further stages at two-week increments, on May 18 and June 1, provided the data related to the outbreak continue to improve.
In Russia, the number of cases rose by over 10,000 for the second straight day, the country's health authorities said on Monday.
In the 24 hours to noon on Monday, the rise was 10,581, shy of the record of 10,633 the previous day. This brought Russia's nationwide tally to 145,268 and the death toll to 1,356.
Despite the increases, the government has indicated it could gradually lift confinement measures from May 12, depending on the region, The Moscow Times reported.
The Chinese embassy in Moscow reposted an announcement from Air China on Monday in which it said that from May 8 all passengers on its flights from Moscow to Beijing must provide negative nucleic acid testing results within 120 hours of boarding.
The tests should be made at one of the six institutions in Moscow and St. Petersburg that were listed on the embassy's website.
In France, the pandemic has claimed 24,895 lives as of Sunday. Travelers who arrive from a country in Europe's Schengen open-border area or Britain will be exempt from a compulsory two-week quarantine, the Elysee Palace said on Sunday.
Despite the eased conditions for travelers from within the Schengen Area and Britain, the tough quarantine rules for those coming from other places will stay in place. France is preparing to gradually lift lockdown measures from May 11.
In Asia, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Monday decided to extend the country's national state of emergency to May 31.
Abe will consider lifting the state of emergency without waiting for its May 31 expiration if expert advisers decide that is possible based on detailed analysis of regional infection trends, he said at a meeting of the government's coronavirus task force.
Even though Japan has not seen a huge outbreak compared with some global hot spots, the coronavirus has infected 15,913 people and killed 542 in the country, according to public broadcaster NHK.
Traditional Thai dancers wearing protective face shields perform at the Erawan Shrine in Bangkok on Monday. The shrine was reopened after the Thai government relaxed measures to combat the spread of the coronavirus. MLADEN ANTONOV/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
Fabrication denounced
Meanwhile, amid controversy, Japanese Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo denounced the posting online of fabricated reports that claimed he had said the new coronavirus was man-made.
Honjo said the broadcasting of unsubstantiated claims regarding the origins of the disease is dangerously distracting, especially at a time when all people need to work together to fight the common enemy of coronavirus.
In Latin America, 4,588 new cases of the virus were recorded in Brazil, with 275 deaths, over the latest reported 24-hour period, the health ministry said on Sunday. That brought the total number of confirmed cases in the country to over 100,000. Brazil's death toll stood at 7,025 on Sunday.
Chen Yingqun in Beijing, Xinhua and agencies contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/97/158865135811.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/4/158865135823.jpeg
---
By CHEN YINGQUN | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-02 09:37

Workers unload medical supplies from China at the airport in Male, the Maldives, on Friday. The Maldives has been receiving support from China to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. LI XIANG/XINHUA
Containing the spread of the novel coronavirus and finding ways to treat it call for international collaboration and cooperation, and China has contributed its mite, global analysts said.
Koh King Kee, the president of the Centre for New Inclusive Asia, an Asian think tank based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, said that instead of indulging in a blame game, world leaders should set aside ideology and geopolitics to work jointly to fight the pandemic, as the virus recognizes no borders and attacks human beings regardless of ethnicity, religion, and location.
"The virus is the common enemy of mankind. In an interconnected world, no country is an island. Humankind shares a common destiny." he said.
He said that China had responded with immediate mobilization of its state resources and its people since the novel coronavirus outbreak began, and the Chinese fought with their "blood, toil, sweat and tears" to combat the spread of the virus.
"China sacrificed the economy of Hubei province to buy time for the world to be better prepared for the virus. As the mobility of the country's entire population of 1.4 billion people was restricted, its economic activities literally ground to a halt for weeks," he said.
China provided assistance to more than 120 countries, and four international organizations to battle the outbreak and is planning further support.
Carlos Velez, president of the China-Spain Business Association, who lives in Spain, the second worst-hit country in Europe, said that China's knowledge of the disease would help others.
"Spain appreciates China's support and help with material and medical experts in the fight against the disease," he said. "China has set an example of how to resolve this global nightmare."
Efforts recognized
Branislav Djordjevic, the director of the Institute of International Politics and Economics in Belgrade, said that at a moment when the world is facing an unimaginable threat, which will have long-lasting negative effects, China's efforts are winning admiration.
"Though it was hit by COVID-19, and still is trying to normalize everyday life, China is not only willing to help other countries by sharing its experience and advising governments and medical experts, but also providing necessary medical supplies," he said.
"China is being responsible, and aware of a shared future for mankind."
Hisham AbuBakr Metwally, an economics researcher with the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Trade and Industry, said that since the beginning of the novel coronavirus outbreak, China had protected the world by issuing rapid warnings, sharing information, and imposing a quarantine in Wuhan.
And after the epidemic situation in China calmed down, China rushed to help other countries, showcasing its kindness and sense of responsibility, he said.
Fraser Cameron, the director of the EU-Asia Centre, a Brussels-based think tank, said that given the gravity of the global pandemic, it was time to stop blaming countries or individuals and concentrate on cooperation and finding solutions.
He said that China is now one of the major providers of medical kits and experts, and that there should be an urgent increase in funding for the World Health Organization, and an international investigation of the origins of the pandemic once it had subsided.
Alexander Semyonov, deputy director of the Saint Petersburg Pasteur Research Institution of Epidemiology and Microbiology, said that in the fight against the coronavirus, the most precious experience is not only that of Chinese epidemiologists and medical personnel, but the great mobilization ability of the country and its people when facing such a situation.
Semyonov said China was closely working with the medical profession globally on a coronavirus vaccine, and sharing information.
Ren Qi in Moscow contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/96/158580015504.jpeg
---
By ZHOU JIN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-05-01 07:19

Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]
China opposes any arbitrary international inquiry into the COVID-19 pandemic that would presume its guilt and politicize its investigation to stigmatize China, Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng said in a recent interview with a major television broadcaster in the United States.
Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Wednesday that the Australian government will continue to push for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus and China's early handling of the outbreak.
On the same day, the White House ordered US intelligence agencies to find out whether China or the World Health Organization hid information about the virus early on in the outbreak.
Le said in the National Broadcasting Corp interview on Tuesday that China is "candid" and "open" to international investigation, and it supports professional exchanges between scientists.
"What we oppose, however, is unfounded charges against China. One should not accuse China first and then run so-called international investigations just to make up the evidence," he said.
Instead, he said, the international investigation should have a solid basis.
"Why is this investigation only targeting China?" he asked. "Is there any evidence to show that China does have problems? Why isn't there any investigation of other countries?"
Le refuted claims holding China accountable or demanding it make reparations, saying such remarks are a "preposterous political farce".
These is no international law that supports blaming a country simply for being the first to report a disease, neither does history offer any such precedent, he said.
China has made sacrifices in curbing the virus and won precious time for the world's battle against it, Le said, adding that China deserves fair recognition, not groundless accusation.
The unreasonable and legally unfounded demand for Chinese reparations is no different from blackmail, he said, adding that the intention is to shift blame to China for the accusers' own inadequate response.
Noting China is a partner fighting the virus alongside the US, rather than an opponent, Le called upon the two countries to set aside differences and contradictions and cooperate to overcome difficulties.
"Whatever the differences or disagreements between China and the US, they pale when we consider the well-being of the Chinese and American peoples and their shared aspiration for a better future," he said.
zhoujin@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/34/158829166176.jpeg
---
By Li Yingxue | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-01 08:30

Zhu Yue, a novelist and book editor, is another protagonist in the series.[Photo provided to China Daily]
A new documentary series explores the relationship between individuals and books, from readers and writers, to editors and translators, Li Yingxue reports.
A picture of a young man reading the Chinese version of Francis Fukuyama's The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution while resting at a makeshift hospital in Wuhan, Hubei province, was widely shared on social media in February.
Fukuyama later tweeted a photo of the man holding the original version of his book after recovering from COVID-19.
The man, 39, surnamed Fu, is a post-doctorate student at Florida State University in the United States. He said he didn't expect to get famous by simply indulging in his daily hobby.
During the pandemic, reading has become a comfort for people. A documentary titled And Yet the Books, released in December, has received more viewers since Spring Festival.
The five-episode documentary is produced by video-sharing platform Bilibili, and has been viewed more than 7 million times.
It took Luo Yingluan, general director of the documentary, and her team, a whole year to make the film.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/14/158570659390.jpeg
---
By XU WEI | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-03-27 08:01

Passengers wearing face masks and raincoats walk through a nearly empty departure hall at Beijing Capital International Airport, March 9, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Key meeting stresses need to stop virus importation or possible rebound at home
China will extend special aid to its citizens stranded overseas while continuing efforts to prevent both the importation of COVID-19 cases and a possible domestic rebound of the outbreak, according to a decision made during a meeting chaired by Premier Li Keqiang on Thursday.
The meeting of the leading group of the Communist Party of China Central Committee on coping with the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak stressed the importance of fully recognizing the complex, challenging situation of the pandemic and the need for zero complacency toward containment measures.
The country will offer more aid to its citizens overseas, including providing them with epidemic prevention materials and more care and support, the group said in a statement. With the pandemic accelerating its global spread and mounting pressure on the nation to curb importation of cases, authorities will further tighten management of inbound travelers and bolster preventive measures at international airports.
Local authorities must also assume their responsibilities and enhance measures to prevent the importation and exportation of cases via land or water, the group said. Persons coming in via ground transportationÔºçexcept for inhabitants of border areas, diplomats and those engaged in important trade, research and technological cooperative activitiesÔºçmust undergo group isolation measures, it said.
The meeting issued instructions on containment for cargo truck drivers while ensuring smooth cross-border cargo transportation and reinforced management for border area dwellers to reduce unnecessary passenger flows.
The group also highlighted the need to consolidate important outcomes in containment in Hubei province and its capital, Wuhan.
The country will continue to have high-caliber medical workers treat severe cases in Wuhan so as to maximize efforts to improve recovery rates and reduce mortality rates from the epidemic. Hospitals must strictly implement discharge policies and enhance follow-up visits and health management of recovered patients, the group said.
It also instructed public health teams to focus on communities while investigating the source of every new infection, suspected case and asymptomatic case.
Authorities in other areas must give full play to the network of precheck and triage practices at fever clinics and the mechanism of monitoring and reporting pneumonia with unknown origins to boost health monitoring and surveillance tests, the group said.
Once new infections are spotted, authorities must enforce targeted controls for possibly affected groups and venues, it added.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/57/158527452473.jpeg
---
China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-11 09:55
South Korea targets infection clusters and Iran releases prisoners
A woman, wearing a protective face mask following an outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), walks pasts jars displayed outside a shop, in Daegu, South Korea, March 10, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
SEOULÔºçAsian countries are stepping up vigilance in their battle to halt the spread of the novel coronavirus, with measures such as aggressively targeting cluster infections and temporarily releasing prisoners.
In South Korea, a total of 242 additional infections were detected on Tuesday, the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or KCDC, said, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 7,755. Also, three more people died, it added, taking the death toll to 60.
Tuesday's cases were far below the daily increase of 500 or more last week and marked the slowest one-day rise in confirmed cases in two weeks, Yonhap News Agency reported.
However, statistics showed that cases of community spread with unknown origins, mostly cluster and sporadic outbreaks, were gradually on the rise.
With at least 64 cases, a call center in southwest Seoul emerged as the biggest infection cluster on Tuesday, triggering concerns over potential mass transmission in the metropolitan area that is home to nearly half of the country's population.
A high-rise in the neighborhood of Sindorim was closed down and disinfected late on Monday after workers at a call center were confirmed as patients.
Meanwhile, the city government said it had created an emergency task force of 30 researchers to look into the outbreak and urged residents in the building to isolate themselves.
KCDC Deputy Director Kwon Jun-wook said that health authorities were trying to bring areas with early-stage virus clusters, including the call center, under control.
"Recently the number of total confirmed cases has shown a downward trend, but health authorities are worried over such cluster infections," Kwon said.
In Iran, another virus hotbed in Asia, authorities temporarily freed about 70,000 prisoners to combat the spread of the coronavirus in jails, the head of the judiciary said on Monday, as officials reported hundreds of new infections and dozens of more deaths across the country.
Judiciary chief Ebrahim Raisi said the release of prisoners would continue "to the point where it does not create insecurity in society", according to the Mizan news site.
Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei canceled his speech in the city of Mashhad for Persian new year, which is on March 20, as part of a campaign to prevent further infections, according to a statement on his official site.
Iran reported 881 new infections and 54 new deaths on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases to 8,042, with 291 deaths, the health ministry spokesman said.
Officials have expressed concern about the possibility of infections spreading during Nowruz, which marks the start of the Iranian new year, and when families usually travel to holiday spots around the country.
In Palestine, the number of confirmed cases infected with the virus in the West Bank grew to 25 on Monday, even as the Gaza Strip is still free of confirmed cases, the Palestinian Health Ministry said.
State of emergency
In Japan, the country's Cabinet approved a bill on Tuesday allowing Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to declare a state of emergency over the coronavirus outbreak if necessary.
Based on the bill, governors of prefectures could order residents to stay at home or request the closure of schools and other public facilities.
The bill also allows the government to use private land and buildings for medical purposes without obtaining consent from their owners.
The bill will be sent to the Lower House of the Diet for deliberation on Wednesday and is expected to be passed on Friday.
On Tuesday the government unveiled a second package of measures worth about 430.8 billion yen ($4.12 billion) in spending to cope with the fallout of the coronavirus outbreak, focusing on support to small and mid-sized firms, as concerns mount about risks to the fragile economy.
The government will tap the remainder of this fiscal year's budget reserve, worth about $2.6 billion, to help finance the package, Abe said.
On Tuesday, Japan also planned to ban the entry of travelers from abroad who have visited northern Italy, another virus hot spot, within the past 14 days.
Another ban announced on Tuesday is the resale of face masks. According to the country's economy ministry, reselling of face masks for profit will become a crime punishable by a one-year prison sentence or a 1 million yen fine, or both, amid surging demand spurred by the epidemic.
Wang Xu in Tokyo and agencies contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/94/158389215832.jpeg
---
US Navy hospital ship Comfort departs from Manhattan of New York, the United States, April 30, 2020. US Navy hospital ship Comfort left New York City on Thursday. It arrived in NYC on March 30 to help ease pressure on city hospitals amid the COVID-19 pandemic. [Photo/Xinhua]

On top of the sudden, common test being faced by humans all over the world is an even darker cloud-a surge of stigmatizing voices from the United States and some Western European countries.

The noises grow louder as the US' failure to effectively cope with the novel coronavirus pandemic is laid bare. China has managed to curb domestic cases, with Wuhan clearing its last hospitalized patient of COVID-19 on April 26.

Not long ago, US officials were still boasting about their control of the virus. But, soon after, the pandemic exposed the unpreparedness of the US-that the world's most powerful nation just did not have enough medical supplies, comparable to the so-called third world.

Their arrogance that "the virus is Asian" and that their own health systems are stronger has been their pitfall.

Among those leading the crusade against China has been US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, attacking China with regard to the name of the virus and its origin, over donations, and over the sharing of information.

All the blatant accusations without evidence point to political paranoia in the current US administration. Their mishandling of the crisis may well jeopardize the chances of US President Donald Trump being reelected later this year.

A 57-page strategy document issued by the National Republican Senatorial Committee and revealed by US media employs a multipronged assault against China and teaches the world how US politicians are spreading fake news and pushing to scapegoat China. The sheer ill will reminds us of the brutality and arrogance of white colonialists.

If US politicians feel no shame in ignoring truth, the echoing attitude of some Western media against China suggests widespread hubris that the West can always find justification for its actions, while doubting or even denouncing the progress of others.

Fox News in the US seems to be following Republican guidelines, circulating untrue accusations against China and promoting a rather ludicrous and extortionate legal suit against China for COVID-19 damages.

The media outlets that prop up a blame game by the world's single hegemonic power are forgetting it was the US that dared to use bacteriological warfare against Korean and Chinese soldiers during the Korean War in the 1950s and against the Vietnamese in the late 1960s, and that it was the US and some other Western powers that framed people in Iraq and Syria time and again for alleged possession of chemical weapons and faked attacks on civilians.

History will not allow that the country first to confront the novel coronavirus and first to successfully combat the new challenge through its own initiative to be condemned as the cause of the pandemic.

China's success in containing the pandemic, and its assistance to other sufferers, has made the imperialist politicians even more upbeat in attacking China. Yet this just exposes the West's view of leadership as some form of superiority and dominance.

From these attacks we see the harbingers of extreme bigotry, blind superiority, discrimination and contempt for others, by selfish politicians and white supremacists who claim that a certain tribe is the chosen people of their God.

Those strongmen and so-called intelligentsia in the West cannot accept China, or any other Asian or African country, leading in charting the course of human destiny. They cannot conceive that the awaited emergence of China as an economic power should be welcomed as an epochal change in the history of mankind.

Their ingrained prejudice and hubris are reinforced by hegemony and chauvinism because of the lucrative income from minerals, oil and agricultural products, for which foreign corporations induce cartels and protectionism and even sell arms to generate conflict.

To the developing world, the most visible traces of Western empires are their subjugation and exploitation of other peoples. China happens to be the top target for its rise, and more so for its success in beating COVID-19, which so embarrasses the world's sole superpower.

To long for the continuing exploitation of others has to be taken as a residue of the slavery, colonialism and imperialism championed by Western powers for centuries. Such practices brought untold riches to the capitalists, and exacerbated underdevelopment, poverty, hunger, misery, disease, ignorance and strife.

Like the virus that came and will be yoked, such political toxins must be buried by us-modern humankind. We have withstood many viruses, and will be more interconnected and more resilient in access to healthcare and equality among peoples.

The author, a Manila-based political analyst and columnist with The Manila Standard, is author of Labor-Only Contracting in a "Cabo" Economy.
---
China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-12-01 10:52

WHO Health Emergencies Programme Director Michael Ryan attends a session on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak response of the World Health Organisation (WHO) Executive Board in Geneva, Switzerland, Oct 5, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Many questions remain about where the novel coronavirus came from and how it spread so widely and rapidly, despite nearly a year since the world first learned of what causes COVID-19.
But more evidence and academic studies examining the origin of COVID-19 have come out, indicating that the city of Wuhan in Central China, where the first cases were reported in January, should not necessarily be the origin of the virus, according to latest media reports.
Chinese experts have called for the international community to stop politicizing the scientific issue or blaming each other. German virologist Alexander Kekule said on a ZDF media program on Thursday that the virus rampant around the world is not from the provincial capital of Hubei, but a mutation from northern Italy.
Kekule, who is director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research and director of the Institute for Medical Microbiology at Martin Luther University in Halle, Germany, explained that the Italian strain, called the "G" mutant, exhibits genetic mutations, being likely more contagious than the variant found in Wuhan.
More than 99 percent of COVID-19 cases can be genetically traced back to the Italian variant and even the current cases in China are reimported from Europe and the rest of the world, German news agency Weser Courier cited the virologist as saying.
The pandemic starting shot was fired in northern Italy, with Italy's long ignorance of the warnings from China and lack of countermeasures to blame; otherwise the original virus could have been brought under control, according to the expert.
Most researchers think the virus originated in bats, but how it jumped to people is unknown.
A study released by the National Cancer Institute in Milan indicated that the coronavirus may have been circulating in Italy since September 2019, China's Xinhua News Agency reported.
"If true, it would mean that the virus was present in Italy three months before it was first reported in China in December 2019, and five months before the first official case was recorded in Italy on Feb 21," according to Xinhua.
The study published earlier in November in scientific magazine Tumori Journal found coronavirus antibodies in 11.6 percent of 959 asymptomatic people enrolled in a prospective lung cancer screening trial between September 2019 and March 2020.
"Our results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 circulated in Italy earlier than the first official COVID-19 cases were diagnosed in Lombardy, even long before the first official reports from the Chinese authorities, casting new light on the onset and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic," the Italian researchers said in their Nov 11 report, which is yet to be peer reviewed.
The northern region of Lombardy, whose capital is Milan where pandemic instances emerged in late February, had previously reported an unusually high number of cases of severe flu and pneumonia in the last quarter of 2019, in a sign that COVID-19 may have circulated earlier than previously thought, according to Xinhua.
The Canadian Global Television Network's Global News said the new research in Italy adds another layer to the mystery that has so far eluded scientists.
Sasha Bernatsky, senior scientist at the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, called the study "very interesting and provocative", but said it was inconclusive.
"Unfortunately, we have yet to really understand the antibody response to COVID and how durable it is," she told Global News.
Apart from Italy, there have also been other reports about the virus being discovered elsewhere earlier in 2019. Spanish virologists discovered traces of the novel coronavirus in a sample of Barcelona wastewater collected in March 2019, nine months prior to the virus outbreak in China.
In Brazil, a study detected the coronavirus in human sewage in samples collected in November 2019, according to Xinhua.
"This virus lived in animals and at some point passed to humans. It's hard to say when and where this happened. It's being investigated. Viruses can be found in wastewater. But nothing can be said specifically," said Melita Vujnovic, representative of the World Health Organization to Russia, in an interview with Russian news agency RIA Novosti.
Xinhua reported that Tom Jefferson, a scientist at the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine in the United Kingdom, said the novel coronavirus has existed worldwide and broke out whenever and wherever favorable conditions occurred rather than starting in China.
Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO's health emergencies program, said at a press conference on Friday that the UN agency has been working with scientists worldwide and the organization will take every detection in France, Spain and Italy very seriously, and will examine each and every one of them.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/46/160679244950.jpeg
---
By CUI JIA | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-04-29 06:40

Members of the China-WHO joint novel coronavirus epidemic inspection team visit the Wuhan Tongji Hospital's Guanggu branch in Wuhan on Feb 23. [Photo by Pan Songgang/For China Daily]
China has shared info about virus with world in timely manner since beginning

Editor's note: As the number of hospitalized COVID-19 patients has dropped to zero in Wuhan, the Chinese city that was hardest hit by the novel coronavirus pandemic, China Daily will publish a series of three stories starting on Wednesday to share front-line experts' views on key issues such as whether China has ever attempted to conceal epidemic information from the world, when the turning point of the epidemic occurred and how China has managed to keep its low death toll.
Has China concealed epidemic information from the world? While being asked the question, Jiao Yahui, an official responsible for medical administration and supervision at the National Health Commission, China's top health authority, gave a definitive "no" without any hesitation.
"If China had ever wanted to hide its COVID-19 death toll, it wouldn't have published the revised death figure in Wuhan, which jumped about 50 percent compared to the previous figure," she said in Wuhan, Hubei province, during an exclusive interview with China Daily on Friday.
"China has never, ever intentionally concealed epidemic information from the world. Both the revised death toll and the number of confirmed cases in the city have increased, which shows that we want to share the fact with the world and be transparent."
On April 17, the Wuhan government revised the death toll in the city from 2,579 to 3,869 after local authorities had the opportunity to correct some inaccuracies in reporting that occurred in the early stages of the outbreak. By the end of Monday, the COVID-19 death toll on the Chinese mainland stood at 4,633, of which about 83 percent were in Wuhan, according to the National Health Commission.
"Actually, during the revision of the death toll, we've seen certain casualties that had been reported multiple times via our epidemic reporting system by more than one medical institute, because they have all treated the patients, so we have to write off the duplication," Jiao said.
The revision also shows that the data in the system is reliable and transparent, and medical institutes can directly report confirmed cases and the death toll independently, she added.
There are two reporting systems for medical workers to report an epidemic in China: One allows them to report more than 30 identified infectious diseases and the other to report pneumonia of unknown origin, which was established to cope with the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in China in 2003. The alarm for COVID-19 was sounded via the latter, Jiao said.
Zhang Dingyu, president of Jinyintan HospitalÔºça hospital specializing in infectious diseases and the first designated hospital for COVID-19 in WuhanÔºçwitnessed how the alarm was sounded.
On Dec 27, 2019, a doctor at Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine reported three pneumonia cases of unknown origin to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention at Wuhan's Jianghan district. This was the first time that Chinese authorities obtained information about the disease.
At 11:30 pm on Dec 29, six patients with pneumonia of unknown origin were transferred to Jinyintan Hospital. "After consultation with epidemiologists, we filed their cases on the system for reporting pneumonia of unknown origin straight away. We just followed the protocol," Zhang said in an exclusive interview with China Daily on Thursday.
On Dec 30, the Wuhan Health Commission issued an urgent notice asking all medical institutions in the city to report patients with pneumonia of unknown origin. On Dec 31, the commission released a briefing on its website about pneumonia of unknown origin, confirming 27 cases and telling the public not to go to enclosed public spaces or hold gatherings. On the same day, experts from the National Health Commission arrived in Wuhan to investigate the cases.
"After the new virus was identified and listed as source of an infectious disease, we then started to use the routine system to report COVID-19 infections," Zhang said.
"In China, it's the responsibility of medical workers to report infectious diseases to the local centers for disease control and prevention. The information will then be verified and then sent to the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention," he said.
Jiao said that reporting infectious diseases doesn't need to go through any other government bodies. The data will be directly collected by CDCs at different levels. The system was designed to avoid interference from outsiders.
Information sharing
Jiao said China has been sharing epidemic control information with the world in a timely and transparent manner since the very beginning of the outbreak.
On Dec 31, the WHO China Office was informed of pneumonia cases of unknown origin detected in Wuhan, according to the WHO.
Starting on Jan 3, China has been regularly informing the WHO as well as relevant countries and regions about the outbreak.
On Jan 8, an expert evaluation team from the National Health Commission initially identified a new coronavirus strain as the cause of the epidemic.
On Jan 12, China submitted the genome sequence of the novel coronavirus to the WHO, which was published by the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data and shared globally.
"China has been taking a closed-book exam on containing the outbreak while it is an open-book exam for the rest of the world due to the information and experience shared by China," Jiao said. "Many countries could have developed diagnosis kits then to find infected people, but they missed the window period."
As the COVID-19 death toll has been surging around the world, people started to question if there were still unreported cases in China. Jiao said the number of patients at fever clinics in Wuhan can explain the situation.
When the epidemic situation was grim, the fever clinics in the cityÔºçthe outposts of epidemic controlÔºçdealt with more than 14,000 people a day. Now the number has dropped to between 200 and 300, she said.
"If there are still unreported cases, people will of course seek treatment at fever clinics. You cannot stop them," she said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/40/158811908004.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By Alfred Romann | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-03-06 09:21

Medics put on protective gear at Wuhan Red Cross Hospital on Feb 25, 2020. [Photo by Chen Zhuo/For chinadaily.com.cn]
The number of COVID-19 cases in China, both inside and outside Hubei province, continues to drop, suggesting the country's approach to dealing with the coronavirus outbreak is working.
All countries have to step up to fight the virus and limit its spread, but they have to do this with limited information about the virus. Even as the number of cases in China drops, the outbreak is growing more serious elsewhere.
One of China's most recognized authorities in the field, Zhong Nanshan, has said there are still a lot of unanswered questions about this coronavirus and that it is difficult to speak with 100 percent certainty about its origin.
Zhong said COVID-19 is not a China disease but "a disease of mankind instead of one country".
There are a couple of important points here. One is that outbreaks can happen anywhere. Another is that, in today's interconnected world, it is impossible to contain diseases within the borders of any one country.
This is not a China virus. It is a global one.
Middle East respiratory syndrome, as the name suggests, started somewhere in the Middle East, and many countries around the world had to deal with it. The severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic, which started in 2003, quickly reached global proportions.
The H1N1 outbreak in 2009 started in Mexico and spread widely in the United States before making its way around the world, killing perhaps half a million people.
Neither did the Spanish flu pandemic, which killed more than 50 million people around the world, start in SpainÔºçalthough more than a century later there is still much debate about where it did start. The concentration of cases does not determine origin.
The world is far too interconnected. A person could carry a virus from one country to another without knowing it.
In Wuhan, the first hints that a novel coronavirus was moving among locals were three samples collected from a patient with an unknown pneumonia at a local hospital, but that does not necessarily mean the virus started there.
It is possible some people had already suffered from COVID-19 before the cases in Wuhan were confirmed, and that people outside China were already carrying the virus, perhaps without knowing it.
One study suggests the new coronavirus may be linked to a virus strain linked to cases identified both in China and the United States, with at least one case of community transmission already being identified in a patient with no obvious links to China or Wuhan. There have also been cases in Italy with no known China link.
Medical staff of the Ministry of Health check passengers' temperature, amid coronavirus outbreak, upon their arrival to El Dorado international airpot in Bogota, Colombia, March 5, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The study suggests the original virus existed in bats and somehow made its way from bats to humans, but suggests it is unclear how or where this jump occurred.
The World Health Organization agrees there had to be at least one intermediate step, meaning the virus likely jumped from bats to another animal (perhaps a household pet) and then to humans.
It may be useful to know where the virus came from in order to develop a vaccine or treatment, but knowing where the virus came from is less important than preventing it from spreading.
A month ago, shutting down entire cities might have seemed like something of an overreach, but it is hard to argue with the results. With few cases reported outside Hubei province now and the numbers dropping daily, Zhong believes the outbreak in China will be under control by April.
Meanwhile, when a vaccine becomes widely available and more effective treatments are developed, the question of the origin of the virus will become academic.
Sure, novel coronavirus pneumonia was first identified in Wuhan, and that is also where the disease is likely to be brought under control first. In the process, China may learn a few thingsÔºçand so may the rest of the worldÔºçabout how to deal with this and future outbreaks.
The author is managing director of Bahati Ltd, an editorial services consultancy based in Hong Kong.The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/23/158346727798.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/44/158346727981.jpeg
---
By Wang Xiaodong | China Daily | Updated: 2020-11-26 09:31

A doctor at a hospital in Los Angeles, California, attends to a COVID-19 patient, May 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
COVID-19 and related diseases may cause lasting health problems, with more than 70 percent of cured patients still showing at least one symptom after recovery, according to a study.
The study, which tracked 1,733 COVID-19 patients discharged from Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital in Hubei province between Jan 7 and May 29, found that discharged COVID-19 patients are mainly troubled with fatigue, muscle weakness, sleep difficulties and anxiety.
The median follow-up time after which the patients started to show symptoms was six months, said Cao Bin, the study's leading researcher and vice-president of the China-Japan Friendship Hospital.
The findings were released at the Lancet-CAMS (Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences) Health Conference that kicked off in Beijing on Monday afternoon.
The results showed that six months after patients first reported COVID-19 symptoms, about 50 percent of them still had at least one symptom. More than 20 percent reported psychological complications.
During hospitalization, more severe patients tend to have more severely impaired lung diffusion capacity and abnormal chest imaging, Cao said.
"It is necessary to conduct follow-up studies in recovered COVID-19 patients to better understand the consequences, prognosis, origin and development of the disease for early medical intervention," Cao said.
"Such studies can also provide information for the development of vaccines and drugs, and we can be better prepared for potential outbreaks in the future," he added.
Previous research in China and other countries have indicated that discharged COVID-19 patients might have persistent symptoms such as impaired lung function and poorer quality of life, but the duration is much shorter-the longest follow-up time previously reported was about three months, Cao said.
The research and tracking was conducted at the outpatient clinic of Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital, where trained physicians interviewed participants face-to-face, asking them to complete several questionnaires.
The research involved other tests such as a six-minute walk and blood test.
Based on the study, cured COVID-19 patients' physical and mental well-being still need to be carefully attended, even after they are discharged from hospitals, he said.
"It is recommended that recovered COVID-19 patients get regular exercise, avoid alcohol and smoking, get psychological counseling if necessary, and have a balanced diet," Cao said.
"They should also continue taking medicines recommended by doctors while following hygiene and social distancing procedures."
Though the pandemic has been plaguing the world for almost a year, much about the virus is still unknown, including the health impact on recovered patients.
Research has been published in various journals such as Lancet and the Journal of the American Medical Association indicating that, like patients who recovered from SARS, some cured COVID-19 patients are poised to face prolonged physical or psychological damage.
Zhang Boli, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering and a prominent expert in traditional Chinese medicine, said earlier that cured COVID-19 patients, especially critically ill patients, are likely to have long-term health problems including damage to their immune system and organs such as their lungs, heart and kidneys that will require rehabilitation for proper recovery.
In general, however, most cured patients will not suffer from lingering health consequences for too long and will recover soon, he added.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/17/160635492732.jpeg
---
By Jasna Plevnik | China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-18 07:48

MA XUEJING/CHINA DAILY
Although vaccination against the novel coronavirus is on in full swing in many parts of the world, there is still a lack of effective global response and balanced vaccine distribution. We therefore need to keep our fingers crossed and hope vaccines will be used to serve the primary purpose of saving lives, and not be abused to win geopolitical and big-business races.
When the Pasteur Institute in France announced it was abandoning its clinical trials on vaccines, national politicians called it a "national humiliation" for France. Which shows how a politically neutral issue of vaccines can turn into a question of state prestige and power, and affect international relations.
So, even if it may sound like a boring clich√©, we should repeat billions of times: People's lives should be given priority irrespective of the competition among global powersÔºçand among multinational corporationsÔºçfor scientific and vaccine domination.
Make no mistake, people in no country want vaccine rivalry. People do not care which country the vaccines come from; their only concern is whether they are safe, effective and available. Monetary scientist Dubravko Rado≈°evi, for example, has complete trust in Chinese-made vaccines. "My trust is based on Chinese research in the field of medicine, especially virology, the institute in Wuhan is known for this, as well as the university and faculty of medicine in Wuhan," Rado≈°evi said.
As for Serbia, it has vaccinated most of its population, more than many other countries in Europe. Serbian people can choose to take vaccines made by China, Russia or the United States. But Serbia has purchased most of the vaccines, 1.1 million doses, from Chinese company Sinofarm, while US and Russian vaccines together make up 7 percent of the total.
Many Serbs living in European Union countries intend to return to Serbia, as do many from neighbouring countries, to get vaccinated because vaccination rates in EU member states are relatively low because of slow vaccine supply by US company Pfizer and British-Swiss firm AstraZeneca.
Perhaps inspired by Serbia's openness to all kinds of vaccines, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said Germany is considering buying Chinese vaccines to boost its sluggish vaccination program. And while Turkey has given the green light to Sinovac vaccines for emergency use, Hungary became the first EU country to approve vaccines from China. In fact, Hungarian Prime Minister Victor Orban said he trusts the Chinese vaccine the most.
However, some European media outlets have not stopped furthering some major powers' geopolitical and ideological game of blaming China for the spread of the virus and doubting the efficacy of Chinese-made vaccines.
Vaccines should be viewed only from the efficacy and safety point of view; their country of origin should not cloud judgment. Decoupling vaccines from science and human health will make the world an even more vulnerable place than what it was at the peak of the pandemic last year.
Many see the 27-member EU's feud with AstraZeneca over vaccine supply as a weakness of European institutions. Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have asked the European Commission to pressure Pfizer-BioNTech to swiftly supply the required number of vaccine doses. And Germany and Switzerland have challenged the efficiency of AstraZeneca, and the German minister of finance criticized the European Commission president for her incompetence in matters of vaccine supply.
The EU has the capability to develop and make new and more vaccines than what it is doing now. But at present, China appears strong on the global vaccine frontline.
Many in Europe consider the Chinese government's prevention and control measures as the global standard for containing the virus, and appreciate its medical aid to other countries.
China's efforts and policies to strengthen the global fight against the pandemic, by declaring Chinese-made vaccines global public goods have narrowed the space for a small group of rich countries to buy most of the vaccines. China has promised to provide tens of millions doses of COVID-19 vaccines for low-and middle-income countries this year under the framework of COVAX, which is backed by the World Health Organization. And accordingly, Chinese pharmaceutical companies have increased the production of vaccines.
Moreover, Chinese intellectual forces have helped increase trust in China's vaccines in many European countries. The Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, the Development and Research Center of the State Council and its global network SiLKS, and other organizations have organized video conferences on pandemic prevention and control with host countries' cooperation in innumerable places around the world.
Daily engagement of"17+1" (17 Central and Eastern European countries plus China) think tanks to provide information on the pandemic and global prevention and control measures has helped people in this part of Europe to better understand the global public health crisis.
We cannot contain the pandemic if the vaccine race among states, and among states and vaccine manufacturers, does not stop and all the parties start working together to improve global health. So we hope the US soon reconnects with China and the EU to reach a consensus on vaccine manufacturing and supply, so as to save human lives.
The author is president of the Geoeconomic Forum Croatia. The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
---
By CAO YIN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-06-04 07:32

Student volunteers from the University of Science and Technology Beijing provide translation services at the New China International Exhibition Center in Beijing on March 25, 2020. [Photo by Zou Hong/China Daily]
Chinese law experts say the country has always abided by international rules and carried out its international obligations during the novel coronavirus outbreak, and there is "no legal basis" to demand it be held responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic.
"Blaming China and holding the country accountable for the outbreak has no legal support, because the current international laws provide no basis for holding a state responsible for a pandemic," said Huang Jin, a law professor specializing in international law at China University of Political Science and Law in Beijing.
Demands that China be held liable for the pandemic and compensate the world raised the question of who should be held responsible for an epidemic such as H1N1 influenza, commonly known as swine flu, which first appeared in North America, he said.
Calling the novel coronavirus a common enemy of mankind, he said China had followed the International Health Regulations and implemented a series of effective measures since the outbreak started.
"What we've done is strictly obey the international rules and fulfill our international obligations," Huang said. "For example, we took the initiative to evaluate the pandemic situation and reported it in a timely fashion to the World Health Organization as well as other countries and regions, and we also accepted inspections from the WHO.
The Foreign Ministry also said on Wednesday that an Associated Press report, which claimed that China delayed sharing information on COVID-19 with the WHO, is totally untrue.
Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said at a daily briefing that the report is "seriously inconsistent with the facts", adding that China's efforts to tackle COVID-19 have been open for the whole world to see and will stand the test of time.
China has maintained close and good communications and cooperation with the WHO and its China office since the outbreak started, and will continue to support the WHO's leading role in combating the pandemic, Zhao said.
Zhu Wenqi, a law professor at Renmin University of China, said there was no need for a country to accept any responsibility in international relations if it had not committed any internationally wrongful act.
An internationally wrongful act, under international law, means a state violating its international obligations, he said, and only in those circumstances could it be accused of bearing "state responsibility".
He said China's behavior in the fight against the pandemic "has nothing to do with an internationally wrongful act", adding that "comments that blamed China cannot stand up, and those trying to throw mud at us must be ignored".
Accusations that China withheld key information about the outbreak, leading to a worldwide pandemic, were not based on facts, said Xiao Yongping, head of the Institute of International Law at Wuhan University in Hubei, the Chinese province hit hardest by the virus.
"Every country, I believe, must need some time to do research on how serious a virus is and what influence it will have on society when discovering it at the very beginning. China is no exception," he said. "For such a completely new virus, there was limited scientific evidence at the very beginning indicating that the pathogen could lead to a pandemic."
After China realized the seriousness of the novel coronavirus and confirmed it could be transmitted from person to person and was potentially more dangerous than seasonal flu, "we notified the world as early as we could and adopted the strictest and most comprehensive epidemic control measures, such as locking down the city of Wuhan", Xiao said, adding that all the moves it made had been welcomed by the WHO.
Xiao said that the Chinese government released in April a clear timeline of what China had done after the outbreak started, showing how transparent it was in the fight against the virus.
Huang said: "Our urgent notification to the world, in fact, gave enough time and information for other nations, including the US, to get prepared for the outbreak.
"Western countries, I believe, had seen what China had done at that time, but the outbreak still went global, so what they need to do, I think, is to reconsider their ability and their outbreak control measures."
Zhu said the origin of the virus was still uncertain, and more scientific research is required, "but that does not mean someone can put the shame on others without facts and evidence".
Wang Qingyun contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/4/159122961696.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-04 19:40

[Photo/Agencies]
Chinese scientists have discovered the novel coronavirus has evolved into two major subtypes. Experts believe investigating the differences and features of these subtypes may help evaluate risks and formulate better treatment and prevention plans.
The two subtypes are named L and S. The L type is more aggressive and was prevalent in the early stages of the outbreak in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province. But instances of the S type, which is older and less aggressive, have increased in frequency recently, thus possibly explaining the disease's slowing momentum in China.
In the study, scientists identified 149 mutations in the 103 sequenced genomes of the novel coronavirus. Experts believed these mutations took place recently and 83 of these mutations are nonsynonymous, meaning they can alter the amino acid sequence of a protein and may result in a biological change in the organism.
The study, titled "On the Origin and Continuing Eolutionof SARS-CoV-2", was published on China's peer-reviewed journal, National Science Review, on Tuesday. The study was done by scientists from Peking University, Shanghai University and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
However, the authors highlighted the fact the data examined in the study is very limited. How L type strains evolved from S type, as well as how these mutations would affect the transmission and pathogenesis of the virus,are still unknown.
"There is a strong need for further immediate, comprehensive study," they wrote.
In the paper, the scientists said the 103 novel coronavirus strains studied could be divided into two major types called L and S, with L being more prevalent and covering 70 percent of the strains examined. The S types are the ancestral strains, but the L types are believed to be more aggressive, multiply faster in humans and can spread more quickly than their ancestors.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/60/158332348779.jpeg
---
By CHEN WEIHUA in Brussels | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-11-18 08:30

A doctor waits for patients to arrive at the Policlinico Tor Vergata hospital where patients suffering from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are being treated in Rome, on Nov 13, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
As the World Health Organization assembles international experts to study the origin of the novel coronavirus by first focusing on China, a study shows that the virus had existed in Italy months before it was first detected in China.
The study by the Milan-based National Cancer Institute, published last week in its scientific magazine Tumori Journal, shows that 11.6 percent of 959 blood samples from healthy volunteers enrolled in a lung cancer screening trial between September 2019 and March 2020 had developed novel coronavirus antibodies well before February.
Another study, conducted by scientists at the University of Siena in Italy, has supported the finding. Its paper, by 16 authors, was published in the same magazine with the title "Unexpected detection of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the pre-pandemic period in Italy". SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID-19 disease.
The study showed that four cases dating to the first week of October 2019 were positive for antibodies.
"This study shows an unexpected very early circulation of SARSCoV-2 among asymptomatic individuals in Italy several months before the first patient was identified, and clarifies the onset and spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic," the authors wrote.
"Finding SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in asymptomatic people before the COVID-19 outbreak in Italy may reshape the history of the pandemic."
Earlier, Italy reported its first two cases of COVID-19 on Jan 30 this year, when two tourists from China in Rome tested positive.
A man wears a protective mask as he sits near the Colosseum, as the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues, in Rome, Italy Nov 12, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
China informed the WHO of the outbreak in Wuhan, Hubei province, on Dec 31, 2019.
The UN health agency on Monday said it was reviewing the results from Italy and was seeking clarification, Reuters reported.
Last week, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that a group of international experts have started to work on the origin of the novel coronavirus.
"These are excellent and respected professionals. And I know they will do their work professionally," he said. "We will give them all the support they need."
When asked about the latest findings in Italy, Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said in Beijing on Tuesday that he has noticed the various reports about the time and location of the COVID-19 outbreak in the world.
Scientific issue
"It has again shown that tracing the origin of the virus is a complex scientific issue," he told a daily news briefing.
Zhao said scientists should conduct the study all over the world through their research and cooperation to better understand the animal host of the virus and its ways of transmission.
He expressed the view that China will continue to actively participate in the global scientific study on the origin of the virus and its transmission channels.
It was not the first time that scientists reported such findings. In early July, Oxford University scientists said that the novel coronavirus may have been lying dormant across the world until emerging under favorable environmental conditions, rather than originating in China.
Traces have been found in sewage samples from Spain, Italy and Brazil that predated its discovery in China.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/23/160566539917.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/84/160566540058.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By WANG KAIHAO | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-10-22 07:42
Huang Xiqiu, a returned overseas Chinese who played an important role in the construction of Huoshenshan Hospital during the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan earlier this year, visits the exhibition on Friday. WANG KAIHAO/CHINA DAILY
Emotional attachment gets closer in times of crisis, as has been proved this year during the fight against the novel coronavirus pandemic.
An ongoing exhibition at the Overseas Chinese History Museum of China in Beijing unveils how Chinese people at home and abroad joined hands in an effort to contain COVID-19.
Over 200 exhibits, including photos, medical equipment, documents, and other personal belongings of those who once fought on the front line against the virus, seem to concentrate the past months into a time capsule, ranging from the fast response of overseas Chinese to support China during the early stage of the outbreak, to the global cooperation after COVID-19 became a pandemic.
Many epic stories about this "war" are recounted at the exhibition. Wan Lijun, head of All-China Federation of Returned Overseas Chinese, hailed the great contribution made by the overseas Chinese community at the opening ceremony of the exhibition on Friday.
"The exhibition only reflects a small portion of the scenarios that happened in the campaign to contain COVID-19, but many other touching moments remain unseen by the public," Wan says. "However, they all show that Chinese people, no matter where they are, will take on the duty of offering their hand to help their compatriots when the country faces crisis."
Huang Xiqiu, 79, was born in a Chinese immigrants' family in Indonesia. He gradually became a famed architect after returning to China. In 2003, when SARS hit Beijing, his team built Xiaotangshan Hospital within 7 days.
And when, 17 years later, COVID-19 brought an even bigger threat to the country's public health, the veteran volunteered to design a new hospital for Wuhan, the hardest-hit Chinese city during the epidemic, despite his advancing age. Within hours, his team had revised the original blueprint of Xiaotangshan Hospital and provided the complete construction plan for the Huoshenshan Hospital to Wuhan urban construction administration.
His application to join the "battle" is on display at the exhibition.
"Chinese people's effort to contain the virus showed their remarkable strength and powerful spirit," Huang says. "We've seen many overseas Chinese join the campaign. They once left home and contributed to social and economic development of other countries. However, they have never forgotten their origin. It's a tradition of overseas Chinese."
Lu Lin, director of Peking University Sixth Hospital and an academician at the China Academy of Sciences, is an overseas Chinese returning from the United States. His team went to Wuhan for three times during the viral outbreak to offer psychological intervention for critical patients. In September, he opened a new office in Wuhan to help ease the psychological impact of COVID-19 on local communities.
"The pandemic has enabled Chinese people to feel their shared 'heart'," Lu says. "As COVID-19 continues to spread overseas, we also care for our compatriots living abroad."
Consequently, Lu has contacted medical teams in countries around the globe and offered psychological consulting services through internet for Chinese who are living abroad as well.
Some artifacts on show may not be that precious in terms of their actual values, but as witnesses to history, they are priceless.
Such items, for example, as the numerous luggage tags from a flight that once carried not just medical supplies from overseas Chinese, but hope during the darkest hours of China's fight with the virus. And the empty boxes, with poetic words of encouragement written on them that were once full of masks, also represented overseas Chinese people's best wishes to their homeland.
According to the statistics of the All-China Federation of Returned Overseas Chinese, China received donations of cash and medical supplies worth over 2.3 billion yuan ($346 million) from overseas Chinese communities during the COVID-19 outbreak in the country.
Nevertheless, as COVID-19 is still rampant in the rest of the world, Wan notes the necessity for continuous global cooperation.
"The pandemic might deeply influence the development of human society," he says. "But people's pursuit of happiness and peace will not change. Overseas Chinese communities the world over will join hands with people in places that are still affected by COVID-19 in a bid to inspire confidence that it can be overcome."
The exhibition will run through Dec 13.
wangkaihao@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/74/160332525782.jpeg
---
By Zhong Sheng | People's Daily Online | Updated: 2020-03-23 17:11
US President Donald Trump addresses his administration's daily coronavirus task force briefing at the White House in Washington, March 20, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
The exacerbating COVID-19 pandemic around the world calls for joint efforts from global countries.
However, some US politicians are showing ill mentalities and intentionally associating the pandemic with China, stigmatizing the country by calling the pandemic "Wuhan pneumonia" and "Chinese virus." Such practice is extremely irresponsible and immoral, which will not only do nothing good to the epidemic control in the US, but also seriously impede international solidarity in the battle against the virus. China firmly opposes and condemns such smears, and urges the US to correct its mistakes and stop the groundless accusation against China.
Viruses are a common challenge faced by the entire human race. To associate a virus with specific countries goes against the principles of international organizations. The World Health Organization (WHO) reiterated that the origin of the novel coronavirus has not been confirmed yet, and the world needs to focus on how to curb the virus and avoid stigmatization.
By naming the disease as COVID-19, the WHO hopes to not associate the term with any region or country, and the names of certain contagious diseases had once led to stigmatization and other unfavorable results. The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) emerged in some Middle East countries in 2012 triggered broad controversy because it was named after the region. Base on such experiences and lessons, the WHO and other institutions proposed in 2015 a guiding principle on naming newly discovered contagious diseases, advocating to name them with neutral and general terms.
However, such principle is neglected by some US politicians who only spread stigmatization and create panic, which just reveals the dark side of their mind.
The origin of the virus is a scientific issue, and to discover it calls for scientific and professional researches. Now relevant tracing work is still underway, and no conclusion has been reached yet on the origin of the virus.
"I think it's also important in terms of looking at the emergence of any disease; disease can emerge anywhere. Coronaviruses are a global phenomenon; they exist on a global basis," said Michael Ryan, Executive Director of WHO Health Emergencies Programme at a press conference. "It's really important that we don't start to ascribe blame to geographic origin and that we look at this in terms of how we respond, how we contain and how we stop this virus."
Daniel Lucey, an adjunct Professor of Medicine-Infectious Diseases at Georgetown University Medical Center noted that first human infections must have occurred in November 2019‚Äîif not earlier‚Äîbecause there is an incubation time between infection and symptoms surfacing.
However, the US politicians have already started the blame game and smearing, and are preventing fact-based discussion, when the origin of the virus is not confirmed yet. What do they want?
The world must use science to conquer stupidity and conduct cooperation to eliminate prejudices, especially when global public health security is facing severe challenges. "This is a time for prudence, not panic. Science, not stigma. Facts, not fear," counselled UN chief Ant√≥nio Guterres.
However, certain US politicians are totally brainless and unscrupulous. They don't care about facts, and what they do is just repeating the ridiculous prejudices that have long taken roots in their mind.
Even after Robert Redfield, the director of the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention admitted some Americans who seemingly died from influenza were tested positive for the novel coronavirus in the posthumous diagnosis, and agreed it was "absolutely wrong" to label the COVID-19 as the "China Virus", the US politicians are still covering the facts and smearing China in almost a crazy way.
The pandemic is a test for countries' governance capability, and also reflects their performance in international cooperation. The preoccupied problems of the U.S. in politics and health care have been exposed, and the country must face up to them and fill the shortages to safeguard the health of its people.
And yes, the American public are disappointed. Stephen Morrison, senior vice president at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and director of its Global Health Policy Center recently questioned the US government: "The Chinese bought us a month of time to prepare ourselves by imposing these astonishing and draconian measures. Unfortunately, we didn't make good use of that time and now we're heading into a very dangerous situation."
The Chinese government has always shared information with the US Chinese experts shared therapeutic plans with their American peers, and Chinese enterprises are also trying to help the U.S. to fight the virus.
However, these still failed to stop the US politicians from attacking and smearing China, as it is a way for them to divert public anger. They are returning evil for good and undermining the international cooperation on combating the pandemic, which is totally irresponsible for people's health.
The virus is still rampant, and the American politicians are advised to blame and smear less, focus on the business of their own country, and play a constructive role in safeguarding global public health security.
(Zhong Sheng is a pen name often used by People's Daily to express its views on foreign policy.)
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/20/158495819549.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By ZHANG ZHIHAO | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-04-28 07:00

Health workers in Wuhan carry out physical examinations for employees at a company who return to work on April 9, 2020. [Photo by Zhou Guoqiang/for chinadaily.com.cn]
Chinese scientists said on Monday that it is very unlikely the novel coronavirus was man-made, and finding patient zero is a formidable task that requires global collaboration to succeed.
Jin Qi, director of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences' Institute of Pathogen Biology, said that finding the first infected case is an "extremely difficult scientific problem that requires a great amount of interdisciplinary research".
He added that scientists have yet to find patient zero for the 1918 influenza pandemic, HIV or the H1N1 influenza in 2009.
"If patient zero is asymptomatic or has very mild symptoms, he or she may not have seen a doctor and left a medical record," Jin said at a State Council Information Office briefing.
Some experts have proposed using antibody tests to find the first case. But current tests can only tell whether a person has been infected in the past, not when the infection occurred, he said.
Liu Peipei, a virologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said the increased number of people with COVID-19 antibodies, as well as the existence of asymptomatic patients, are two main obstacles in finding patient zero.
Liu said that China and many other countries are also looking for patient zero. He said he hopes countries can work together to tackle this challenging task.
When asked about the origin of the novel coronavirus, Liu said the scientific community has reached a consensus, which is, the possibility of the virus being man-made is "very low".
Jin said the purpose of tracing the contagion's origin is to formulate specific prevention and control plans to prevent similar outbreaks from happening in the future. "But this is also a very difficult scientific undertaking."
Some have speculated the COVID-19 may disappear with the arrival of hot weather, similar to what happened during the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in 2003, but experts refuted these claims.
Wang Guiqiang, head of Peking University First Hospital's department of infectious diseases, said the probability of seeing a significant drop in COVID-19 cases in the Northern Hemisphere's summer is low.
"COVID-19 is very different from SARS and MERS (Middle East respiratory syndrome) for it has a longer incubation period and high ratio of asymptomatic patients, Wang said. It is believed that the novel coronavirus is temperature sensitive, and can be destroyed when making contact with water above 56 C, "but weather temperatures cannot naturally reach this high".
"Given the current global pandemic situation, it is unlikely that the virus will die away this summer. At the same time, we cannot rule out the possibility of the virus returning in the fall or winter in places where people tend to gather," he said.
Wang said that scientists have yet to find any intermediate host of the virus, so a globalized, unified prevention and control effort is necessary. "So long as one country has existing cases, other countries cannot relax their measures or else there may be new cases popping up around the world throughout the year."
Jin agreed with Wang's assessment, saying it is misguided to believe COVID-19 will go away in the summer like SARS did simply because they are both coronaviruses.
"People infected with SARS had clear symptoms of fever that we could efficiently identify and control," Jin said. "However, for COVID-19, there may be people who are presymptomatic, have mild symptoms, are asymptomatic or have other types of conditions. Do you really think humanity can get rid of this virus so easily?"
"It is possible that COVID-19 will become seasonal and stay with us for a long time," he added.
As a result, experts said the most effective ways to curb the virus are through vaccinations and drug development. Three vaccinesÔºçone adenovirus vector and two inactivatedÔºçhave entered phase two clinical trials in China, and more research is needed to evaluate their safety and efficacy, Wang said.
He added that China is also testing convalescent plasma transfusion, stem cell therapy and monoclonal antibodies to treat COVID-19.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/158803289352.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By Yan Lun | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-13 08:26

A man wearing a protective mask walks across Westminster Bridge with an umbrella in London, Britain March 5, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Is China trying to deny its "disgraceful role" in a "global pandemic" by strongly opposing the use of "Wuhan virus" or "China virus" to describe the novel coronavirus? And has China put the whole world on edge because of its inability to contain the virus in Wuhan, Hubei province, in the initial stages?
Yes, claim many Western media outlets and politicians.
But has the world heard of "Los Angeles virus" or "US virus"?
In June 1981, a rare type of pneumonia was detected in five previously healthy young men in Los Angeles. Epidemiologists had to conduct studies for 18 months to identify the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and its major risk factors.
The lethal disease has spread from the United States to the rest of world in the past 39 years. According to UNAIDS, in 2018 an estimated 37.9 million people, including 1.7 million children, were living with HIV and 770,000 died of AIDS-related illnesses. And since the first cases were reported, a total of about 74.9 million people have contracted HIV and 32 million people have died of AIDS-related illnesses.
Has anyone used "Los Angeles virus" to describe HIV? Have people attacked the US for failing to keep the deadly disease within its borders? Do people panic over the disease that claimed 770,000 lives in 2018 alone?
The answers are no. It was in 2007, 26 years after the first AIDS cases were reported in Los Angeles, that biologists at the University of Arizona put forward a hypothesis that HIV was carried from Africa first to Haiti and then to the US way back in 1969.
Have people rejected the hypothesis, saying the US is trying to cover its "role" in "creating and spreading" HIV/AIDS?
No. On the contrary, the hypothesis has been widely accepted.
To determine where a new kind of disease or virus originated, scientists need a long time to track down the pathogen, "patient zero", or "ground zero". And even a century after the influenza pandemic of 1918-20, more widely known as "Spanish flu", killed about 40 million people, there are different hypotheses about its place of originÔºçfrom France to the US, to even China.
The opposition to linking the novel coronavirus with Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak, is not China's attempt to shirk its responsibility as COVID-19 cases outside China continue to rise sharply, but because epidemiologists and other experts need time and arduous research to find out where it originated. In early February, in the initial stages of the outbreak, at least 12 people in Japan had contracted the disease despite not having a travel history to China or coming in contact with a Chinese national. And at the hearing in the US House of Representatives on Wednesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield admitted that it was possible some Americans who appear to have died of influenza may actually have died of the novel coronavirus as the CDC's surveillance system for pneumonia does not cover every city, every state, every hospital.
The novel coronavirus is the common enemy of humankind. And people who have suffered and even lost their lives in the epidemic should not be blamed for that. Before the puzzle of determining the place of origin of the virus is solved, people shouldn't display their ignorance by casting aspersions on others, especially the victims. If some media outlets and politicians such as US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo continue to link the virus with "Wuhan" or "China", they would be spreading racial hatred.
Take a look at the chain of discrimination that is emerging because of prejudice. In a recent column in The New York Times, a Chinese author described how a woman of Vietnamese origin in an Asian community in the US yelled at her for "eating weird food and bringing it here". Asians have become an eyesore for many Westerners now. A college student from Singapore was beaten up in London by a group of men who told him that they didn't "want your coronavirus in my country". Such biased attacks will undermine the joint efforts to fight the pandemic, and they should stop.
True, all 15 makeshift hospitals in Wuhan were closed on Tuesday, suggesting China is closer to reining in the outbreak. But let us not forget what China has sacrificed in the battle against the disease: the whole Hubei province is under lockdown, China's economic growth may slip to as low as 3.5 percent in the first quarter. Nor should we forget the contribution of more than 40,000 medical staff from across the country who went to Wuhan to take care of the patients. And the measures China has taken to control the epidemic will not only better protect its people, but has also created a window of opportunity for other countries to fight against the disease, as WHO said.
Indeed, China should learn many lessons from the anti-virus fight, including how to strengthen public health governance in the early stage of an outbreak. Such painful lessons, as well as experiences, are valuable reference for other countries tackling an epidemic.
Wuhan's sacrifices, Hubei's sufferings, China's battles. The stories of the city, the province, and the country should not be demonized. And calling the novel coronavirus "Wuhan virus" or "China virus" is the worst form of demonizing. It should stop.
The author is a writer with China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/72/158406495484.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By Joseph Li | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-05-20 11:01

Raymond Liu (left), head of the Medicine and Geriatrics Department at the Ruttonjee and Tang Shiu Kin hospitals, and Siu Mun-lei, the head nurse and ward manager at the same hospitals, tell China Daily about their experience in fighting COVID-19 in Wan Chai. [Photo by CALVIN NG/CHINA DAILY]
The head of the Medicine and Geriatrics Department at the Ruttonjee and Tang Shiu Kin hospitals believes that the pandemic has been brought under control in Hong Kong.
Raymond Liu lauded the self-discipline that local residents have shown as they wear face masks to guard against the virus. However, there is no room for complacency. All the existing control measures should remain in force and should be relaxed step by step, he said.
Siu Mun-lei, the head nurse and ward manager at the same hospitals, agrees. Hong Kong must stay vigilant in case of a second wave resulting from Hong Kong residents returning from overseas, she said.
The pair made their points at an interview with China Daily. Liu has been a doctor for over 30 years and worked at the Hospital Authority for 25 years after graduation. Siu has about 30 years' experience as a nurse and has been a ward manager for 10 years.
Both of them confronted SARS back in 2003, and also the swine flu outbreak. When the COVID-19 pandemic erupted, they volunteered to work in the isolation ward because they have relevant past experience.
"We first knew in December that pneumonia of an unknown origin had occurred in the mainland city of Wuhan," Liu recalled.
"With experience in handling SARS, we knew it must be a coronavirus because its behavior and the transmission path were very similar to that in 2003. In late December, the mainland authorities was in a position to report the situation to the World Health Organization.
"Hong Kong reported the first confirmed case on Jan 23, but we held the first meeting at Ruttonjee and Tang Shiu Kin hospitals on Jan 5 to make preparation, and so we were very well-prepared.
"Compared with SARS, COVID-19 is a very cunning, being more infectious yet in some cases without obvious symptoms."
Swift response
The doctor praised the Hospital Authority for devising effective response strategies, and the government for carrying out viral tests to trace the patients and their close contacts. He also gave a thumbs-up to the discipline of Hong Kong residents, who are willing to wear face masks.
Wearing masks "is the key factor in controlling COVID-19 in Hong Kong. Only four patients have died, and our mortality rate is well below 1 percent. The situation is still vulnerable overseas because they do not wear face masks", Liu said.
"Good coordination among hospitals and coordination between healthcare workers and management are essential to fighting the virus. Learning from the painful experience of SARS, when a large number of healthcare staff were infected, we did not admit several hundred patients in a single hospital, knowing that would ruin the hospital," he said.
Liu also revealed that the patients, including a medical student returning from the UK, said they felt more secure in Hong Kong although life in the isolation ward was strict and dull. In UK hospitals, even some healthcare workers don't wear masks because they believe only sick people need to wear masks according to Liu.
As ward manager, Siu has the responsibility of protecting the nursing staff and has accordingly worked out daily routine procedures in consultation with the doctors.
"To save them from entering the isolation ward many times every day, some daily routines are combined ‚Äî for example, body-temperature-taking and blood-taking, and the dissemination of drugs and meals.
"We have taught the patients to observe good hygiene, including wearing face masks and washing hands. We also taught them ways to communicate with the healthcare staff by telephone if necessary. Apart from reading their medical records, we can monitor them through CCTV and see what they are doing from the glass doors outside the isolation wards so we need not go inside too often," she said.
To minimize the risk of cross-infection, healthcare workers wear protective gear at a certain location before entering the isolation ward, she said. When they leave, they take off and dispose of the gear at another location, and no two employees should be changing their gear at the same time.
Ruttonjee and Tang Shiu Kin hospitals are not "dragon head" hospitals, which are bigger and have greater resources to admit many COVID-19 patients, Siu added. On peak days, there were 20 COVID-19 patients, but only a few remain as the situation subsides.
Not time for complacency
Liu and Siu both say that now is not the time to lift all the control measures at once, even though the COVID-19 situation in Hong Kong has eased.
There is no longer a serious outbreak in the community, said Liu, while the infamous chains of infections, such as those at the Buddhist temple and pubs clusters, have been handled. A recent chain of patients without travel records has occurred in the Lei Muk Shue public housing estate, but he believes this to be an isolated case.
While personal hygiene and social distancing measures should remain in force, Liu believes it is too early to reopen all the immigration checkpoints and resume all international flights because the virus situation is still a problem overseas.
In his view, people should wait longer before they travel again, although he added that there is a need to strike a balance between fighting the virus and restarting the economy.
Closure of the majority of the immigration checkpoints has been an effective measure to contain the virus, as a large majority of the confirmed cases were imported from foreign countries like the UK and the US, the doctor said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/46/158994752693.jpeg
---
By Cui Jia | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-07-06 09:18

A digital billboard showing "Be Strong China", conveying support to China in fighting the novel coronavirus epidemic, is seen at Shibuya in Tokyo, Japan in February. [Photo/Xinhua]
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, countries should curb the alarming rise in xenophobic incidents and hate speech directed at groups based solely on their race, ethnicity or nationality because such incidents threaten the solidarity needed to fight the disease, international human rights experts said in an online seminar on Friday.
More than a dozen human rights experts from around the world shared their views at the seminar, which was titled "Addressing Contemporary Forms of Racism: Challenges Posed by the Pandemic and the National Responses".
The seminar was hosted by the Human Rights Center of Central South University, the Wuhan University Institute of International Law and the Cross Cultural Human Rights Centre at Vrije University Amsterdam.
"People who are perceived or known to be of Chinese or other East Asian descent have been subject to racist and xenophobic attacks related to the virus. Reports received indicate that racially motivated violence and other incidents against people of Asian descent have reached an alarming level in some countries," said E. Tendayi Achiume, the United Nations special rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in a statement.
Due to time zone differences, her statement was delivered by Kellie-Shandra Ognimba, from the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Achiume said Asian-Americans have been subject to such attacks since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. The attacks have ranged from physical assaults, vandalism and verbal harassment to denial of access to services and public spaces. Women have reported being harassed more than twice as often as men.
The situation is partly caused by irresponsible and discriminatory remarks by some public figures, she said.
"It's dismaying to witness state officials adopting alternative names for COVID-19 instead of using the internationally recognized name of the virus. These officials have adopted names with geographic references, typically referring to its emergence in China. This sort of calculated use of a geographic-based name for this virus is rooted in and fosters racism and xenophobia," she said.
Naming the virus with geographic references may not constitute as hate speech itself, but it will trigger hate speech, said Sun Shiyan, a researcher with the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences' Institute of International Law.
During the pandemic, COVID-19-related racist hate speech has been rampant in various countries, especially on social media. Such speech not only affects many ethnic groups but also may threaten international solidarity in efforts to respond to the health crisis, Sun said.
Meanwhile, the Chinese community in the Netherlands has moved from indirectly challenging racist comments to tackling them head on, especially during the outbreak. The assertiveness of the younger generation has been significant, said Tom Zwart, director of the Amsterdam university's Cross Cultural Human Rights Centre.
On Feb 6, a so-called corona song was broadcast by a radio station in the Netherlands. In the song, a number of crude remarks were made about Chinese people and Chinese restaurants.
About 60,000 people of Asian origin objected to the song by formally reporting it as a crime to the police. The public prosecutor then announced that it would investigate if the singer and songwriter had committed the crime of offending a group of people on the basis of race.
On June 2, the prosecutor announced that it had decided not to pursue the case. The decision sparked outrage in the Chinese community, Zwart said.
He added that last week, community representatives opted to challenge the prosecutor's decision, further proof that it is ready to confront the issue in "a very direct way".
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/39/159400842104.jpeg
---
People's Daily Online | Updated: 2020-07-07 08:39
Passengers wait for metro line one in Wuhan, China's Hubei province, April 22, 2020. Starting from April 22, all bus and rail transit network resumed operation in Wuhan. [Photo/Xinhua]
"Let's stay, and pass on this kindness! Later generations will be good comes out of evil". Followed this call by Pastor William Mompesson over 300 years in 1666, all residents in Eyam, a pretty commuter village located 35 miles southeast of Manchester UK, decided to quarantine themselves, made the heroic choice to sacrifice their own lives to stop the spread of Black Death. A resounding heroic story of responsibility, selflessness and braveness links the 1660s with 2020s.
Wuhan, a transport hub of 11 million people in China's Hubei province, made the same arduous and heroic choice in the year 2020 when thrust by COVID-19, a once in a century deadly pandemic of global challenges.
Statistical prediction models show that thanks to the lock down, at least 80% of possible infections have been prevented, and valuable time was bought for the rest of China and the world in containing the epidemic.
Yet despite the lofty sacrifice of Wuhan, and of China for the greater good, which has been widely acknowledged worldwide, there are still discordant notes and groundless accusations to vilify China.
It is fair and imperative to reveal the true picture, for human history should be justified by facts, lies and disinformation shall never prevail.
It is wrong to accuse China of covering up. The fact is, China's handling and notification of this virus is extremely transparent, speedy and responsible.
As timeline shows clearly, three cases of pneumonia of unknown causes were first reported on 27th of December 2019 in Hubei Province of China. It was only two days later that relevant authorities carried out an epidemiological investigation. 4 days afterwards on 31st of December, 2019, WHO office in China was notified. The virus was separated on the 7th of January2020, and the whole genome sequence of the novel coronavirus was shared with WHO on the 12th of January.
Richard Horton, editor-in-chief of the well-known medical journal The Lancet, spoke up the truth: "We knew in the last week of January that this was coming. The message from China was absolutely clear, that a new virus, with pandemic potential, was hitting cities."
It is wrong to criticize that China did not release the real number of confirmed cases and the death toll. The fact is, China has been timely releasing the data, including the number of diagnosed, suspected, severe, cured, dead and quarantined.
The reason that the Chinese figure is much lower than that in other countries lies in the most comprehensive, thorough, and strictest prevention and control measures taken in a relatively early stage by Chinese government; and in the fact that Chinese people, in respect of the force of nature, and out of their inherent values to restrain individual benefit for collective good, have strictly cooperated with containment measures.
It is wrong to claim that China's lock down was delayed, which led to the spread of the virus. The fact is absolutely to the contrary, China's lock down is most swift and effective.
Keep in mind that COVID-19 is a brand-new virus in human history, it is only natural therefore, for any country to compass the targeted curing of the disease for proactive prevention. No country would have announced extreme measures of locking down when only dozens of cases are found.
In fact, the Chinese government announced the "lock down of Wuhan" on January 23, 2020, less than a month since the first case of unknown virus was reported.
It was not until 30th January that WHO declared the epidemic as "Public Health Emergency of International Concern", which again proved that there was no delay from the Chinese side.
It is wrong for those who failed to test, report and act timely to pin blame on others. The fact is, shall a victim be labeled as a killer?
Shall a country be claimed as the origin of the virus, held accountable and made to pay for others' inept responses simply because it was the first to honestly report what it found?
Those who have rushed to attach geographical label to the virus, politicized its source and stigmatized China are only a handful of politicians who have demonstrated little respect for science. They have both overestimated their own ability to spread disinformation and underestimated others' ability to tell right from wrong.
More and more cases are being discovered outside China, the specific types of virus found in China, the US and Europe are also different, all suggesting that the disease might have appeared in other countries earlier on, and making it necessary for the tracing endeavour to be carried out on a global scale.
China is open to joint efforts by the international science community to identify the source of the virus. Importantly, it must be a professional, impartial and constructive process.
It is wrong to make accusations that China's help may be driven by geopolitical factors. The fact is, China's assistance is fighting for life. It has done everything in the open, with no strings attached, has nothing to do with geopolitical calculations, but with one and single objective, that is, to save more lives.
China has made great assistance to the world, because China is a grateful nation who is ready and willing to reciprocate acts of friendship and kindness received in its most difficult time in COVID-19 fight; because China would like to try its best to be a friend in need , and a sincere partner to be counted on in difficulty; because China firmly believes that one country's success does not mean the end of the global pandemic, only when the virus is defeated in all countries can we claim a final victory.
It is wrong to blackmail and claim so called "state liability". The fact is, this claim has serious flaws from legal perspective.
The precondition of a country bearing "state liability" for certain damage is that the country has committed an "international wrongful act".
China is the victim, like all other countries in the world. Giving top priority to people's lives and health, which was and remains the starting point of the Chinese government's response to the epidemic, China was the first country to report cases to WHO and share information with relevant countries and regions, the first to sequence the genome of the virus and share it with the world, the first to publish guidelines for treatment and containment, and the first to make tough decision to cut off the route of transmission in the shortest possible time.
China has taken unprecedented, comprehensive, thorough and rigorous measures which go far beyond the requirement of International Health Regulations in many aspects.
China has never violated its international obligations. On the contrary, China has set a new standard for the world in fulfilling international obligations.
It is wrong to de-couple with China. The fact is, China and the U.S. can and should proceed apace. Given the extensive and multifaceted links between the two economies, any "de-coupling" of the two would spell disaster for both.
When a relationship sours, the parties involved may need a dose of self-awareness. Although bilateral relations have taken a dive, continued escalation of tensions need not be the norm. The two sides could work, not in competition, but rather in collaboration, with other nations to realize the common aims of mankind in defeating the pandemic and sustain global development.
More seriously, the efforts to create a scapegoat for the failure of the US dealing with the virus will not only create confusion about the real causes of the crisis, thereby preventing the necessary policy changes for overcoming it, but also create more difficulties for the U.S. economy which is still heavily reliant on Chinese products.
Pandemic is a disaster, but it could be a blessing in disguise.
It inspires us to make collaboration to explore the best way out to confront common challenges.
It inspires us to evaluate the right role of the government to honestly shoulder its responsibility and perform its function.
It inspires us to rethink the relationship between mankind and nature, and teaches us that humanity must live in harmony with nature.
Fabricating lies may deceive the world for a while, but can they deceive the virus? Will the virus spare them because of their lies?
Ignoring the real enemy with arrogance while manipulating it as a political tool is doomed to be punished by nature.
At this grim moment of global challenges, countries tend to be steeped in their respective national interests, but they may have to consider another source of wisdom to achieve a final victory. To look at things from a global standpoint instead of perspectives based only on the individual narrow interest, to learn from nature to mobilize those "better angels" to keep the lofty spirit burning.
Interminable challenges and chaos may be subverted if the welfare of everyone is considered.
Virus is merciless though, yet love and kindness shall pass on.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/18/159408790545.jpeg
---
By WANG KEJU | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-07-23 09:04

A freight train departs from Xi'an to Europe on April 8, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
After a two-week journey, a freight train loaded with Chinese-made laptops and computers, small electrical appliances, daily necessities, toys and office supplies arrived in Budapest, capital of Hungary.
The train, which started in Southwest China's Chongqing municipality, is part of the regular operations of the China-Europe cargo fleet, like its counterparts from the eastern city of Yiwu, Zhejiang province, and Wuhan, capital of the central province of Hubei.
Wang Huoquan, deputy general manager of Yuxin'ou-Pacific Integrated Logistics Group Multimodal Co, said the China-Europe cargo trains have maintained a reliable transportation channel across the continents after air cargo supply chains faced capacity shortages due to the grounding of passenger aircraft and the resultant suspension of their bellyhold operations in the wake of the novel coronavirus outbreak.
"The regular Chongqing-Budapest rail service has met the booming logistics needs of current cross-border e-commerce, illustrating its strategic value in ensuring the international supply chain amid the pandemic," Wang said.
In 2017, the China-Europe rail service began making occasional trips to transport Chinese-made goods to Budapest, but it was not feasible to launch regular operations because the rail freight volume was relatively low at the time and very little cargo needed to be shipped back.
With only occasional orders, the train would usually arrive at other European cities and the cargo would be transported to Budapest by truck, said Qi Dan, general manager of Yuxin'ou (Chongqing) Logistics.
The sudden spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has prompted global traffic restrictions, leaving tons of goods at their places of origin and unable to reach their destinations.
"We received an urgent application from a company that has long cooperated with us, asking us to open a direct route from Chongqing to Budapest to cut the journey time and cost," Qi said, adding that the first dedicated cargo train set off on April 26, after days of preparation.
Qi noted that less than two weeks later, when the first train had yet to reach its destination, a second had already started its journey, which served as evidence that the customer was satisfied with the service and fully trusted the China-Europe cargo trains.
Since then, the company has launched a weekly Europe-bound service.
The latest company statistics show that more than 4,000 containers have been transported to Hungary on China-Europe cargo trains, with more than 900 traveling from January to May, a rise of more than 50 percent from the same period last year.
"We are delighted to be able to provide a solution for many businesses during this stressful time. The China-Europe freight train service has clear benefits and has become the main means of transporting goods between China and Europe," Nie Hongyan, director of the Chongqing Municipal Logistics Office, said.
"I have no doubt that the future is bright for freight trains from China to Europe, as many other businesses have recognized the benefits."
Rail services in other parts of the country have seen strong growth because China-Europe freight trains have carried urgently needed anti-coronavirus supplies to other countries, along with daily necessities and production materials.
The first train carrying medical supplies departed Yiwu on March 21.
By the end of May, China-Europe freight trains had carried 12,524 metric tons of materials to fight the epidemic to countries such as Italy, Germany, Spain, the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and the Netherlands, according to the China State Railway Group.
On March 28, the China-Europe train service resumed in Wuhan, which was one of the places hardest hit by the coronavirus outbreak, soon after the city eased traffic controls following a two-month lockdown.
Having started in 2011, the China-Europe rail transport service is seen as an important part of the Belt and Road Initiative, which aims to boost trade between China and participating countries.
---
By ZHANG YUNBI in London and CHEN YINGQUN in Beijing | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-03-21 07:13
US President Donald Trump addresses his administration's daily coronavirus task force briefing at the White House in Washington, March 20, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
United States President Donald Trump's recent labeling of the novel coronavirus pneumonia pandemic as originating from a "Chinese virus" has triggered widespread backlash from the international community.
Officials and commentators worldwide used words like "racist" and "xenophobic" to describe the term and said it is part of Washington's attempt to shift blame to China for its delayed, inefficient response to the novel coronavirus pandemic.
Instead of terms such as "COVID-19" or "coronavirus", the US top leader used the term in both his Wednesday and Thursday news conferences at the White House as well as in some recent tweets, and he publicly rejected reporters' questions about whether the term was racist.
The World Health Organization gave the name COVID-19 to novel coronavirus pneumonia on Feb 11, when WHO's chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan said it was both for scientific purposes and also to "avoid a number of different stigmatizing or other forms of confusing names".
US Democrats have slammed Trump and other Republicans for using "Chinese" or "Wuhan" when referring to the virus in public statements and social media posts.
Former US vice-president Joe Biden on Wednesday condemned Trump's comments and urged him to "take responsibility" for his actions.
"Stop the xenophobic fearmongering. Be honest. Take responsibility. Do your job," he wrote on Twitter.
Former US secretary of state Hillary Clinton also tweeted on Wednesday that Trump was attempting to distract people from his administration's slow response to the pandemic.
"The president is turning to racist rhetoric to distract from his failures to take the coronavirus seriously early on, make tests widely available and adequately prepare the country for a period of crisis," she tweeted. "Don't fall for it. Don't let your friends and family fall for it."
Josep Borrell, high representative of the European Union for foreign affairs and security policy, said on Thursday that viruses don't have a nationality and don't care about borders.
"COVID-19 is not a Chinese virus, as the Spanish flu was not Spanish," he tweeted. "We all face a massive threat that requires global cooperation and all of us working hand in hand."
Sadiq Khan, mayor of London, said on Thursday: "COVID-19 is COVID-19." He said trying to link a nation to the illness "is disgraceful."
The term used by Trump is "the sort of language which leads to incitement and hatred toward people of Chinese origin", Khan said when answering questions from members of the London Assembly about the pandemic.
"We are a city which celebrates our diversity and we think it is a strength, not a weakness. It's really important that we do not fall into the trap of some to use this virus as an excuse to denigrate, demean and humiliate people," the mayor added.
Pascal Lamy, former director-general of the World Trade Organization, said that the COVID-19 crisis is testing first and foremost the resilience of national governance, as the capacity to fight the virus lies in the quality of health systems and in collective disciplines such as social distancing.
But there is also a second order international dimension in cooperation to provide medical equipment, liquidity for economies or signals for concerted action, Lamy said.
"In this respect, I very much agree with the WHO that 'my country first' or 'blame the foreigners' political proclamations are dangerously counterproductive, including when they target China," he said.
Canadian experts and officials also stressed that using the term that Trump did does not help bring the whole world together to respond to this common threat. Only through global collaboration can the war against the virus eventually be won.
Thomas Bernes, a distinguished fellow at the Centre for International Governance Innovation, said that the terms being used by Trump are "highly regrettable and inappropriate".
"This is a global threat that requires global cooperation to defeat the virus and respond to the global economic challenge," said Bernes. "Trump's go-it-alone approach can only fail, and his language can only exacerbate problems and make global cooperation more difficult."
Toronto Councilor Jim Karygiannis said it is time for the US president to acknowledge that the term is racist and apologize for using it.
"The president continually has demonstrated that he reacts before he thinks. In this case, he is using China as a scapegoat for his country not being ready to fight the COVID-19 threat," said Karygiannis.
Leading media have also criticized the use of the term.
Amanda Walker, US correspondent of Sky News, wrote on Thursday that Trump "has recently and very purposefully ramped up his reference to 'Chinese virus'".
She noted that "there has been another recent change in Mr Trump's tone" as Trump is now "taking this public health crisis seriously" and he "accepted it could cause a recession and its grip on America could last well into the summer, which is just a couple of months from November's election.
"If millions of Americans die, it will be on his watch," Walker wrote. She said using an insulting term "is a way of deflecting blame".
The New York Times said on Thursday that Trump is "ignoring a growing chorus of criticism that it is racist and anti-Chinese".
Chen Weihua in Brussels and Rena Li in Toronto contributed to this story.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/40/158474900873.jpeg
---
By Li Wenfang and Qiu Quanlin | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-19 09:00

[Photo/Agencies]
The COVID-19 pandemic cannot be controlled by the herd immunity strategy and vaccines will be the key to ultimately tackling the virus, said Zhong Nanshan, a prominent Chinese expert in respiratory diseases.
There is no evidence that a person becomes immune forever to coronavirus-related illnesses after having been infected once, he said at a news conference in Guangzhou on Wednesday.
China has been moving quickly in vaccine development and international cooperation is necessary in this regard, said Zhong, who is also one of the leading specialists tackling the outbreak in China.
No matter which country produces the vaccine first, it definitely cannot supply enough to the entire world, he said, adding that it will need to come from multiple sources.
Responding to a question on the origin of the novel coronavirus, Zhong said that although Wuhan first reported the outbreak there is no evidence that the city is the source of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19.
A lot more needs to be understood about COVID-19 and international cooperation is important in fields such as drug development, he said.
His team plans to issue a report next week on clinical medication in treating COVID-19 patients.
Zhong stressed the importance of nucleic acid tests for people returning from foreign countries, as imported cases now account for the majority of the new cases in China.
The virus remains highly contagious and some infected people have shown no symptoms when entering China.
Meanwhile, Chinese people overseas are being urged not to return to Guangdong province during Qingming Festival, or Tomb Sweeping Day holiday, as provincial health authorities further tighten the response to the novel coronavirus, the provincial health commission said at a news conference on Wednesday.
Qingming Festival, which begins on April 4, is usually the peak time for millions of overseas Chinese to return to Guangdong, said Ji Leqin, an official with the provincial health commission.
"At a time of rising numbers of confirmed imported COVID-19 cases, people are being gently urged not to return home," Ji said.
As of Wednesday afternoon, Guangdong had confirmed 20 imported cases of coronavirus infection, the health commission said.
Ji said that people returning from countries hit hard by the coronavirus will be required to undergo medical observation for 14 days.
"Paying respect to ancestors on online platforms is encouraged," Ji said.
According to Fang Qiaping, deputy director of the Guangdong Provincial Civil Affairs Department, the province will not organize any group activities to honor ancestors during this year's festival.
"We will launch online activities instead," Fang said, adding that cemeteries will be closed during the festival.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158458352579.jpeg
---
By Li Wenfang and Qiu Quanlin in Guangzhou | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-19 08:12

Zhong Nanshan. [Photo/China Daily]
The COVID-19 pandemic cannot be controlled by the herd immunity strategy and vaccines will be the key to ultimately tackling the virus, said Zhong Nanshan, a prominent Chinese expert in respiratory diseases.
There is no evidence that a person becomes immune forever to coronavirus-related illnesses after having been infected once, he said at a news conference in Guangzhou on Wednesday.
China has been moving quickly in vaccine development and international cooperation is necessary in this regard, said Zhong, who is also one of the leading specialists tackling the outbreak in China.
No matter which country produces the vaccine first, it definitely cannot supply enough to the entire world, he said, adding that it will need to come from multiple sources.
Responding to a question on the origin of the novel coronavirus, Zhong said that although Wuhan first reported the outbreak there is no evidence that the city is the source of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19.
A lot more needs to be understood about COVID-19 and international cooperation is important in fields such as drug development, he said.
His team plans to issue a report next week on clinical medication in treating COVID-19 patients.
Zhong stressed the importance of nucleic acid tests for people returning from foreign countries, as imported cases now account for the majority of the new cases in China.
The virus remains highly contagious and some infected people have shown no symptoms when entering China.
Meanwhile, Chinese people overseas are being urged not to return to Guangdong province during Qingming Festival, or Tomb Sweeping Day holiday, as provincial health authorities further tighten the response to the novel coronavirus, the provincial health commission said at a news conference on Wednesday.
Qingming Festival, which begins on April 4, is usually the peak time for millions of overseas Chinese to return to Guangdong, said Ji Leqin, an official with the provincial health commission.
"At a time of rising numbers of confirmed imported COVID-19 cases, people are being gently urged not to return home," Ji said.
As of Wednesday afternoon, Guangdong had confirmed 20 imported cases of coronavirus infection, the health commission said.
Ji said that people returning from countries hit hard by the coronavirus will be required to undergo medical observation for 14 days.
"Paying respect to ancestors on online platforms is encouraged," Ji said.
According to Fang Qiaping, deputy director of the Guangdong Provincial Civil Affairs Department, the province will not organize any group activities to honor ancestors during this year's festival.
"We will launch online activities instead," Fang said, adding that cemeteries will be closed during the festival.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/41/158457637606.jpeg
---
By WANG XIAODONG in Beijing and LIU MINGTAI in Changchun | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-05-18 07:25

A resident of the city of Jilin passes by Jilin No 12 Middle School on Saturday. The school has been temporarily closed due to the recent COVID-19 cluster of cases in the city. HU HAIFENG/FOR CHINA DAILY
The recent COVID-19 outbreak in a city in Northeast China has exposed a deficiency in epidemic control and prevention in some areas, the top health authority said on Sunday, adding it has urged local authorities nationwide to ensure epidemic control measures are strictly implemented and risks eliminated.
"The sustained spread of the epidemic overseas, coupled with the emergence of scattered cases and cluster outbreaks in some individual places domestically, has increased the risks in China," said Wang Bin, of the National Health Commission's Bureau of Disease Prevention and Control.
Recent local outbreaks in the city of Jilin, Jilin province, indicated laxness in the thinking of authorities in some places, she said at a news conference.
The city reported three new confirmed COVID-19 cases on Saturday, accounting for all domestically transmitted, confirmed cases reported on the Chinese mainland on Saturday, according to the commission. Two other imported confirmed casesÔºçin Tianjin and Guangdong provinceÔºçwere also reported that day.
On May 7, the city of Jilin reported a confirmed COVID-19 case, ending more than 70 days of no new locally transmitted cases in Jilin province.
As of late Saturday, the city had reported 32 locally transmitted cases since May 7: 18 in Shulan, a small city administered by Jilin city, 12 in the city's Fengman district and 2 in the city's Chuanying district, the Jilin city government said on Sunday.
Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, the Chinese city hit hardest by the epidemic, reported six confirmed cases on May 9 and 10, all in the same residential compound. Before that, Wuhan had gone more than a month without new confirmed cases.
Wang said at the news conference on Sunday that health authorities must improve coordination with other departmentsÔºçincluding foreign affairs, customs, aviation and railwaysÔºçto prevent cases being imported. Measures such as placing all inbound travelers in isolation and medical observation for 14 days must be well implemented, she said.
Other key measures, including enhancing monitoring at fever clinics, reporting cases and swift epidemiological investigation to quickly isolate sources of infection and their close contacts, should also be well carried out.
Meanwhile, expanded virus testing is needed to ensure that key groups at risk get tested and that all others who want to get tested can do so, she said.
Following the outbreak in Jilin, six of the city's officials have been removed from their posts: including Li Pengfei, Party secretary of Shulan, Liu Shijun, deputy director of Jilin's city health commission, and Yue Xiaoyan, head of Shulan's health bureau.
During an inspection tour in Jilin province that started Wednesday night, Vice-Premier Sun Chunlan called for more decisive, precise, flexible and effective epidemic prevention and control to prevent further spread of the disease.
Stricter measures should be enacted in higher-risk areas, including closing public bath houses, entertainment venues and restaurants, and conducting nucleic acid testing on all outbound travelers to prevent the virus from spreading to other areas, she said.
Yang Limin, deputy secretary-general of the Jilin city government, said on Sunday that over the past three days, the city had given nucleic acid tests to more than 40,000 people. Between May 7 and May 16, the city reported 938 close contacts of locally confirmed cases and put them under isolation.
Efforts to trace the origin of the outbreak are underway, and the results will promptly be made public, he said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/34/158976757452.jpeg
---
By Rod P. Kapunan | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-04-30 08:51

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks at a news conference at the State Department, in Washington, US, April 29, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
A surge of stigmatizing voices from the United States and some Western European countries clouds the world over the sudden but common test brought upon all human beings by the novel coronavirus.
Such noises grow louder as the US lays bare its failure to effectively cope with the pandemic while China manages to curb domestic cases, with Wuhan clearing its last hospitalized patient on April 26.
Not long ago, US officials were still boasting about their control of the virus. It is most disheartening that soon afterward, the pandemic exposed the unpreparedness of the US. Their arrogance that "the virus is Asian" and their own health systems are stronger led them astray.
Among those leading the crusade against China are US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who has been attacking China on issues ranging from the name of the virus to its origin, from its donations to sharing of information, without showing any evidence for the blatant accusations.
A 57-page strategy document issued by the National Republican Senatorial Committee, disclosed by US media, employs multipronged assaults against China and shows the world how US politicians are pushing to scapegoat China and spreading fake news.
If US politicians feel no shame in ignoring the truth, the echoing attitude of some Western media against China suggests the West always seeks to find justification for all its actions, and doubts or even denounces others for any progress.
Fox News seems to be in line with Republican guidelines in circulating untrue accusations against China. The rather ludicrous legal suit against China for COVID-19 damages could ripen to threats to extort China.
However, the media outlets that prop up a blame game by the world's single hegemonic power are forgetting that it was the US that is alleged to have engaged in bacteriological warfare against Korean and Chinese soldiers during the Korean War (1950-53) and against the Vietnamese (1955-75).
It was the US and some other Western powers that framed people in Iraq and Syria for alleged possession of chemical weapons.
Yet the country that was the first to confront the coronavirus and the first to successfully combat the new challenge through its own initiative is today being condemned as the cause of the pandemic.
The fact that China's success in containing the pandemic and its assistance to other sufferers leave politicians more upbeat in attacking China explains why the West equates leadership with some form of superiority and dominance, an outlook that lingers to this day.
From these attacks, we see the harbingers of extreme bigotry, blind superiority, discrimination and contempt of others by selfish politicians.
Those strongmen and so-called intelligentsia in the West cannot accept China or any other Asian or African country leading in charting the course of human destiny. They cannot conceive of the idea that the awaited emergence of China as an economic power should be welcomed as an epochal change in the history of mankind.
To the developing world, the most visible trace brought about by Western empires is the subjugation and exploitation of other peoples. China happens to be the top target for its rise, and more so, for its success in beating COVID-19 that so embarrasses the world's sole superpower.
Such longing for continuous exploitation of others has to be taken as a residue of slavery, colonialism and imperialism championed by the Western powers for centuries. The practice has brought untold riches to the capitalists that exacerbate underdevelopment, poverty, hunger, disease and an incessant struggle for survival.
Like the virus that came and will be yoked, such political toxins should be buried by us, the modern Homo sapiens that have withstood many viruses, and will be more interconnected, more resilient in health access and more equal among peoples.
The author is a Manila-based political analyst and columnist for The Manila Standard. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/49/158821228349.jpeg
---
By Murad Qureshi | China Daily | Updated: 2020-04-29 07:15  A double-decker red bus passes by the Bank of England in London, Britain, March 6, 2019. /Xinhua
World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus urged the world's governments to "test, test, test" after declaring the novel coronavirus outbreak a global pandemic on March 11. But since then the British government has moved from dropping its initial response-"herd immunity"-to locking down the whole country in an effort to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus.
Nevertheless, COVID-19 has claimed more than 20,000 hospital deaths to date and this excludes the figures of fatalities in Social Care and in the wider community-people who could well have passed away in social isolation. As a result with the return of the Prime Minister Boris Johnson to 10 Downing Street, his key decision will be whether to extend the lockdown in response to the much higher than expected number of fatalities.
In the United Kingdom, much of the focus has been on the availability of personal protection equipment (PPE) for front-line workers, not just in the health and social care sectors, but also in transport and other key sectors. Almost a third of the doctors treating COVID-19 patients do not have access to enough face masks, PPE and other medical gear to keep them safe, a survey released recently said. Not surprisingly, many doctors and nurses of the National Health Service have fallen victim to COVID-19. In addition, despite the demand for public transportation falling significantly-more than 90 percent for the subway-we have seen some fatalities among transport workers. For example at least 14 bus workers in London had lost their lives already to COVID-19 before the drivers were isolated from the passengers physically and bus service was made free to reduce contact with drivers.
As well as the lives lost and the suffering of the people, the pandemic is also extracting a huge economic cost, because for every one month of lockdown, the UK economy will lose 2 percent of GDP according to Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development sources. As such, some governments in countries under lockdown have already started discussing ways to restart parts of their economies.
Since infections are not spread evenly across countries, it's worth looking at major city-regions. While the lockdown in Wuhan, Hubei province, was lifted on April 8 and the city seems to be gradually returning to normal, new deaths in Lombardy, Italy, and Madrid, Spain, are flattening off. But as the death toll is still rising in New York and is yet to flatten in London, we expect the lockdown to be extended.
London Mayor Sadiq Khan has said that we can beat the novel coronavirus only if cities around the world work together, meaning we need international cooperation, both on the medical and economic fronts, to defeat the virus.
So what has been happening with global cooperation?
German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier has suggested that the fight against the "pandemic is not a war", as many world leaders have claimed, "rather, it is a test of humanity".
In this spirit, China donated $20 million and then another $30 million to the WHO, while helping more than 120 countries, including the UK, fight the outbreak by dispatching medical supplies and medical experts to them. For that, we are truly grateful. China has also been cooperating with other countries in the research to develop a vaccine.
Indeed, the Italian people have expressed gratitude to China for lending a helping hand and the UK's deputy chief medical officer has spoken highly of the exchanges between the Chinese and British medical experts. And Steinmeier has said the pandemic is "bringing out the best and the worst in people".
In this context, an Ipsos survey showed that one in every seven persons has avoided people of Chinese origin or those with mongoloid features since the virus started spreading in the UK. But xenophobia won't save anybody from the virus, especially when it's highly possible that a non-Chinese brought the virus to the UK.
Therefore, xenophobia needs to be dealt with head on. And if Sinophobia has a long history, and Chinese people have faced discrimination even before this pandemic broke out, the UK too has a long history of fighting racism in all its forms. People opposing Sinophobia, or xenophobia in any form, number many times more than those who indulge in such nefarious activities, and nowhere is this more true than in London where global cohesion will bring people together to tackle this awful virus.
The author is a member of the London Assembly, and chair of Stop the War Coalition. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/12/158811906871.jpeg
---
By Zhang Zhihao | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-24 09:45

Chinese medical team experts and Italian doctors pose for a photo in Padua, Italy, on March 18, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Experts have become more available as nation begins to emerge from epidemic
Chinese scientists and doctors from the front lines can help other nations formulate their own response plans and contain the pandemic by sharing their practical know-how and key data regarding COVID-19 with foreign peers, experts said.
Since China has wrestled the disease to its knees over the past few weeks, experts have become more available and are sharing their insights with the rest of the world through workshops, video calls and news briefings.
The topics with the most amount of foreign interest are quarantine measures, diagnosis methods and treatments, especially for patients in severe and critical condition.
Some of these outreach efforts are done through official channels like embassies or government institutions, but many experts are also getting their knowledge out through universities, hospitals, civil societies and other grassroots agencies.
"Almost all the suggestions for improvement given by Chinese experts have been accepted by their Italian peers," Li Junhua, the Chinese ambassador to Italy, said in a video call with China Central Television.
"I believe the situation in Italy will gradually come under control as more rigorous prevention and control is implemented."
Tang Menglin, the head nurse of a medical delegation sent to Italy, said the friendship between Italy and China will deepen through this joint battle against the pandemic.
"We Chinese medics are the bridge linking the two peoples now," Tang said.
Last week, doctors from Zhejiang province held a video conference with peers from Yale University in the United States.
The Chinese participants shared practical advice ranging from trial drugs and their potential side effects to how to conduct surgeries on critical patients.
"By looking at the current statistics, the disease's global mortality rate is no lower than that in China," said Liang Tingbo, a medical professor from Zhejiang University.
"We must share our experience and methods with the world, including some of our shortcomings, so that other nations can avoid making the same mistakes and help save more people."
In a video call with US doctors on March 13, Zhang Wenhong, head of the department of infectious diseases at Huashan Hospital under Fudan University, said at the start of the outbreak that China had relied solely on nucleic acid testing as the go-to diagnostic method, and this had left many patients waiting since there was a shortage of test kits. Further, the accuracy of the results was only around 60 percent.
Zhang said his hospital quickly employed other methods, such as CT scans, next generation sequencing and other analytical techniques to help diagnose patients.
Confirmed patients should be swiftly hospitalized to avoid infecting their family members or communities, he added.
Earlier this month, Enrico Ammirati, a cardiologist from Italy, called his peers at Tongji Hospital in Wuhan, raising questions about efficient ward setup, the protection of medical workers and treating critical patients with cytokine storm-a life-threatening condition in which the immune system overreacts and attacks the body.
Wang Daowen, a cardiologist at the Wuhan hospital, said they could refit their general wards by turning off air conditioners and adding doors to separate the wards into clean, semi-contaminated and contaminated areas.
The Tongji experts also showed how they used their protective masks and suits.
When treating cytokine storm, the Chinese doctors advised monitoring another condition called fulminant myocarditis that can cause sudden heart failure.
Jean-Pierre Armand, an oncologist based at the Gustave Roussy Institute in Paris, said his video call with Chinese peers last week was "very valuable and can help Europe avoid many pitfalls."
Wang Ting, general director of the China Research Institute for Science Popularization, said: "the COVID-19 pandemic is a new challenge that has an unknown origin, and the situation is constantly evolving.
"Only science can unveil its secrets."
Since February, the China Association for Science and Technology said it has sent out letters of encouragement and information packages regarding COVID-19 to scientific organizations in over 20 countries in Europe, Asia and Africa.
In a reply letter, Ehud Menipaz, president of the Association of Engineers in Israel, thanked the association for the information videos.
He said Israelis have been praying for the Chinese people at the Western Wall, hoping China and the world can overcome the novel coronavirus soon.
Wang said global scientific communities should enhance dialogue and cooperation, share experimental data, produce high-quality scientific findings and offer practical advice to end the disease's global rampage.
"This will showcase the value of science and technology and the power of unity when building a community for the shared future of humankind," he said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/52/158502258616.jpeg
---
chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-03-01 06:20
A pneumonia outbreak was first reported in Central China's Wuhan city in December. The disease, which has spread across China and beyond, is caused by a novel coronavirus.
Feb 29
China
Latest data released by National Health Commission by midnight, Feb 28, 2020.
- Chinese mainland reports 427 new confirmed cases of novel coronavirus infections, 47 new deaths (Read more)

- 39,002 mainland coronavirus patients have recovered, the first time the number has surpassed remaining confirmed cases

- China sends a group of experts to Iran to help combat the novel coronavirus (Read more)

- Wuhan to send teams to supervise the city's prisons over virus control

- All schools in China should continue delaying their reopening date in an effort to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus outbreak, the Ministry of Education says (Read more)

- The Wuhan Marathon, originally set for April, is postponed to the second half of the year
Outside China
The latest figures reported by each government's health authority as of Feb 29, 2020.
- The total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Italy rises to 889, including 21 fatalities and 46 recoveries
- South Korea confirms 219 more cases of COVID-19, raising the total number of infections to 3,150
- The number of confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus in Iran totals 593, including 43 fatalities
- UK confirms its first coronavirus patient who was infected in the country
- US reports third case of unknown origin of the novel coronavirus
- Mexico, Iceland and Morocco each confirm their first cases of the novel coronavirus

Click here for previous reports
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/71/158302091424.jpeg
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/6/158302091439.jpeg
---
By TAN XINYU in London | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-03-02 07:24

Marchers in San Francisco, California, turn out on Saturday to oppose discrimination that links the novel coronavirus pneumonia with people of Chinese heritage. LIU GUANGUAN/CHINA NEWS SERVICE
Editor's note: In this new series, we share stories and experiences showing how expats are dealing with the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak.
As the novel coronavirus continued to spread around the world, discrimination against people of Chinese or Asian heritage has been emerging.
In early February, the Netherlands launched an online petition against racism and discrimination nationwide, which garnered more than 55,000 signatures in less than five days.
"The feedback has been overwhelming," said Marco Jacobs, a Dutch citizen involved in launching the petition. "Finally, people stood up. TV shows were dedicating a lot of time to the petition, and it was even talked about in the government. It makes me proud to see all these people work together to fight racism and discrimination against people of Chinese and Asian descent."
Jacobs lived in China for more than 11 years before returning to the Netherlands in 2014. He completed his bachelor's and master's degree studies at Beijing Language and Culture University. Now he is a Dutch language instructor and teaching director at the Sunway Language school, which provides Dutch language courses to Chinese people.
Over the past few weeks, Jacobs said he has seen people of Asian descent targeted in the Netherlands. He's seen people spitting in the face, yelling "Coronavirus!" at little children and kicking an elderly Asian man off his bicycle.
What triggered the petition was a song aired on Radio 10 that featured lyrics connecting the virus to people with a Chinese background and warning listeners to stay away from Chinese food.
"In the song they used a sentence that really upset me. They sang: 'Het is allemaal de schuld van die stinkende Chinezen', which means 'It's all the fault of those smelly Chinese'", he said, "I was utterly shocked. Who would think of something like this?"
Some of Jacobs' Chinese friends asked him for help with the translation, and in the process he explained the meaning of the words. He urged them to stand against it, as he believes the right to free speech is not a blank check to hurt people, to blame them or to instigate racial hatred.
Jacobs joined the petition campaign the same day, helping with translations, research and proofreading. The petitionÔºçtitled "We are not viruses"Ôºçreads:
"How can it be that there are people like those at Radio 10 who dare to connect a serious virus with people of Chinese origin and those who eat Chinese food?"
"You don't joke about an illness, or a virus. Would you laugh if the song was about cancer?"
Apology sought
The petition also asks the media to take responsibility for proper reporting and demands that politicians stand against racism and discrimination. It also asks the radio station to sincerely apologize.
Jacobs said he is satisfied with the current results of the petition. It has more than 55,000 signatures and has put the problem of discrimination against people of Chinese and Asian descent high on the public agenda. The Public Prosecution office in the Netherlands has opened an investigation into the matter.
The petition also shows that the Chinese community in the Netherlands can stand up against discrimination, and makes clear to a lot of people within the Chinese community that they have to come out and be visible, Jacobs said, adding that openness is needed to build bridges between different groups in Dutch society.
He said he hopes advocates will be able to hand the petition over to members of the Dutch Parliament during the European Action Week Against Racism in March.
Jacobs said the reaction to the COVID-19 virus has revealed a deeply ingrained prejudice against China. At the beginning, he noted, it was called the China virus or Wuhan virus.
Using the word China in the name inflamed dormant racial hatreds in parts of society, he said, adding that such hatred has its roots in ignorance.
Jacobs also helped to write a book for Dutch children of Chinese descent to help them explain the virus to other children.
"Although we have faced some acts of racism and discrimination, I would like to emphasize that in this country there are also a lot of people who oppose this behavior, who welcome you, who want to be your friend," Jacobs said.
"To my friends in China, I would like to say, 'Stay strong!' The battle against COVID-19 will be won."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/158311451271.jpeg
---
By Liu Yang | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-31 07:18  Patients are transferred to Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn borough of New York City on Saturday. The number of COVID-19 cases in the United States was 85,228 as of Saturday, according to the World Health Organization. MICHAEL NAGLE / XINHUA
The novel coronavirus pandemic has put every country's government to test. Leaders have to act, society has to mobilize, but before that the public needs to have confidence in their leaders. True, there will be fear, but as Martin Luther King Jr. said, fear motivates us. Fear could also drive people to think, prepare, and to act. But to do that, people need correct information.
However, some countries' politicians have been playing the blame game over the pandemic and, in the process, distorting facts. For example, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has repeatedly called the novel coronavirus the "Wuhan virus" and tried to write the term into the joint statement of the recent G7 foreign ministers' meeting.
And although US President Donald Trump stopped referring to the novel coronavirus using a racist term last week, all this naming and blaming has undermined the global fight against the pandemic.
Many in the United States still have a vivid memory of the H1N1 swine flu outbreak in 2009-the first influenza outbreak to be declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Since the first two H1N1 flu cases were reported from California, some tended to pin the blame for the outbreak on the US. On the other hand, Michael Savage, a radio host, claimed it was "brought" to the US by illegal immigrants from Mexico.
The origin of a virus is important for virologists and epidemiologists, because it helps them to design a better control and prevention system. However, associating a virus with a specific place or a particular ethnic group is offensive. And given the experience of the H1N1 flu, the American people should know that better than anyone else.
Combining speculation with discrimination, some also used labeling in a bid to name and shame an ethnic group or place after the severe acute respiratory syndrome, Ebola and H1N1 flue epidemics broke out.
Despite this being a global war against the novel coronavirus, Tom Cotton, a US senator, has insisted to "hold China accountable".
For those whose minds are attuned to power rivalry, they are capable of only replicating this mental exercise during every crisis. And in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, such people get some form of comfort by targeting China.
As the Italian theorist Georgio Agamben said, securitization, which leads to the state of exception, ruins the role of democracy as the organizing principle of political life. Those who tend to ride on manipulated hatred suffer a deep sense of loss, as they tend to believe they are losing a power competition. Which is symbolic of admitted decline.
The novel coronavirus respects no borders, nor does it have any affinity to any ideology. In a bizarre way, it has created a dialectical global binding. Whereas the globe has no choice but to be a whole, individual states have been put to test to determine which can better protect its people. So it is natural for people to have their own opinion on which state is more capable.
Notwithstanding the different opinions, however, the novel coronavirus has brought humans to a Kantian cosmopolitan moment: You don't necessarily like others, but you have to live with them. So you'd better work together to protect all or bring upon universal misery by creating divisions.
The author is an assistant professor at the School of Law, and a fellow at the Institute for National Development and Strategy, Renmin University of China.
The views don't necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/100/158561309019.jpeg
---
By Jiang Lu | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-12 13:44
Countries should stop blaming each other and should cooperate and share information to fight against COVID-19, a US teacher said.
James Ryan Nolton has lived in China for more than three years.
This Spring Festival, he came to Beijing to visit friends. He shot a series of videos to show his life in Beijing during the novel coronavirus outbreak.
The worldwide epidemic situation is more serious than before. Based on his research, Nolton said countries can learn two important things to fight against the coronavirus. First, act as quickly as possible: "The quicker a country acts, the better it is by far."
Second, communicate. "Countries can share information and communicate experience to battle the virus," he said.
Nolton said some news sometimes made him upset.
Some politicians and people outside China associated the novel coronavirus with Wuhan and China. The stigma around the disease fuels racism and discrimination against Asian people.
"I believe that all people are so advanced now and no matter anyone's skin color, country of origin or religion, those should not be boundaries among people," Nolton said.
Since China has almost controlled the situation, it has begun to help others. China has provided aid to 89 countries and four international organizations to help them fight against the pandemic.
However, some Western media still blamed China for the outbreak.
Nolton, who has heard these comments before, said that blaming will not help control the pandemic.
While doing research to learn more about the virus, he emphasized, "I am not an expert in this field. I just get basic information about it."
He added, "People who make rumors are not scientists. They don't know much about the virus so they have no scientific evidence to blame."
Many people abroad still don't wear face masks, which has really bothered Nolton for a while. Many times, he has suggested that his family and friends should wear face masks, and they finally listened.
Nolton also advised friends abroad to wash their hands, use alcohol-based sanitizers and maintain social distancing.
Repoter: Jiang Lu
Video editor: Gao Wenxuan
//v-hls.chinadaily.com.cn/stream/606012/6b36d95d-adc2-4bc1-a805-09876cd2e281/52ced96a-585d-4b1c-92c7-2380b80b6e1c_h.m3u8&p=//img2.chinadaily.com.cn/images/202004/12/5e92ad7ea3105d502d9d5733.jpeg&l=en&c=5e351b06a310128217274051&s=WS5e92aacca3105d50a3d158bc
---
By Zhao Xu | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-31 08:19

Charity organization Samaritan's Purse sets up an emergency field hospital in New York's Central Park on Sunday.[Photo/Reuters]
"The youngest patient I've handled over the past few weeks was just one-month-old. She had tests but I don't know the result, because the next day I began a long-overdue break from work, if only to get better prepared for tougher days ahead," said a nurse from the Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens, New York, last Thursday.
As she talked, news emerged that 13 people had died of COVID-19 within the previous 24 hours in the hospital.
The nurse, who agreed to speak on condition of anonymity, was back at work last Saturday, the day when the New York State Governor Andrew Cuomo warned New Yorkers to gird for a "war" as the state-wide death toll soared by 209 from 519 over the previous 24 hours, bringing the total number to 728. As of Sunday night, that number stood at 965.
"The current situation is: if you are experiencing minor symptoms including coughing, headache and fever, you will not be tested and will be asked to go directly into self-quarantine at home," said the nurse. "We test those who are suffering from chest pain and breathing difficulties-clear signs that the patient's condition has deteriorated.
"On a number of occasions, a patient who had slight discomfort and had been turned away comes back a week later, having developed more severe symptoms," she continued. "On other occasions, they keep coming back out of anxiety."
Largely populated by people of Hispanic, Chinese, Indian and Pakistani origin, Elmhurst is a typical working-class neighborhood where more than two-thirds of the residents were born outside of the United States.
According to the nurse, who lives in Elmhurst, the current coronavirus crisis has hit the neighborhood hard, keeping in mind the limited numbers of means many have for self-quarantine.
"In this part of New York, it was not uncommon for a family of four or even five to be crammed into a one-bedroom apartment. This has made effective self-quarantine difficult, even if one is willing to wear a mask all day long," she said.
John Thomson is a veteran diplomat who was first stationed in Beijing in 1978, to prepare for the normalization of the relationship between China and the US.
"I think shelter at home is a mistake," he said, referring to the widely-adopted practice in the US where the non-critically infected patients are required to be quarantined at home. "We need to have those large, temporary housing areas like they (the Chinese) did in Wuhan. When you put everyone who's not a critical case on effective quarantine and appropriate care, you're able to stretch it out and avoid the most-feared scenario as has happened in Italy."
The hospital nurse, who lives in Elmhurst with her parents and two children, said that the local Chinese population has been hit less hard compared to other ethnic groups.
"The Chinese have generally been more aware of the imminent danger due to the fact that the disease had caused immense suffering in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, before the alarm was raised here," she said. "They, therefore, got better prepared, through limiting their outings at a relatively earlier stage of the outbreak in the US, and through wearing masks long before it was recommended by officials and medical experts in this country."
But that doesn't mean that the Chinese are not feeling the scourge of the pandemic. In fact, the nurse, who's an ethnic Chinese, said that she herself feels the pang of angst from time to time.
"I ask myself: what if one day I go to the hospital and I'm told that there are not enough masks?" she said. Currently, the doctors and nurses are given one N95 mask for a day, which means that very often a mask has to be taken off and worn again more than once a day.
A man who identified himself as a New York State emergency medical technician recently tweeted about his own experience. Feeling unwell, he was told by doctors to stay at home for 14 days without getting a test, while his boss was hoping that he could get back to work within 72 hours given the number of patients who are in desperate need of the service.
The Elmhurst Hospital Center has been getting donations of medical masks and gowns from various sources, including members of the local Chinese-American society. Due to a lack of ventilators at the hospital, two patients have to share one.
Earlier at a press conference, Cuomo blamed "non-compliance" for the worsening of the situation and begged all to stay at home and fulfill their "public health responsibility", to use his words.
"I don't know what's going on in the head of those who had consistently ignored the warnings," said the nurse. "They only need to take a look at what we are going through now."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/63/158562020629.jpeg
---
By Fernando Reyes Matta | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-25 07:29

US President Donald Trump addresses his administration's daily coronavirus task force briefing at the White House in Washington, March 20, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
No doubt there is political motive behind US President Donald Trump labeling the novel coronavirus as the "Chinese virus". Especially, since he insists on using it despite the advice of the World Health Organization not to do so. Eventually, he softened his tone on Monday under domestic pressure.
Misnaming things is not a minor act, especially when there is no agreement between what we want to name and the definition or identity determined by a word. The concern for consistency in language is essentially the source of thoughts both in the West and East. A discourse on the meaning of words and, consequently, about their non-correspondence with the concepts they denote was first put forward by Plato in his Cratylus, which reproduces a dialogue between Socrates and his disciples.
In The Analects of Confucius, the ancient Chinese philosopher refers to the subject when addressing zhen mingÔºçit is the rectification of names when they are not wise or lack legitimacy. Perhaps, neither the US president nor his immediate advisers are aware of these cultural roots.
US officials ignore advice against use of racist term
There is a reason why US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has on several occasions referred to the novel coronavirus as the "Wuhan virus" ignoring the advice of Beijing and global health officials to avoid using terms that could incite xenophobia.
Xenophobes are everywhere. This was confirmed when a Filipino girl riding a bus in Paris was blamed for the spread of the virus and attacked, and the harsh treatment of Chinese store owners in neighborhoods in Madrid and Buenos Aires. In mid-February, Judy Chu, a Democrat member of the House of Representative from California, stressed that the epidemic not be called the "Chinese coronavirus". Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar agreed, but other officials in the Trump administration ignored it.
WHO avoids attributing virus to any ethnic group of place
The World Health Organization has been especially careful in naming the novel coronavirus. In the middle of February, when global collaboration with China to try and identify the origin and characteristics of the virus was at its height, the WHO and other international organizations called on experienced medical professionals to give a name to the disease that did not reflect on race or place.
COVID-19 may not be a very catchy name, but it has information about the year of the outbreak and the category of the pathogen.
No wonder the WHO disapproved the use of "Chinese virus" by Trump. Some other international organizations and several global leaders, too, criticized Trump for using the term, stressing that viruses have no borders, and "it is important to be careful with the language" and to not relate it "to a specific ethnic group or nationality". For example, the H1N1 flu pandemic in 2009 originated in North America, but we don't call it the "North American flu', said Mike Ryan, WHO executive director for health emergencies.
So someone in the White House should spend some time to understand that changing names is a major offense in traditional Chinese culture. As Confucius says: "If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things. If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success." Ancient philosopher Xunzi has also said that in Confucian doctrine, it is essential to use the names properly "to be able to fight against chaos".
The battle we are fighting calls for collaboration. This is the time to collect experiences and see how China and other Asian countries have fared in the fight against the epidemic. That medical aid is now moving from East to West proves they have fared better than others.
Proper measures can help fight epidemic
"No country can think that this will not happen to us; it is a fatal error. It can happen to any country", WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Gebreyesus said recently. He also highlighted the experiences of China, the Republic of Korea and Singapore, which have managed to contain the increase in new cases. "That clearly demonstrates that by taking an aggressive stance for testing and tracking, combined with measures of social distance and community mobilization, infection can be prevented and lives saved."
In all countries, especially now in Latin America and Africa, the word quarantine dominates political and social discussions. What political decisions to make? How to reduce people's fears? How to ensure "social discipline" where each one takes care of himself and others? What new forms of integration and collaboration will the economic crisis that is expected to follow the pandemic require? As UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said: "This is a time for prudence, not panic. Science, not stigma. Facts not fear. Even though the situation has been classified as a pandemic, it is one that we can control‚Ä¶ But that will require unprecedented personal, national and international action."
However, some leaders think otherwise. Lagging in the fight against the virus, because of their lackadaisical approach, they are now taking advantage of their access to the media to use provocative terms for the novel coronavirus, in order to divert public attention from their failure to prevent the spread of the disease.
The author is director of the Center of Latin American Studies on China, Universidad Andr√©s Bello, Chile, and former Chilean ambassador to China. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/21/158509477959.jpeg
---
By MARTIN ALBROW | China Daily | Updated: 2020-06-11 07:35  LUO JIE/MA XUEJING/CHINA DAILY
Pandemic has promoted the transition from trade globalization to tech totalism
The COVID-19 is a human tragedy. There is no denying that. The repercussions for every sector of life are proving to be profound.
Indeed some commentators have announced that this is the end of globalization. Well, for a start, I would say that underestimates the impact of COVID-19. It is more than the end of something, it is a beginning.
For relations at a distance are still social, indeed some come much closer to the true sense of being social. We are reaching out to other human beings who could be anywhere in the world in the vivid and renewed recognition that we all belong to a single vulnerable biological species that ultimately has only science between itself and extinction.
This is the world society of the human species as it extends worldwide not simply through the overlapping linkages of neighboring communities, which have always been a fact of life, but because each one of us has a real or potential link with someone else, no matter how far we are apart. The virus means we sustain our relations with our family and friends even as it forces us to keep our distance from them.
By emphasizing absence it is a paradox that the virus illuminates with still greater clarity the nature of human society. Physical contact or proximity is not its essence, even if it provides the necessary condition for human reproduction (at least up until in vitro fertilization).
It therefore appears at first glance more than a little strange that many commentators have remarked that COVID-19 means the end of globalization. What they mainly have in mind is an idea of globalization that is restricted largely to the economic sphere, and in particular to free trade between nations.
But trade between countries is not everything in the global economy. When the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development published a special report on globalization in 1993 it emphasized transnational firms, jumping over tariff boundaries. People migrate to find jobs. They take their tastes with them. Culture and communication are even more global than trade.
Perhaps we should be talking about the globalization of knowledge. The currents that carry globalization forward are fundamentally cultural, the spread of ideas and knowledge in particular, especially in and through science and technology. National boundaries can do little to prevent the spread of knowledge and indeed today the quest for a vaccine for the virus is a shared effort across the globe, where the claims to ownership are insignificant compared with the vast fund of shared knowledge that is at the disposal of all medical scientists from every nation.
Globalization goes on all the time. What does not happen is a reduction in the diversity of life and differences between cultures. What does not happen is a march to the same destination. There is no single outcome, but there is the continuing experience of multiple cultures in the same place.
Technologies of communication have brought the possibility of knowing what is happening to one's closest and dearest even when they are on another continent. They allow us to talk of events in far off places. They span the world, but the radical novelty in the response to the virus is they penetrate the intimate spaces of personal life.
This effect is total in its pervasiveness and extent, beyond anything the prophets of globalization could have imagined. This is totalization, something other than globalization, distinct in its origin and in its penetration, for each individual.
The virus has brought the total dimension to global society. To understand this we really have to be clear in our minds what the difference is between global and total. Global, since its rise in general use since World War II, refers to the shared fate of our species. Total means that every aspect of individual and collective life comes under scrutiny and control.
We count, inspect and gather all the individual items together to get the total sum. When we go global we encompass everything. The total penetrates whatever there is, the global expands to ensure nothing is left out.
COVID-19 has brought the first "total-global" moment, one unprecedented in human experience, so far as we know from recorded history. World wars have been approximations to it, but even they have not had the comprehensive impact that the virus is having on daily life around the world.
Many say that nothing will ever be the same again. In the immediate shock of the outbreak that may seem to be the case. But the two world wars lasted very much longer than the pandemic has up to now and the world recovered from those for the global population to triple-a double-edged achievement of course.
Many of the changes will come from the added impetus to the advance of communication technology precisely because it operates to intensify both the total and the global. Rivalry between states, competition between corporations, individual aspirations for contact and knowledge all add up to the comprehensive digitalization of everyday life.
Whether this relentless advance of technology will actually assist or imperil the future of humankind is a question that remains to be answered after the crisis of the pandemic has passed. Our best hope is that we learn lessons from the experience that can be put to good use in averting the worst consequences of climate change. The total may yet help the global.
The author is a fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences, UK, and the author of China's Role in a Shared Human Future: Towards Theory for Global Leadership. The author contributed this article to China Watch, a think tank powered by China Daily. The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/19/159183433817.jpeg
---
FILE PHOTO: A general view of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, September 30, 2014. [Photo/Agencies]

Italy identified the novel coronavirus in a patient in early December, researchers said in a new study published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the latest research suggesting that the disease hit Europe earlier than thought.

"We identified severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA in an oropharyngeal swab specimen collected from a child with suspected measles in early December 2019," Antonella Amendola of the University of Milan and other authors wrote in the CDC's Emerging Infectious Disease journal.

SARS-CoV-2 is the respiratory virus that causes COVID-19, while RNA, or ribonucleic acid, is a nucleic acid present in all living cells.

That was about three months before the first identified coronavirus disease case in Italy, they said in an early release of their article in the February 2021 issue of the journal.

"This finding expands our knowledge on timing and mapping of novel coronavirus transmission pathways," the Italian authors wrote.

COVID-19 symptoms can appear as early as two days after infection or as late as 14 days, according to the CDC.

This could mean the coronavirus was circulating in Italy as soon as the end of November 2019, as reported by the Bloomberg on Wednesday, which cited the same research.

The new study provides further perspective into demystify the origin of COVID-19, as other scientific papers also suggested the novel coronavirus appeared in the United States in mid-December 2019 and in France in late December, before or around the time the virus was officially identified in China.

China reported cases of what people then called "pneumonia of unknown cause" on Dec 27. The World Health Organization said it received China's official report on the cluster of cases on Jan 3.

In the Italian case, researchers said the boy, who lived in the surrounding area of Milan and had no reported travel history, had cough and rhinitis on Nov 30 and was taken to the emergency department with respiratory symptoms and vomiting a week later.

"These findings, in agreement with other evidence of early COVID-19 spread in Europe, advance the beginning of the outbreak to late autumn 2019," the authors noted.

In France, for example, researchers found the virus in a retrospective analysis of a specimen from a patient who was hospitalized in France on Dec 27, 2019, which was weeks before the first cases were confirmed in France on Jan 24, 2020.

The Italian researchers pointed out, however, earlier strains also might have been occasionally imported to Italy and other countries in Europe during the late autumn period, but those importations could have been different from the strain that became widespread in Italy during the first months of 2020.

Italy was the first Western country severely hit by the COVID-19 epidemic, with the first known COVID-19 case reported in the town of Codogno in the Lombardy region on Feb 21.

However, some evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been circulating unnoticed for several weeks in Lombardy before the first official detection, according to the CDC journal article.

Italy logged 499 coronavirus-related deaths on Wednesday, adding the total to more than

61,7 00 since February, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain.

Researchers in the country have never stopped their quest for the exact timeline of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy.

Environmental surveillance has "unequivocally" demonstrated the presence of the virus, at concentrations comparable to those obtained from samples collected at later stages of the pandemic, in the untreated wastewater of the Milan area as early as mid-December 2019, according to the article.

Another research article, published by the National Cancer Institute's scientific magazine Tumori Journalon Nov 11, show that 11.6 percent of 959 healthy volunteers participating in a lung cancer screening trial in Italy between September 2019 and March 2020 had developed coronavirus antibodies.

Scientists with the US CDC also found evidence of the novel coronavirus infection in 106 of 7,389 blood donations collected from residents in nine states across the US as early as mid-December, according to their study published online in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseaseslast Monday.
---
By ZHAO HUANXIN in Washington | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-12-10 04:18

FILE PHOTO: A general view of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, September 30, 2014. [Photo/Agencies]
Italy identified the novel coronavirus in a patient in early December, researchers said in a new study published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the latest research suggesting that the disease hit Europe earlier than thought.
"We identified severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA in an oropharyngeal swab specimen collected from a child with suspected measles in early December 2019," Antonella Amendola of the University of Milan and other authors wrote in the CDC's Emerging Infectious Disease journal.
SARS-CoV-2 is the respiratory virus that causes COVID-19, while RNA, or ribonucleic acid, is a nucleic acid present in all living cells.
That was about three months before the first identified coronavirus disease case in Italy, they said in an early release of their article in the February 2021 issue of the journal.
"This finding expands our knowledge on timing and mapping of novel coronavirus transmission pathways," the Italian authors wrote.
COVID-19 symptoms can appear as early as two days after infection or as late as 14 days, according to the CDC.
This could mean the coronavirus was circulating in Italy as soon as the end of November 2019, as reported by the Bloomberg on Wednesday, which cited the same research.
The new study provides further perspective into demystify the origin of COVID-19, as other scientific papers also suggested the novel coronavirus appeared in the United States in mid-December 2019 and in France in late December, before or around the time the virus was officially identified in China.
China reported cases of what people then called "pneumonia of unknown cause" on Dec 27. The World Health Organization said it received China's official report on the cluster of cases on Jan 3.
In the Italian case, researchers said the boy, who lived in the surrounding area of Milan and had no reported travel history, had cough and rhinitis on Nov 30 and was taken to the emergency department with respiratory symptoms and vomiting a week later.
"These findings, in agreement with other evidence of early COVID-19 spread in Europe, advance the beginning of the outbreak to late autumn 2019," the authors noted.
In France, for example, researchers found the virus in a retrospective analysis of a specimen from a patient who was hospitalized in France on Dec 27, 2019, which was weeks before the first cases were confirmed in France on Jan 24, 2020.
The Italian researchers pointed out, however, earlier strains also might have been occasionally imported to Italy and other countries in Europe during the late autumn period, but those importations could have been different from the strain that became widespread in Italy during the first months of 2020.
Italy was the first Western country severely hit by the COVID-19 epidemic, with the first known COVID-19 case reported in the town of Codogno in the Lombardy region on Feb 21.
However, some evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been circulating unnoticed for several weeks in Lombardy before the first official detection, according to the CDC journal article.
Italy logged 499 coronavirus-related deaths on Wednesday, adding the total to more than
61,7 00 since February, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain.
Researchers in the country have never stopped their quest for the exact timeline of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy.
Environmental surveillance has "unequivocally" demonstrated the presence of the virus, at concentrations comparable to those obtained from samples collected at later stages of the pandemic, in the untreated wastewater of the Milan area as early as mid-December 2019, according to the article.
Another research article, published by the National Cancer Institute's scientific magazine Tumori Journalon Nov 11, show that 11.6 percent of 959 healthy volunteers participating in a lung cancer screening trial in Italy between September 2019 and March 2020 had developed coronavirus antibodies.
Scientists with the US CDC also found evidence of the novel coronavirus infection in 106 of 7,389 blood donations collected from residents in nine states across the US as early as mid-December, according to their study published online in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseaseslast Monday.
---
By Willa Wu | China Daily Asia | Updated: 2020-11-30 08:59

Hong Kong's Central District is seen in this photo. [Photo/VCG]
Since the start of 2020, I tied my own feelings closely to the daily confirmed local COVID-19 cases: relieved when there is none, anxious when there is one, and frustrated if the number is more than one.
I think many in the city share the same feelings as me, especially those with business, loved ones and families across the boundary. The number of local cases is the most important indicator for doing away with the quarantine requirement.
Now with the Chinese mainland having managed to contain the pandemic, Hong Kong has cut the 14-day compulsory quarantine for its residents who come back to the city from Guangdong province. More mainland cities and provinces will be included to the city's quarantine-free points of origin, according to the Hong Kong government.
But the mainland has not yet let down its guard against imported cases from Hong Kong. On the same day, the Hong Kong government announced its decision to place a 14-day hotel quarantine requirement on those who arrive in the city from places other than the mainland; and three local cases were recorded. One day later, seven local cases were found.
The pandemic situation has gotten worse in Hong Kong in the past several days, with the majority of new infections being locally transmitted cases.
That means the 14-day quarantine requirement implemented by the mainland will remain in place. Moreover, different mainland cities have different quarantine policies toward travelers from Hong Kong. Even if a person has undergone quarantine in Shenzhen or Zhuhai, which is required immediately when crossing the boundary, they might still face another quarantine if they travel beyond those two cities.
A week ago, a friend of mine needed to go back to Shenyang in Liaoning province to visit his mother, who had just undergone major surgery. The local authority informed his family that he should undergo a seven-day home quarantine once he set foot in his home city. It will take him 35 days ‚Äî more than a month ‚Äî for just quarantine. He canceled his trip.
Even if Hong Kong adds more mainland cities to its quarantine-free list, Hong Kong people still need to face a quarantine of at least two weeks on the mainland. The inconvenience caused, needless to say, is unbearable, let alone the frustration.
Recently, an article went viral on WeChat, joking that if you want to spend the coming spring festival, which falls on Feb 12, on the mainland, you'd better leave Hong Kong now. But for an employed person, who will have such a long holiday?
Spring festival is a time the Chinese value the most. I don't dare to imagine how upset people will feel if the free flow of people does not resume at that time. And frustration is never a good thing for any city development.
Recalling the interviews I did earlier this year with cross-boundary families who suffered separation from their family members, one sentence struck me most: "At least the government should let us see hope." The Hong Kong government should act tougher in clearing local cases ‚Äî giving hope to its residents who desire a reunion.
It is pleasing to see the special administrative region government announce that allowing visitors to enter quarantine guest rooms is a criminal offense and offenders are subject to a maximum imprisonment of six months and a fine of HK$25,000 ($3,225). That is a good way to prevent the virus entering communities.
But the government should also take the tougher measure ‚Äî a comprehensive mandatory citywide virus test ‚Äî in a bid to clear the local cases. Successful experience on the mainland shows that such a measure is the most cost-effective way to put pandemic under control and bring life back to normal.
The previous voluntary citywide virus test implemented in September did help to detect some invisible transmission chains in the community. But let's face it. With only 1.78 million residents participating in the program, the effect was limited, as evidenced by the untraceable cases reported now.
The concerns raised for the September citywide test, like privacy leakage, were all found to be ungrounded. The 14-day testing program went smoothly and no complaints were filed. Most importantly, it has enhanced Hong Kong's testing capabilities and experience in organizing mass community events.
With the Christmas holiday and spring festival around the corner, it is high time for the SAR government to bring the citywide testing program back to the table. And this time, it should be mandatory ‚Äî everyone is required to take part.
Let people see hope.
The author is a Hong Kong-based journalist.
The views do not necessarily reflect those of China Daily.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/69/160670167091.jpeg
---
By Berlin Fang | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-03-22 10:38

A person holds a placard during a "Stop Asian Hate" rally, following the deadly shootings, in Atlanta, Georgia, US, on Mar 20, 2021. [Photo/Agencies]
"Stop Asian hate" movement has erupted into protests across the United States over this weekend in the wake of the Atlanta spa shootings.
Robert Aaron Long, a 21-year-old, went on a shooting rampage on March 16, claiming that he had "sex addiction" issues and wanted to "eliminate elements" of his temptation. He chose three Asian spas to carry out his dastardly plan, and six of his eight victims were Asian women.
The crime has passed the duck test for racism: If it looks like a duck, swims like a duck and quacks like a duck, it probably is a duck. It does not seem to be a random act of evil carried out indiscriminately.
Anti-Asian hate crimes are rising across the United States. The criminals often target the most vulnerable among the Asian community, including women and older people.
It is important to call a social phenomenon by its proper name. You cannot act on what you cannot name. If a crime is carried out targeting a specific racial or ethnic group, society should isolate the racist intent and call it as such.
However, in the case of Long, local authorities were hesitant to label it a racist crime, hate crime or domestic terrorism. According to the daily Beast (March 18), Georgia Sheriff Office spokesman Jay Baker said March 17 was a "really bad day" for the killer. Baker is reported to have uploaded with his tweets photographs of T-shirts with "COVID 19 Imported Virus from CHY-NA" on them. Baker asked his readers to "place your order while they last", ending the post with a smiley.
It is hard to not link the T-shirt with the racist dog whistle of former US president Donald Trump, who consistently called the novel coronavirus the "China Virus" even after reports of anti-Asian violence increase, while the scientific study on the source of virus origin is still going on. .
On both individual and collective levels, thoughts become words. Words become actions. And these actions may eventually define a nation. So will positive actions curb bad actions?
If we allow racist thoughts and words to spread, they will grow. All of a sudden, an Asian-looking man gets shot while shopping at Walmart, or pushed down on the sidewalk while waiting at a traffic light.
At the policy level, President Joe Biden has signed the Memorandum Condemning and Combating Racism, Xenophobia, and Intolerance Against Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the United States, which is a good start. But local organizations play an active role in curbing the rise of racist, including anti-Asian, sentiments. Such efforts should be part of the anti-racism campaign in the US.
In many cases, Asians are such a small minority that they do not get to sit at the table of racial conciliation talks, which are confined to Caucasian and African-American people. But anti-Asian violence has gained such a critical mass that it warrants greater attention and action.
On a larger scale, anti-Asian violence is part of the racism problem. An average non-Asian American may have difficulty in telling one Asian ethnic person from another. As a result, victims of anti-Asian crime include Asian and Pacific Islander Americans of Chinese, Thai, Korean, Vietnamese and many other ethnic groups.
So Asian Americans should unite and become actively involved in the larger anti-racism effort. In the US, racism is more about confrontations between Caucasian and African-American people, which are the two largest ethnic groups.
Personally, I find myself inept to talk about it. Sometimes, there is a little voice within me saying that this is not my fight. But it is. I thought that I wouldn't know which side to take in such confrontations. But the answer is simple: Take the side of equality when there is inequality, and stand with the oppressed when there is oppression.
Asian Americans should unite to oppose, and work together with other ethnic groups to oppose racist practices, even if they don't seem to affect them personally or directly. A more equal society benefits everyone, including the minority and majority groups.
I often think of Martin Luther King Jr., and his fight in advancing civil rights for all Americans. Had it not been for his efforts and struggles and those of many other civil rights leaders, we as Asians would still be grouped as people of color forbidden to gain equal access to employment, social services, and interracial marriage, among other things.
So I appeal to people no matter where they are to join the fight against racism, because you may be living somewhere as an outsider oblivious to the injustices around you until one day, your sweet grandma gets punched on the street because some cowards hate the guts of people like her.
The author is a columnist based in Texas. The views expressed are the author's own and may not represent views of China Daily.
---
By ZHONG NAN | China Daily | Updated: 2021-02-26 08:58

Customs officials check imported wines in Lishui, Zhejiang province. [Photo/Xinhua]
Customs officials say CRO framework signals tariff gains, higher productivity
The Cumulative Rules of Origin under the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership framework will substantially boost China's foreign trade and outbound direct investment activities in partner countries in the next stage, Customs officials said on Thursday.
The cumulative rules are applied when the production process of goods involves different member countries or regions under the same preferential trade agreement.
For instance, once the RCEP comes into effect, a Chinese firm that exports shoes to the Republic of Korea will be exempted from tariffs as long as raw material from China, the ROK, Indonesia and Thailand accounts for more than 40 percent of the final shoes.
Jiang Feng, director-general of the department of duty collection at the General Administration of Customs, said Chinese companies can actively apply these rules to improve their productivity.
"They can make full use of the resources of the same economic region for production," she said. "It will be easier for the goods to obtain the origin qualification of the contracting countries, and finally enjoy more preferential tax rates and trade treatment."
The official said competent government branches such as the GAC and the Ministry of Commerce have already accelerated domestic preparations for RCEP implementation. They will discuss specific implementation plans and other guidelines with counterparts from other member countries on March 8.
As many RCEP participants pledged that they will expedite the pact's implementation procedures to help companies from all sides share the benefits as soon as possible, the GAC said substantive progress has been achieved in the technical preparations for implementing the cumulation provisions of the rules of origin.
As much as 85 percent of the 701 binding obligations stipulated in the agreement had been enforced by the end of January.
After the RCEP was signed by the 15 participating countries in November, China sealed 19 free trade agreements with other countries and now has 26 free trade partners, she said. After the implementation of the RCEP, China's foreign trade volume with its FTA partners will increase from 27 percent to 35 percent, indicating that more than one-third of its foreign trade goods will be tariff-free.
The RCEP pact is expected to add $500 billion to global exports and increase the national income of participating countries by $186 billion by 2030, according to the Washington-based Peterson Institute for International Economics.
The RCEP deal is not only about cutting or exempting tariffs, but also specifies the cumulative provisions of rules of origin, said Di Jie, deputy director-general at the GAC's department of duty collection.
He therefore said fully understanding and implementing the cumulative rules of origin will help lower the threshold for enjoying-tariff concessions, promote intraregional trade and investment cooperation, as well as stabilize and reinforce regional industrial and supply chains.
Despite the COVID-19 pandemic effect on global trade in 2020, China became the biggest trading partner of the European Union, the United States and India, respectively, last year, according to information released by China's Ministry of Commerce and India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
China's recovery in the second quarter of last year created stable demand for global commodities and products, especially crude oil, iron ore, automobiles, industrial and consumer goods, said Wei Xiaoquan, a researcher specializing in regional economic development at the University of International Business and Economics in Beijing.
He said the extended lockdown in many parts of the world created a huge demand for shipping containers, electronics, entertainment and healthcare products, with many of them being manufactured in China.
Eager to consolidate its growth strength and support the recovery of the global economy, China will strengthen efforts on coordinating the development of trade industries this year, Commerce Minister Wang Wentao said during a news conference on Wednesday.
The minister said China will greenlight a new batch of foreign trade transformation and upgrade bases this year, and build several industrial parks for processing trade. The country will also establish a cluster of pilot demonstration zones to expand the scale of imports and stimulate the quality development of related industries, he said.
---
By Wang Zhan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-09-17 21:50

A child donning a face mask rides a bicycle in Hong Kong on Aug 10, 2020. [Photo/XINHUA]
HONG KONG - Hong Kong reported nine new COVID-19 infections on Thursday, including three cases of unknown origin, after two days of clearly identified sources of infection.
The three cases involved an unemployed man, 24, who lived in Tin Shui Wai, a 52-year-old woman who lived and worked in Mong Kok, and a 57-year-old woman who lived in Yau Tong and worked in Kwun Tong, according to the Center for Health Protection.
The new additions brought the city's overall infection tally to 4,993.
From Sept 10 to 16, the city confirmed a total of 83 coronavirus infections, 15 of which were untraceable, representing 18 percent of the total and a decline from 32 percent a week before.
Another three cases reported on Thursday were locally transmitted, involving family members of previously confirmed patients.
The remaining three cases were imported ‚Äì one from Iran and two from the United Kingdom.
As the outbreak waned, Hong Kong has started to cautiously and gradually relax social distancing measures. Starting Friday, more entertainment venues will reopen, including bars, karaoke lounges and amusement parks, and restrictions over restaurants will also be eased.
There are currently 173 COVID-19 patients in the hospitals, with 14 in critical condition.
The temporary community treatment facility set up at AsiaWorld-Expo will suspend its service from Friday after hospitalizing nearly 700 patients since Aug 1, the Hospital Authority said. Facilities inside the exhibition center will be kept in case of future outbreaks.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/42/160035885720.jpeg
---
By Wang Zhuoqiong | China Daily Global | Updated: 2020-05-20 09:49

Eoin O'Leary, Irish ambassador to China. [Photo provided to China Daily]
The Irish ambassador to China said the Irish dairy sector has taken measures to ensure safe production and consistent supplies of infant formula products to China, and he praised efforts by Beijing in restoring cargo transport across the country.
"I think China has been very successful in restoring cargo transport into China and across China. That has been absolutely essential for Irish suppliers because without the transport links, you can't get the product to the markets," Ambassador Eoin O'Leary told China Daily.
"For the rest of the world, China can play a role in relaunching the world economy," said O'Leary.
The impact at the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak was most visible on Ireland's transport of goods coming into China. Fortunately, within China itself, deliveries of infant formula by all Irish firms were not disrupted.
In the first three months of 2020, Ireland exported 10,950 metric tons of infant formula to China, which is higher compared to the 10,613 ton level over the same period in 2019.The ambassador attributed the increase to inventories piled up prior to the Chinese Lunar New Year.
Ireland provides 15 percent of the imported infant food and formula in China and is the production base for infant formula brands including Nutricia and Wyeth. Ireland exports 80 percent of all the food it produces.
The ambassador said despite the strict lockdown at this time in Ireland, the dairy sector and food sector, which are considered emergency sectors, are fully operational with a product ion model that is safe against the virus.
Those safe production methods are greatly helped by Ireland's extensive farming model on single-occupier farms that produce milk to the highest safety standards. In addition, these farms meet the conditions for the "Origin Green" sustainable products standard.
The supply of dairy products, particularly early life formula products to China, is secured, especially with the start of the full production season.
Conor O'Sullivan, China manager of Bord Bia (Irish Food Board), confirmed that strict biosecurity measures are in place in all Irish factories. Ireland's dairy farmers and milk processors are maintaining normal production while adhering to all health and safety guidelines stipulated by the Irish government.
For example, Paris-based food company Danone, which has early life nutrition products produced in Ireland, said their infant formula product supply in China has not been affected by the pandemic.
The company has business continuity plans for production sites around the world to ensure good stock levels. It has invested heavily in multiple transportation methods to ensure steady supplies. It also adopted additional safety measures to ensure total product safety, such as disinfecting all surfaces in factories between shifts.
The European Union Chamber of Commerce in China, which represents a number of major infant formula producers, said companies have taken exceptional measures to secure safe production and maintain consistent supplies.
This was echoed by the Netherlands' embassy in China, which reiterated that the production and export of infant formula products from the Netherlands has proceeded normally since Dutch authorities gave priority to facilitating the export of those products.
Compared with other countries suffering from a surplus of milk or dairy products, Ireland's dairy sector is less affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the ambassador said.
Ireland's milk production mostly goes into infant formula, cheese and butter, with a small percentage of milk going to food service sectors which have been hit hard during this challenging time, he said.
He added that in addition to the current trade protocols with China, Ireland has been exploring new provisions to expand exports.
Dublin is seeking agreement on enhancing beef protocols to add bony beef and chill beef while likewise working on exporting mutton and live pigs to China. Ireland began exporting beef to China in 2018.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/94/158994755106.jpeg
---
By Zhang Yu in Shijiazhuang | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-01-13 13:47

A medical worker collects a swab sample from a child at a community COVID-19 testing site in Yuhua district of Shijiazhuang, capital of North China's Hebei province, Jan 12, 2021. Shijiazhuang started the second round of nucleic acid tests for all residents on Tuesday. [Photo/Xinhua]
Contact tracing to find the origin of coronavirus infections in Hebei province is focusing on the period from early November to Dec 15, according to an expert from the Beijing Center for Disease Prevention and Control.
The earliest confirmed cases ‚Äî some seniors in Shijiazhuang's Gaocheng district ‚Äî had no contact with imported objects or people, indicating that they are not the first to be infected, or "patient zero", said Tian Lili, who is now in the city in Hebei province to conduct and epidemiological survey. He was quoted by Beijing Daily.
Hebei reported 90 new confirmed COVID-19 cases and 15 asymptomatic carriers on Wednesday morning, the highest daily rise of confirmed cases in the province since the cluster infection broke out on Jan 2.
The cases were all detected during a 24-hour period on Tuesday.
After the jump, Hebei has a total of 395 recently confirmed COVID-19 patients and 215 asymptomatic carriers under medical observation, the provincial health commission said. Among the confirmed cases, one person has acute symptoms, 12 have severe symptoms and the rest are displaying medium or mild symptoms.
The new cases in Shijiazhuang include several children, the youngest a 6-month-old.
Some had been to outside places, including the Hebei cities of Baoding, Cangzhou and Dingzhou, as well as to other provinces, including Shaanxi and Shandong. Some infections were found in more than one member of a family.
Most of the newly confirmed cases in Shijiazhuang were confined to villages in Gaocheng district, while several were from other counties or districts. Many of those infected had attended weddings or other gatherings.
The province has reported new confirmed cases for 11 consecutive days since the new outbreak was discovered.
Among those, 84 were found in Shijiazhuang, Hebei's capital, 27 of which involved people previously diagnosed as asymptomatic carriers. The other six were from Xingtai.
Of the new asymptomatic carriers, 14 were in Shijiazhuang and the rest were in Xingtai.
---
By Wang Zhan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-09-22 22:27

Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor holds a press conference at Central Government Offices on Sept 22, 2020. [PHOTO BY PARKER ZHENG / CHINA DAILY]
HONG KONG - Hong Kong will extend virus-related social distancing measures for another week amid persisting signs of hidden COVID-19 transmission, Chief Executive Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor said, as the city reported eight new infections on Tuesday.
Despite moderating numbers, "we still have unknown cases and it implies that there is silent transmission chain in our community," Lam said at a weekly briefing on Tuesday before a meeting of her advisory Executive Council.
Bars, pools and theme parks were allowed to reopen last Friday. Bars were allowed to remain open until midnight, and dine-in services at restaurants were extended by two hours, also until 12 am. The limit on public gatherings will be kept at four people.
The restrictions are now due to expire on Oct 1.
The general public and operators of leisure venues that have reopened should not lower their guard, especially when Hong Kong schools will resume face-to-face classes on Wednesday, Lam said.
From Sept 15 to 21, the city recorded 67 new COVID-19 infections, seven of which were of unknown origin, the CE said, citing health data. Of the fresh infections recorded in the past week, two thirds were imported.
Lam said health authorities will soon announce details of further extension of social distancing measures.
Lam gave the reminder as the Centre for Health Protection (CHP) reported eight new coronavirus cases, including five imported cases from India and three local cases linked to previous patients. This brought the city's tally of confirmed cases to 5,046.
The three local cases included a 30-year-old woman who lived in Tuen Mun, a 14-year-old girl in Wong Tai Sin and a 23-year-old woman in Hung Hom, the CHP said.
An employee (top) wearing a mask, face shield and gloves gives a customer (bottom) a massage at a bathhouse in Hong Kong on September 18, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Tuesday marked the second consecutive day that the city registered a single-digit increase after it saw a high of 23 infections, mostly imported, on Sunday.
According to Hong Kong's Hospital Authority, 179 patients are still being treated in hospitals, including 12 in critical condition. The number of deaths related to COVID-19 stood at 103.
Also on Tuesday, Hong Kong Disneyland said it will reopen starting Friday to a reduced number of visitors and with limited days and enhanced health measures, after a shutdown of two months due to the third wave of the epidemic in the city.
With inputs from Agencies
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/20/160079070116.jpeg
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/50/160079070237.jpeg
---
By Wang Zhan | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-09-22 15:58

Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor holds a press conference at Central Government Offices on Sept 22, 2020. [Photo by PARKER ZHENG/CHINA DAILY]
HONG KONG - Hong Kong's Chief Executive Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor reminded people Tuesday of the dangers of an invisible coronavirus transmission chain in the community, as the government decided to extend its social distancing rules for another week until Oct 1.
The general public and operators of leisure venues that have reopened should not lower their guard, especially when Hong Kong school will resume face-to-face classes on Wednesday, Lam told reporters before attending a weekly Executive Council meeting.
From Sept 15 to 21, the city recorded 67 new COVID-19 infections, seven of which were of unknown origin, the CE said citing health data. Of fresh infections recorded in the past week, two thirds were imported.
Lam said health authorities will soon announce details of further extension of social distancing measures, which includes a ban on public gathering of more than four people at a time.
https://syndigateimages.s3.amazonaws.com/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/76/160076907163.jpeg
---
By He Shusi and Zhao Ruinan in Hong Kong | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-10 08:53

A woman and her child wearing facemasks look out at Victoria Harbour from the Star Ferry in Hong Kong on Feb 22, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Medical experts in Hong Kong are suggesting changes to coronavirus containment measures to prevent imported cases, as they cautioned that the city faces mounting risks from overseas amid a global outbreak.
The remarks came after Hong Kong saw at least nine new cases in the past week with links to overseas travel. These patients or their close contacts visited countries including India, Japan, the United Kingdom, France, Mexico and the United States during their incubation periods.
The latest new case in Hong Kong was a 44-year-old male driver of a 56-year-old patient of Indian origin, who visited multiple countries before returning to Hong Kong and developing suspicious symptoms, health authorities said at a news briefing on Monday.
This has brought the city's total to 115 cases, including three deaths and 59 people discharged from hospitals.
Yuen Kwok-yung, a leading Hong Kong microbiologist and one of the Hong Kong's government advisers on epidemic control, noted that the current challenge for Hong Kong is to prevent imported cases from foreign countriesÔºçnot the Chinese mainland.
It's increasingly difficult to cut the global transmission chains, as the virus has been spreading across the world, Yuen said.
Even when Hong Kong enters the summer, countries in the Southern Hemisphere will enter winter at the same time and have another outbreak, with the possibility of it spreading elsewhere, he warned during a radio interview on Monday.
Yuen said he believes the outbreak will be brought under control only after vaccines or specialized drugs are available, or 70 percent of the population develops an antibody against the virus.
This could take years, he warned. During this time the disease might become endemic in Hong Kong, always present but under control, like the flu, he said.
He suggested that the government considers requesting arrivals from epidemic areas to provide a health certificate, or complete a 14-day quarantine before entering Hong Kong.
As of Monday, novel coronavirus infections had been reported in over 100 countries and regions around the world. The number of remaining patients overseas has surpassed those in China, and reached 25,000, while China has some 19,000 patients.
Keiji Fukuda, a former WHO official who is also a member of the Hong Kong government's expert team on the COVID-19 outbreak, told China Daily that he thinks Hong Kong has to adjust control strategies, both on border control and local prevention.
"Control strategies like social distancing, keeping yourself at home when you are sick or not going out, personal hygiene, these things will become more important," he stressed. "But we are also trying to develop vaccines."
Another member of the government's medical expert team, David Hui Shu-cheong, a professor of respiratory and infectious diseases, said the government should constantly review the situation of the epidemic overseas, especially in developing countries such as India, as six cases in Hong Kong are linked to that country.
Limited medical resources there can result in inaccurate statistics of actual infection numbers, Hui warned.
Kathy Zhang also contributed to this story.
Contact the writers at heshusi@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/69/158380573613.jpeg