


Letter, petition support Chinese medics in outbreak fight
China Daily
February 19, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 494 words
Byline: chinadaily.com.cn
Body




By Zhang Zhihao | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-02-19 19:42

Medical workers in Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University in Wuhan, Central China's Hubei province, on Jan 24, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Lancet, one of the world's top medical journals, published an open letter on Wednesday in support of scientists and public health and medical professionals in China fighting the novel coronavirus outbreak, and to condemn conspiracy theories surrounding the effort.
The letter was launched by 27 public health scientists from eight countries. A petition to spread awareness of the letter and its agenda began on Change.org on Wednesday and was close to reaching its goal of 500 signatories as of 6:30 pm the same day.
Chinese scientists and medical professionals have "worked diligently and effectively to rapidly identify the pathogen behind this outbreak, put in place significant measures to reduce its impact, and share their results transparently with the global health community," the letter reads. "This effort has been remarkable."
"The rapid, open, and transparent sharing of data on this outbreak is now being threatened by rumors and misinformation around its origins," it said. "We stand together to strongly condemn conspiracy theories suggesting that COVID-19 does not have a natural origin."
The letter said scientists from multiple countries have published and analyzed genomes of the novel coronavirus and they "overwhelmingly conclude that this coronavirus originated in wildlife".
"Conspiracy theories do nothing but create fear, rumors, and prejudice that jeopardize our global collaboration in the fight against this virus," the letter said. "We support the call from the Director-General of WHO to promote scientific evidence and unity over misinformation and conjecture. We want you, the science and health professionals of China, to know that we stand with you in your fight against this virus."
Rumors, misinformation and conspiracy theories have caused some Chinese scientists to receive threats of violence against their family and themselves, according to the petition statement.
The purpose of the letter and the petition is to let the "message of encouragement and solidarity" reach as wide an audience as possible at this critical moment of combating the viral outbreak, and quash any unfounded rumors.
Pauline Skarrott, a petition signatory, wrote in a comment that the letter sends support to all frontline staff working in China who are dealing with ill and frightened patients infected with the virus.
"This puts them at great personal risk. They have my respect and gratitude," the comment reads.
A comment by Miles Fahlman said, "I'm signing because of the loss of Chinese healthcare professionals; they are brave and committed in the name of public health. I stand in allegiance with them, long may they live, long may they fight on to a new horizon in China."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/25/158211500273.jpeg
 Load-Date: February 19, 2020

 

