



Vice-FM: Don't use probe to stigmatize China
China Daily
May 1, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 438 words
Byline: CHINA DAILY
Body




By ZHOU JIN | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-05-01 07:19

Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng [Photo/fmprc.gov.cn]
China opposes any arbitrary international inquiry into the COVID-19 pandemic that would presume its guilt and politicize its investigation to stigmatize China, Vice-Foreign Minister Le Yucheng said in a recent interview with a major television broadcaster in the United States.
Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said on Wednesday that the Australian government will continue to push for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus and China's early handling of the outbreak.
On the same day, the White House ordered US intelligence agencies to find out whether China or the World Health Organization hid information about the virus early on in the outbreak.
Le said in the National Broadcasting Corp interview on Tuesday that China is "candid" and "open" to international investigation, and it supports professional exchanges between scientists.
"What we oppose, however, is unfounded charges against China. One should not accuse China first and then run so-called international investigations just to make up the evidence," he said.
Instead, he said, the international investigation should have a solid basis.
"Why is this investigation only targeting China?" he asked. "Is there any evidence to show that China does have problems? Why isn't there any investigation of other countries?"
Le refuted claims holding China accountable or demanding it make reparations, saying such remarks are a "preposterous political farce".
These is no international law that supports blaming a country simply for being the first to report a disease, neither does history offer any such precedent, he said.
China has made sacrifices in curbing the virus and won precious time for the world's battle against it, Le said, adding that China deserves fair recognition, not groundless accusation.
The unreasonable and legally unfounded demand for Chinese reparations is no different from blackmail, he said, adding that the intention is to shift blame to China for the accusers' own inadequate response.
Noting China is a partner fighting the virus alongside the US, rather than an opponent, Le called upon the two countries to set aside differences and contradictions and cooperate to overcome difficulties.
"Whatever the differences or disagreements between China and the US, they pale when we consider the well-being of the Chinese and American peoples and their shared aspiration for a better future," he said.
zhoujin@chinadaily.com.cn 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/34/158829166176.jpeg
 Load-Date: May 1, 2020

 

