


Hong Kong sets daily record in virus cases
China Daily
July 20, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 465 words
Byline: China Daily
Body




By GU MENGYAN in Hong Kong | China Daily | Updated: 2020-07-20 07:47
People walk in the street at Tsim Sha Tsui in south China's Hong kong on July 17, 2020. [Photo/Xinhua]
Hong Kong reported its all-time daily high of 108 coronavirus cases on Sunday, as the government further toughened social distancing rules including reintroducing work-from-home arrangements for civil servants.
The city's infection tally has been pushed to 1,885, with 12 related fatalities.
Hong Kong Community Anti-Coronavirus Link, a civil alliance, called on the government to arrange mass virus tests for residents and resort to the central government's assistance in testing when necessary.
The latest infections, recorded from 4 pm Saturday to midnight, included a record-high of 83 locally transmitted cases, 48 of which were of unknown origin, said Chuang Shuk-kwan of the Centre of Health Protection.
Chuang said there were more than 60 additional confirmed and preliminary cases discovered on Sunday and that were not included in the most recent daily count.
The city has confirmed 627 COVID-19 infections since July 5 when the worsening third wave of local outbreak was first detected, with 494 local cases related to various clusters in multiple districts, including at restaurants, schools, hospitals and elderly care homes. The source of about half the local cases could not be traced.
Chuang said many recent patients were found to have attended different social gatherings, which added to the difficulties identifying the source of infections. She conceded that the city was currently unable to test every resident for the virus, and she urged residents to stay at home and avoid social activities in the following weeks.
The latest figures came shortly after Chief Executive Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor announced that civil servants will resume working from home starting Monday and the government will provide only emergency and essential services.
Meanwhile, mask-wearing will be mandatory in all indoor public venues. Previously only passengers on public transportation were required to do so. The ban on the operation of bars and 12 other types of leisure venues will be extended to July 28, and dine-in service at restaurants from 6 pm to 5 am will not be available before July 28.
Lam said if the outbreak continues to escalate, the government will likely impose more restrictions on social life, including barring residents from leaving their homes, as many other places have done.
She added that the government is converting Lei Yue Mun Holiday Village and AsiaWorld-Expo to accommodate coronavirus patients with mild symptoms. Another 2,000 quarantine units will be built near Hong Kong Disneyland for similar purposes.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/58/159521110076.jpeg
 Load-Date: July 20, 2020

 

