


Petition counters racist virus reaction
China Daily
March 2, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 775 words
Byline: CHINA DAILY
Body




By TAN XINYU in London | CHINA DAILY | Updated: 2020-03-02 07:24

Marchers in San Francisco, California, turn out on Saturday to oppose discrimination that links the novel coronavirus pneumonia with people of Chinese heritage. LIU GUANGUAN/CHINA NEWS SERVICE
Editor's note: In this new series, we share stories and experiences showing how expats are dealing with the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak.
As the novel coronavirus continued to spread around the world, discrimination against people of Chinese or Asian heritage has been emerging.
In early February, the Netherlands launched an online petition against racism and discrimination nationwide, which garnered more than 55,000 signatures in less than five days.
"The feedback has been overwhelming," said Marco Jacobs, a Dutch citizen involved in launching the petition. "Finally, people stood up. TV shows were dedicating a lot of time to the petition, and it was even talked about in the government. It makes me proud to see all these people work together to fight racism and discrimination against people of Chinese and Asian descent."
Jacobs lived in China for more than 11 years before returning to the Netherlands in 2014. He completed his bachelor's and master's degree studies at Beijing Language and Culture University. Now he is a Dutch language instructor and teaching director at the Sunway Language school, which provides Dutch language courses to Chinese people.
Over the past few weeks, Jacobs said he has seen people of Asian descent targeted in the Netherlands. He's seen people spitting in the face, yelling "Coronavirus!" at little children and kicking an elderly Asian man off his bicycle.
What triggered the petition was a song aired on Radio 10 that featured lyrics connecting the virus to people with a Chinese background and warning listeners to stay away from Chinese food.
"In the song they used a sentence that really upset me. They sang: 'Het is allemaal de schuld van die stinkende Chinezen', which means 'It's all the fault of those smelly Chinese'", he said, "I was utterly shocked. Who would think of something like this?"
Some of Jacobs' Chinese friends asked him for help with the translation, and in the process he explained the meaning of the words. He urged them to stand against it, as he believes the right to free speech is not a blank check to hurt people, to blame them or to instigate racial hatred.
Jacobs joined the petition campaign the same day, helping with translations, research and proofreading. The petition－titled "We are not viruses"－reads:
"How can it be that there are people like those at Radio 10 who dare to connect a serious virus with people of Chinese origin and those who eat Chinese food?"
"You don't joke about an illness, or a virus. Would you laugh if the song was about cancer?"
Apology sought
The petition also asks the media to take responsibility for proper reporting and demands that politicians stand against racism and discrimination. It also asks the radio station to sincerely apologize.
Jacobs said he is satisfied with the current results of the petition. It has more than 55,000 signatures and has put the problem of discrimination against people of Chinese and Asian descent high on the public agenda. The Public Prosecution office in the Netherlands has opened an investigation into the matter.
The petition also shows that the Chinese community in the Netherlands can stand up against discrimination, and makes clear to a lot of people within the Chinese community that they have to come out and be visible, Jacobs said, adding that openness is needed to build bridges between different groups in Dutch society.
He said he hopes advocates will be able to hand the petition over to members of the Dutch Parliament during the European Action Week Against Racism in March.
Jacobs said the reaction to the COVID-19 virus has revealed a deeply ingrained prejudice against China. At the beginning, he noted, it was called the China virus or Wuhan virus.
Using the word China in the name inflamed dormant racial hatreds in parts of society, he said, adding that such hatred has its roots in ignorance.
Jacobs also helped to write a book for Dutch children of Chinese descent to help them explain the virus to other children.
"Although we have faced some acts of racism and discrimination, I would like to emphasize that in this country there are also a lot of people who oppose this behavior, who welcome you, who want to be your friend," Jacobs said.
"To my friends in China, I would like to say, 'Stay strong!' The battle against COVID-19 will be won."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/158311451271.jpeg
 Load-Date: March 2, 2020

 

