


Leung: Tighter measures may be needed to contain the virus
China Daily
April 3, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 558 words
Byline: chinadaily.com.cn
Body




By Joseph Li | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2020-04-03 13:47

Leung Chi-chiu, a doctor specializing in respiratory science, talks about various issues on the COVID-19 outbreak during an interview with China Daily on Thursday. [PARKER ZHENG / CHINA DAILY]
Hong Kong may need to introduce more-stringent measures if the COVID-19 situation cannot be effectively controlled in the near future, said Leung Chi-chiu, a doctor specializing in respiratory science.
He believes infections from Hong Kong students and travelers returning from overseas before March 19 seem to have slowed because they have nearly completed their incubation periods. But now is the time to focus on local infection cases and prevent major outbreaks in the community.
Leung is currently the chairman of the Hong Kong Medical Association's Advisory Committee on Communicable Diseases. Prior to retirement from the government last year, he was a consultant doctor with the tuberculosis and chest services division of the Department of Health.
The confirmed cases reached 802 as of Thursday — rising by 37 from the day before. For the past week, the average number of daily cases was over 40, hitting 65 — the highest daily tally on March 27.
"The current virus situation in Hong Kong has come to a tipping point," Leung told China Daily in an exclusive interview.
"The number (of confirmed cases) is seesawing between 40 and 50 cases per day, and the origins of 10 or more cases cannot be detected. The longer the situation is deadlocked like this, the more difficult it will be to control the situation.
"We hope large clusters of local infection cases will not occur within the next three to seven days. If clusters of infection cases continue to emerge, with 10 or more cases a day having unknown origins, the government will need to tighten control of risky premises, such as banning dining-in services at restaurants and other establishments."
On Wednesday, the government announced it would ban entertainment venues such as mahjong parlors, karaoke lounges and nightclubs for 14 days in an urgent move to minimize social gatherings, after fitness centers, cinemas, and billiard and game centers were banned last week. However, beauty parlors and massage centers are spared.
High risk jobs
"I think this is a loophole (not to ban beauty parlors and massage centers," he added. Beauty and massage services are risky services, he said. This is because beauticians and masseurs have close body contact with the customers, and 90 percent of customers do not wear face masks. He noted the recent case of an infected beautician who had provided treatment to a customer with the coronavirus.
Leung added that stringent control measures cannot be enforced indefinitely. This is because people's patience will run out and there will also be a high price to pay economically.
He urged people with jobs that put them at risk to be particularly vigilant.
Healthcare workers, employees at homes for the elderly, and disciplined services officers should be particularly vigilant. These people should avoid large gatherings and going to other risky places. If they get sick, they will not only harm themselves but also family members, colleagues and friends, and further spread the virus into the community, Leung said.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/78/158589379820.jpeg
 Load-Date: April 3, 2020

 

