


China striding on despite malicious propaganda
China Daily
February 9, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 902 words
Byline: chinadaily.com.cn
Body




By Muhammad Zamir Assadi | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-02-09 14:18

Two young women take a photo while sitting in a lavender plantation at Huocheng county, based in the Ili Kazakh autonomous prefecture, Northwest China's Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region, on June 17, 2017. [Photo by Zou Hong/China Daily]
The recent fabricated allegations leveled against Beijing by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) regarding Xinjiang are emerging at a time when China has engaged in handling the biggest humanitarian operation in the global fight against COVID-19, by providing necessary medical equipment for containing the pandemic as well as vaccines.
The allegations by the BBC are not new, but rather part of the malicious propaganda campaigns carried out by other Western politicians and particularly encouraged by former US secretary of state Mike Pompeo.

The claims made by the BBC mean that they are clearly and intentionally a part of a deadly campaign aiming to divert the attention of the Chinese leadership and Communist Party of China (CPC) in the successful global execution of COVID-19 vaccine operations.
With its full strength and commitment, China is assisting the international community in containing a fatal virus, which is the manifestation of core Chinese moral values based on the Chinese dream.
By keeping in mind the history of the Chinese civilization, the humanitarian operation carried forward by China tells us that Socialism with Chinese characteristics is a driving force in securing the lives of millions without meeting vested interests.
The struggle of China since day one of the sudden outbreak of COVID-19 reads like an open book and the steps taken by the Chinese leadership reflected that every single life, whether Chinese or international, matters to Beijing.
In the initial days of the outbreak, when the international community was struggling to trace out the origin of virus and to secure the lives of citizens, China stepped up by formulating standard operating procedures for the prevention of COVID-19. China started sharing necessary medical equipment with countries in need who were facing the horrific challenge of containing the disease and also dispatched medical teams to sharing medical experiences with doctors in developing and developed countries.
The start of operations by China showed that the disastrous situation following COVID-19 brought us together and problems can lead humanity forward.
China is performing its job by enhancing its medical and professional support to other countries, as others are busy making false accusations about China.

We have observed in the past year that the diplomatic outreach of China is a positive force. The peaceful rise of the country has attracted the attention of many and it has been achieved by concerted efforts of helping others globally as per the guidelines of the Chinese president and CPC.
Whatever the allegations about China, it must be clear to everyone that the attention of China cannot be diverted and the scale of Chinese engagements around the globe will be enhanced effectively and smoothly.
It must be very clear that China has a history of development which was not a gift received overnight. China's sustainable development was the result of arduous efforts witnessed in history.
China faced disturbing elements in the course of history but the country responded with more progress, prosperity and unity and those elements have faded into the past. Now China is standing on its own feet, helping others through challenging times.
As per the statement from the Chinese foreign office published on Feb 8, China is providing vaccine aid to 53 developing countries including Pakistan.
The statement added that China has exported or is in the process of exporting vaccines to 22 countries.
The capacity and will of China has shown that the pandemic will be defeated unanimously by joining hands and not by a few Western politicians and institutions sowing doubts about China.
The continuous relief operation is a message that China is committed to its international responsibilities and all efforts will aim at establishing a community of global health.
These consistent and ceaseless operations show that all of the hurdles created by misleading entities will be overcome.
Chinese operations in vaccine provision have won worldwide applause as the international community is getting all their medical needs fulfilled by Beijing with care and love.
The warmth of the Chinese dream and the brotherhood attached with the relief operations have been widely acknowledged by recipients.
The confidence and trust of the international community in Chinese vaccines show that the Chinese medical system has passed the test of the times.
China's humanitarian relief operations stand as a strong rebuttal to the misleading elements and are a sublimation of the historical and traditional spirit of the Chinese dream.
Through the uninterrupted relief operations, it has become obvious that traditional Chinese ethics and morality are still striding on.
The author is a diplomatic correspondent with the Independent News Pakistan news agency.
The opinions expressed here are those of the writer and do not necessarily represent the views of China Daily and China Daily website.
If you have a specific expertise and would like to contribute to China Daily, please contact us at opinion@chinadaily.com.cn , and comment@chinadaily.com.cn 
 Load-Date: February 9, 2021

 

