


Fight against epidemic should be strategic
China Daily
March 5, 2020 Thursday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 819 words
Byline: China Daily
Body




By Dong Chuan | China Daily | Updated: 2020-03-05 07:23
The battle against the COVID-19 outbreak, which has affected almost every Chinese citizen's life, should forge forward strategically without sparing any efforts.
The Communist Party of China Central Committee with General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core has been leading the fight against the COVID-19 epidemic. It has been taking measures to control the epidemic, as well as maintain healthy economic development. So, from the highest authorities to the grassroots departments, all should strictly implement the CPC Central Committee's decisions, and society should unite under the strong leadership of the Party to win the fight against the epidemic.
The aim of the fight is to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus, safeguard people's health, promote scientific research to identify the origin of the disease and develop a vaccine, and help resume production to stabilize socioeconomic order. To make sure it wins the fight against the epidemic, China has mobilized officials, publicity departments and the military to control the virus.
Since economic adjustment measures play a vital role in preventing and controlling any epidemic, it is necessary to take steps to resume full production. Or else, social problems such as unemployment and loss of livelihoods will worsen, and the impact of the epidemic on different industries and industrial chains such as hospitality, catering, tourism and agriculture will increase.
Five departments including the Finance Ministry jointly issued a document in early February vowing to increase funding for enterprises that play a critical role in fighting disease outbreaks, such as pharmaceutical and medical supply companies.
For instance, to support the enterprises that are vital to epidemic prevention and control, the People's Bank of China, the country's central bank, has carried out hundreds of billions of yuan worth of reverse purchases to ease the liquidity strain and encourage prime-based loans totaling 300 billion yuan ($42.75 billion).
And the State Taxation Administration has implemented 18 measures to support the epidemic fight, including preferential tax policies to help enterprises resume production, improved on-site tax payment services to prevent disease transmission, and adjusted tax administration measures to reduce the pressure on enterprises. Accordingly, the local governments have also issued measures to help enterprises resume production.
Also, the international community's understanding and support will help us win the fight against the epidemic. Ever since the outbreak emerged in Wuhan, Hubei province, China has regularly shared information on the measures it has taken to contain the disease with the people in China and abroad, winning the praise of the international community, including the United Nations. And it has constantly maintained that the fight against the epidemic is part of its efforts to build a community with a shared future for mankind.
More important, with the COVID-19 spreading to more countries, including the Republic of Korea, Japan, Italy and Iran, international cooperation has become increasingly important to win the battle against the epidemic. As part of international cooperation, China has already donated 250,000 face masks to Iran.
Since it is important to scotch rumors in order to prevent social unrest and win the fight against disease outbreaks, more than 300 journalists are at the epicenter of the outbreak, Hubei province and its capital Wuhan, to report from the front line about the effectiveness of the measures China has taken to contain the disease.
China has also taken action against non-performing officials and law-breaching individuals to boost epidemic control measures. And the military has made great contributions to the fight against the epidemic, particularly with its medical assistance to the front line medical staff.
China should learn a lesson from the coronavirus outbreak, and intensify reform, especially in the medical and related fields, so as to better deal with such emergencies in the future. Especially, it needs to strengthen its emergency response system, strategic reserve and production, and urban governance. Also, it should more actively promote the modernization of the national governance system and governance capacity.
Moreover, the authorities should make greater efforts to heal the psychological trauma of people, especially those people in Hubei. Under the strong leadership of the Party, China will win the battle against the epidemic and realize national rejuvenation.
The author is a deputy director of international exchanges office at Beijing Language and Culture University, and PhD candidate at the Party School of the Central Committee of CPC. The views don't necessarily represent those of China Daily.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/16/158336661818.jpeg
 Load-Date: March 4, 2020

 

