


Coronavirus cuts deeper into Europe
China Daily
February 28, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 695 words
Byline: China Daily
Body




China Daily | Updated: 2020-02-28 09:40

Tourists wear protective masks in Saint Mark's Square in Venice as Italy battles a coronavirus outbreak, Venice, Italy, Feb 27, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
17 countries declare cases as continent braces for rise in number of infections
ROME－Europe continued to brace for an increase in confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus on Thursday as officials take measures to contain the spread of the virus in what countries now see as the early stage of a COVID-19 epidemic.
A growing number of people linked to Italy, which has more coronavirus cases outside Asia than anywhere else, fell ill across Europe, with 17 European countries reporting confirmed cases of infection as of early on Thursday.
By press time, two more people had died in the country from coronavirus, bringing the death toll from the worst outbreak of the disease yet seen in Europe to 14, the Civil Protection agency said on Thursday. The number of confirmed cases has risen to 528 from 420 announced on Wednesday.
Denmark and Estonia reported their first confirmed cases on Thursday, while Romania, North Macedonia, Norway and Greece did likewise on Wednesday. One day earlier, Switzerland, Austria and Croatia also reported their first cases. The number in Switzerland rose to four on Thursday. Other countries that had previously reported cases, including Italy and Germany, have also seen confirmed new infections.
Denmark has confirmed its first coronavirus infection in a man who returned from a skiing holiday in northern Italy, the Danish health authority said on Thursday. The man was put in isolation in his own home.
And Estonia has confirmed its first case of the virus in a man who returned from Iran, Russian news agencies TASS and Interfax reported on Thursday, citing Estonian Minister of Social Affairs Tanel Kiik, who added that the person is a permanent resident of Estonia but not a citizen.
Romanian Health Minister Victor Costache confirmed late on Wednesday that a 20-year-old Romanian had tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
North Macedonia confirmed its first case of infection, diagnosed in a woman who recently arrived from Italy, Health Minister Venko Filipce said on Wednesday.
Italy calls for support
Meanwhile, Italy sought to rally international support for its virus containment efforts on Wednesday. At the start of a crisis meeting with the World Health Organization and European Union representatives in Rome, Italian Health Minister Roberto Speranza said:"Viruses don't know borders and they don't stop at them."
Germany and France also reported two cases apiece in people with no known ties to Italy, travel to China or contact with an infected person, raising concern about additional clusters of unknown origin possibly forming in Europe.
"We are at the beginning of a coronavirus epidemic in Germany," German Health Minister Jens Spahn said, adding that he had asked state health officials to review their emergency plans for pandemics.
European Union Health Commissioner Stella Kyriakides said on Wednesday in Rome that EU countries should coordinate their responses to the outbreak of the coronavirus to avoid divergent approaches. Kyriakides said countries should not give in to panic and that the EU would provide information for travelers on the virus.
"All member states need to inform us of their preparedness plans," she said. "Divergent approaches across the EU should be avoided," Kyriakides said, adding the EU executive was ready to coordinate responses.
The German Health Ministry said on Wednesday that the country was "at the beginning of an epidemic" as authorities in the west tested dozens of people who had contact with an infected couple.
British Health Secretary Matt Hancock also said on Wednesday that the government expects more cases to arise and it has a clear four-part plan to respond to the outbreak: contain, delay, research and mitigate.
As of Wednesday morning, 7,132 people in the country had been tested for the virus, Hancock said in a statement. By Thursday morning, 15 people had been confirmed with the virus.
Xinhua
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/66/158286251911.jpeg
 Load-Date: February 28, 2020

 

