


Personal trials set aside in devotion to country
China Daily
June 15, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 China Daily Information. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 627 words
Byline: China Daily
Body




By PRIME SARMIENTO in Hong Kong | China Daily | Updated: 2020-06-15 10:17

Health workers look at x-rays of a patient at Emergency Department in the Kuala Lumpur Hospital, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia May 23, 2020. [Photo/Agencies]
Editor's note: This news column showcases stories from around the world that bring a touch of positivity to the fight against the deadly coronavirus.
Aashreena Inderjit, 35, who says she always wanted to be a doctor, is aware of the sacrifices and hard work that come with her work in the state of Kelantan in northeastern Malaysia. Ten years after graduating from medical school she is taking care of pregnant women amid a global pandemic.
"I never fully understood the impact of my work on my society until this pandemic occurred," Inderjit said.
Inderjit is a registrar in the labor section of Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia, one of the country's most prestigious teaching hospitals. She is now doing graduate work in obstetrics and gynecology, and is thus assigned to the hospital's obstetrics and gynecology ward. Her daily tasks include general administration, helping deliver babies and caring for mothers and babies until they are fit enough to leave the hospital.
However, the outbreak has disrupted those routine tasks. By the middle of March, Malaysia had more than 400 COVID-19 patients, the highest in Southeast Asia at the time. This prompted Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin to impose restrictions on movement on March 18. The country was locked down, with mass gatherings prohibited, classes canceled and government and private-sector offices closed. Malaysia closed its borders, and even interstate travel was banned.
"All of us (hospital staff) experienced an upheaval, especially on a personal level, because we knew we would not be able to see our families until God-knows-when," Inderjit said, talking of how she felt on learning of the lockdown.
"It's tough on us mentally (being away from spouses and families) as a majority of us have left (our homes) and are here serving the university while we do our postgraduate studies."
Nevertheless, Inderjit chose to focus on the important task at hand: attending to the needs of expectant mothers, most of whom had voiced concerns about the virus.
With little data available during the first few weeks of the outbreak, "many of our patients were worried and anxious", she said.
Zero infection
Mothers who had flu-like symptoms were immediately given treatment and tested. Thankfully, none of the hospital's patients tested positive for the virus.
"We mainly deal with pregnant women, and Kelantan being the state of origin for most of the (ethnic) Malay women, many of them flock back to their state of origin to deliver (their babies). So, there were days when we were truly busy."
Inderjit said the hospital has a standby team assigned to expectant mothers who came from red-zone areas, that is districts with active coronavirus cases. This team is composed of obstetrics and gynecology personnel garbed in protective clothing.
Kelantan is one of the Malaysian states with relatively low rates of infection. Nevertheless, hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia is not taking any chances and continues to implement stringent measures against the coronavirus.
During this time, Inderjit manages any stress or anxiety through meditation and reciting personal affirmations. She also keeps a journal, writing down all the things she is grateful for. One of those things, always, is being part of the medical profession.
"This truly is a selfless and noble profession. We set aside our personal trials and tribulations to serve our country and the people."
https://s3.amazonaws.com/syndigateimages/syndigate/imgs/498/1493/5/159219395829.jpeg
 Load-Date: June 15, 2020

 

