Mumbai, March 18 -- Maharashtra reported its first death from the new coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Tuesday as 40 other confirmed cases indicated an alarming surge in infections in the state, which considered tightening the shutdown of travel and workplaces on a day several trains were cancelled in the region to step up containment efforts.

All passengers landing at the Pune airport from foreign destinations will be put in hospital quarantine for 24 hours irrespective of whether they have any symptoms, a senior official said. The city has reported seven cases of the disease, while the neighbouring Pimpri-Chinchwad has reported 10.

A 64-year-old man who recently tested positive for the coronavirus infection died in Mumbai, an announcement that came shortly before chief minister Uddhav Thackeray said the state government may have to take the harsh decision of shutting public transport in the country's financial hub if people don't avoid non-essential travel.

Thackeray clarified that, for now, local trains will remain operational and government offices will continue to function.

About eight million people take Mumbai's suburban trains every day and the admission that the government may be forced to shut down the service indicated the deepening public health crisis in the state over fears of the infection taking hold and spreading to other states.

Experts warned that if the state doesn't move fast to stop the local infections from turning into community infections, when it is not possible to trace the origin of the spread, the region may have to be put under a stringent lockdown to guard against wide transmissions.

Of the 137 cases of Covid-19 confirmed in the country by the Union health ministry, 41 have been reported in Maharashtra, the largest number for a single state. While one person tested positive in Mumbai on Tuesday, another in Pune was confirmed to be infected.

Of the 40 cases other than the death in the state, the highest number (10) is from the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation near Pune, which is home to several information technology professionals frequently visiting the US and European countries for work. TheBrihanmumbai Municipal Corporationand Pune Municipal Corporations have reported seven patients each, while four patients are being treated in Nagpur.

Navi Mumbai, Yavatmal and Kalyan Dombivali Municipal corporations have reported three patients each while one patient each is being treated at Thane, Raigad, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad. There are 105 suspected patients hospitalised in variousMaharashtra cities.

At a news briefing on Tuesday afternoon, Thackeray said 39 patients were stable and one was critical. He said the government was working on a proposal to let government offices function with only 50% strength.

The 64-year-old man from Mumbai who died on Tuesday morning became the third Covid-19 fatality in the country. He had recently travelled to Dubai.

A 49-year-old man in Mumbai who returned from the US on March 7 and a 26-year-old man in Pune who returned from the US on March 14 tested positive on Tuesday.

There are 502 beds ready in isolation wards across the state, an official statement said, adding that mandatory 14- day follow-up of 442 people out of 1,169 who returned from abroad was complete.

Officials said Indian Railways cancelled 76 trains as precaution against the spread of coronavirus and due to low occupancy. The list includes some popular long-haul trains, including the Hazrat Nizamuddin Rajdhani Express from Mumbai to Delhi and the Mumbai-to-Howrah Duranto Express, among others. Fifty-three trips of 10 trains stood cancelled by the Western Railways, 29 by South Central Railways, nine by South Eastern Railways and four by Northern Railways.

"Various preventive measures have been taken by Western Railways to counter the spread of this infection in railway premises. We have cancelled these trains due to low occupancy as a crowd management measure to contain the spread of the disease as many had cancelled due to coronavirus," a Western Railways official said on condition of anonymity.

As a precautionary measure railway zones like Western Railways and Central Railways have also increased the prices of their platform tickets to discourage large crowds. "All staff of catering units should be directed to maintain personal hygiene as per the food safety norms/standards of FSSAI," the guidelines stated. FSSAI is short for the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com