India, Feb. 15 -- Shilpa Shetty and her husband, Raj Kundra, welcomed their baby girl Samisha on February 15, 2020, via surrogacy. The little one came as a blessing into their lives; they had been trying to have a second child for five years. They are also parents to a seven-year-old son, Viaan.

In an Instagram post, Shilpa had shared the happy news. "Our prayers have been answered with a miracle. With gratitude in our hearts we are thrilled to announce the arrival of our little Angel. Samisha Shetty Kundra. Born on 15th February 2020 Junior SSK in the house," she wrote.

The post also revealed the beautiful origin of the baby girl's name. "'Sa' in Sanskrit is 'to have', and 'Misha' in Russian stands for 'someone like God'. You personify this name - our Goddess Laxmi, and complete our family," the actor wrote.

Also see: Zack Snyder's Justice League trailer teases intense faceoff between Batman and Joker. Watch

As Samisha turns one, here is a look at some of her adorable pictures and videos:

Not long after Samisha's birth, the country went into a lockdown on account of the Covid-19 pandemic. However, Shilpa made the most of this time, attending to her children.

"My role as a mother takes precedence over everything. I wanted time to myself because I was like, 'I have a new baby, how will I manage?' God has his special ways of working things around for you. This break, unfortunately, came at a time which isn't a happy situation for people suffering from it. For me, it was a much-needed break for my two kids," she told Hindustan Times in an earlier interview.

On the work front, Shilpa will be seen next in Sabbir Khan's Nikamma, which marks her comeback to acting after more than a decade. She also has Priyadarshan's comedy, Hungama 2, ready for release.

When Samisha turned six months old, Shilpa had reflected on how fast she was growing up. "One moment they are so tiny, your arms seem too big for them... you blink and they've outgrown it! As our little angel Samisha turns 6 months old today, she's started turning onto her tummy... signs of being 'independent' already. Soon, she'll be sitting up, crawling, and then... my workouts will mainly comprise of running behind her. We'll cross that bridge when we get to it, but for now, I'm loving this time with her. Watching her grow, crossing new milestones every day is a complete blessing and I'm not complaining one bit. Happy 1/2 birthday, our Angel," the actor wrote.

Shilpa is all set to return to the big screen after a hiatus of 13 years. She will be seen in Sabbir Khan's Nikamma alongside Abhimanyu Dassani and Shirley Setia. She also has Priyadarshan's comedy Hungama 2 in the pipeline.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com