India, May 6 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

With lone patient testing negative, Mizoram claims 'Covid-19 free' status

Mizoram has announced that it is free of coronavirus disease (Covid-19), as the north-eastern state's lone patient has recovered. The patient, a 50-year-old pastor who had visited the Netherlands, tested Covid-19 positive on March 24. Read more

Survey reveals over 50% urban Indians maintain social distancing even at home, sleep and eat separately

As the number of coronavirus cases in India near the 50,000 mark, a survey has found that nearly 90% of Indians have taken the coronavirus pandemic seriously and have strictly adhered to the social distancing norms. Read more

Chargesheet filed against foreign jamaatis, AU prof

Shahganj police have filed the chargesheet against 18 persons including seven foreign 'jamaatis' and a professor of Allahabad University (AU), who was also named in the FIR lodged against them under Epidemic Act and other relevant sections of IPC. Read more

24 cases in two days: Veggies come at a premium as Meerut mandi closed for 3 days

Two dozen Covid 19 cases inside the vegetable mandi in the past two days have thrown a scare among traders as well as buyers. Read more

Singapore court jails Indian-origin man for abusing police

An Indian-origin man in Singapore was on Wednesday sentenced to seven months in prison for verbally abusing police and safe-distancing enforcement officers who were urging compliance with the Covid-19 measures. Read more

Arogya Setu app on privacy issue: Read full statement here

India's Covid-19 contact tracing app Aarogya Setu released a statement today responding to the claims of French hacker Robert Baptiste of a privacy issue in the app. Read more

Twilight fans, rejoice! Edward Cullen's perspective is going to be out soon in Midnight Sun

Stephenie Meyer's long-awaited prequel to her hugely successful human-vampire love story series, Twilight is releasing on August 4, the author announced on her website (www.stepheniemeyer.com). Read more

Brighten up your day with this goofy pup trying to protect its home

When one reads the sign 'Beware of the dog' they generally picturise a stern looking Doberman or a German shepherd guarding the gates. In this case, a rather silly looking guard is there to greet you at the gate of this house. Read more

Watch- Covid-19: States eye liquor revenue | What you need to know

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com