New Delhi, July 31 -- AustraliaonThursday backed India's position on the border standoff with China, saying it opposes attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo along theLineofActualControl(LAC) as that could increase the risk of instability.

Australian high commissionerBarryO'Farrellconveyed hiscountry'spositiontoexternal affairs minister S Jaishankar during a meeting where the two sides discussed developments across the Indo-Pacific region amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Australian side urges restraintalongtheLACandsupports continued moves towards de-escalation, said a statement from the Australian high commission.

"As I told the external affairs minister of India today, Australia opposes any attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo, which only serves to increase tension and the risk of instability," O'Farrell was quoted as saying.

"It is important that the bilaterally- agreed principles and norms that have helped prevent escalation or miscalculation in the border areas over many decades continue to be observed." India has repeatedly said in recentweeksthatitisopposedto any unilateral efforts to change the status quo along the LAC, alongwhichtensofthousandsof Indian and Chinese troops continue to be deployed.

There has been growing convergencebetweenIndiaandAustralia on security issues and the role of China in the Indo-Pacific in recent months. The two sides elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed an agreement for reciprocal access to military logisticsduringavirtualsummit last month.

Australia, which is set to be invitedtojointheMalabarnaval exercise conducted by India, Japan and the US, has also backedIndia'scallsforreformof international bodies such as the WHOandsoughtaprobeintothe origins of the pandemic.

DuringameetingoftheUSand Australian defence and foreign ministers in Washington on Tuesday,thetwocountriesenvisaged a key role for India in defence cooperation and post- Covid-19 recovery efforts in the Indo-Pacific.

The Australian mission's statementfurthersaidthat"Australia remains vigilant about strategic trends inimical to our vision of the region" even as it focuses on health and economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis.

Australia envisages an Indo- Pacificthatisanopen,free,rulesbased region that is "resilient to coercion" and supported by inclusive institutions, the statement said. "Territorial disputes and competing claims should be resolvedpeacefullybytheclaimant countries, and in ways consistentwithinternationallaw," it added.

Australia also continues to be deeply concerned by China's actions in the South China Sea thatare"destabilisingandcould provoke escalation", the statement said. On July 23, Australia lodged a note with the UN Secretary General refuting China's "unlawfulmaritimeclaimsinthe South China Sea".

Rory Medcalf, head of the National Security College at the AustralianNationalUniversity, recently said the Indo-Pacific "serves as a canvas for framing policy responses to Chinese power", including a web of securitycooperation based on the US alliance system, and "emerging middle power coalitions, involving Japan, India, Australia and occasionally others such as Southeast Asian or even European states".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com