New Delhi, March 18 -- The government's decision to open the gates for private facilities to test for the coronavirus infection has the potential to urgently scale up the country's testing capacity that experts say is necessary to effectively fight the deadly disease that has claimed 7,500 lives worldwide.

But experts warn that if diagnosis criteria is not relaxed and more people tested, the benefits of allowing private labs might be nullified and India will be left fighting an uphill battle against the highly contagious infection.

Currently, the Indian authorities limit testing only to government facilities, for people with a history of travel abroad, those who have come in close contact with someone testing positive for the virus, as well as health workers. Only those showing symptoms are tested.

But the strict eligibility criteria and limited number of testing centres - 72 in a country with a population of 1.3 billion people - has ensured that many people are finding it difficult to get tested.

Moreover, the need to rope in more labs and private players is made clear by the problems plaguing government testing and sample collection centres, where experts admit there exists a clear infection risk because of long hours of wait and overcrowding.

India currently tests the lowest number of people per capita among major countries grappling with the coronavirus outbreak: a mere 8.6 tests per million, compared with 4,831 per million in south Korea, 2,820 in China and 533 in the United Kingdom, which has been criticised for not testing enough and reversed its "herd immunity" policy after grim projections.

"We do need to do more testing. I have made that clear. You don't know what you are dealing with until you test. What is the harm in testing?" asked Dr Gagandeep Kang, director of Translational Health Science and Technology Institute.

Even in the national capital, patients have complained of many problems. Overcrowded hospitals have turned away travellers from affected countries on the basis that they didn't show symptoms, even though research has shown that symptoms may take up to 14 days to appear.

"I was impressed by the response of the Indian government, till I reached the sample collection centre. I have been standing here for over two hours and now I just feel like running away," said a 27-year-old Australian national, who was standing outside the sample collection centre at Dr Ram Manohar Lohia hospital. She had travelled to Delhi for work.

On Tuesday morning, the Australian woman called the government helpline number and informed them she was fatigued and had a sore throat. "They came to my hotel and picked me up in an ambulance. All the health care workers were in complete protective gear. It was scary but it was also good. Then, they just dropped me here with my bags and asked me to wait," she said.

For almost an hour, she couldn't figure out what to do because none of the hospital staff posted outside the sample collection centre spoke English. "They took me inside the hospital to find someone who could explain what I needed to do," she said.

If she had the infection, she may have infected people inside the hospital.

And it is not just her. In the corridor outside the two rooms collecting the samples at the collection centre, close to 70 people sat next to each other waiting for up to two hours. Open on all sides, several people passed by this "restricted area" all day round. There was no check on who entered the corridor.

RML hospital collects nearly 70 samples for Covid-19 every day. But the corridor outside has hundreds of people waiting. Many were likely to be turned away after hours of waiting, and potentially exposing themselves to the coronavirus infection.

"The person I brought to the hospital today has been given the token number of 318, I think," said the ambulance driver stationed outside the centre. It will be hours before she gets her turn.

Safdarjung hospital collects samples only for suspected patients admitted to its isolation ward. Sample collection facilities will soon start at 14 Delhi government and corporation hospitals.

"Who has the time to wait for three hours? We have a flight tonight and we just wanted to get tested to get a certificate declaring that we are virus-free. And, we were told to come to this centre but if we sit around here we are more likely to get the virus," said Ravi Shingari, an Australian citizen of Indian origin. He and his wife travelled to London before coming to India.

Some wait it out, only to be refused at the door. "In the last two hours, I have seen around 10 people being refused the test after they reach to the front of the line. They must have been waiting for a couple of hours. And, what if one of these people actually has the disease? That's why I am waiting my turn here a little farther away," said one of the persons waiting near the sample collection centre.

Getting information on testing is difficult on the helplines: only one of the 30 calls made by the HT reporter to the toll-free number connected.The government helpline advises people with cough and fever but no travel history to maintain personal hygiene and get in touch with district surveillance officers or a local physician.

Experts say cramped government facilities pose a clear danger.

"This is an infection risk. We are advocating social distancing and here are people who need to get tested for the disease sitting close to each other. The government has to make arrangements for a large waiting area.. or start more sample collection centres because clearly there is a need," said Dr MC Mishra, former director of the All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.

People who didn't need the tests should not show up, he added. "Someone needs to be stationed outside the centres to ask people who do not need testing to leave rather than them waiting for hours before leaving," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com