Washington, July 19 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculationamongofficialsofthe Trump administration that the Covid-19 outbreak might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan.

Officials of the US embassy in China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the Wuhan facility, had raised concerns in the state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained techniciansandinvestigatorsneededto safelyoperatethis high-containment laboratory".

Though the lab in Wuhan couldstudySARS-likecoronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strainsthatcouldinfecthumans, officialswroteinthecable,whose release was secured by The Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

The cable, however, did not prove if the new coronavirus indeed came from the Wuhan facility."Idon'tseeanyevidence to support the idea that this was releaseddeliberatelyorinadvertently," IanLipkin,thedirectorof ColumbiaUniversity'sCenterfor InfectionandImmunity,toldThe Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable. "You can't just say someoneisguiltyofaccidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it." In recent days, the Trump administrationhasn'tpushedthe Wuhan lab origin theory much, but it has continued to blame Chinaforthepandemic.BothUS PresidentDonaldTrumpandsecretaryofstateMikePompeohave called the pathogen "Chinese virus" and "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new casesreportedinthelast24hours and 843 new deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit. ICUs are runningtofullcapacityinsomeof the worst affected counties, and, inarepeatofthegrimsituationin NewYorksomeweeksago,refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Americans debated mask mandates and the reopening of schoolsasthecountry'stopinfectious disease expert Anthony Fauci and Trump yet again sparred,thistimeovertheneedto use masks.

While Fauci urged political leadersto"beasforcefulaspossible in getting your citizenry to wear masks", Trump said he didn'tbelieveinissuinganationwide mask mandate.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com