Washington, April 22 -- US President Donald Trump said that he will sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States" because of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic, suggesting it would prevent the contagion from spreading from overseas travellers while saving American jobs.

The US President, however, offered no details about which immigration programmes might be affected by the order; new immigrants are mostly those applying for Green Cards on professional and family visas, refugees and asylum seekers.

"In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" Trump tweeted late on Monday night, in a move that was widely criticised by Democrats as an opportunity to further his "anti-immigration" stand.

The President's announcement was made after figures released by the administration earlier this month showed that at least 22 million jobs have been lost in the country since sweeping lockdowns were implemented to slow the spread of the virus.

His administration has also sought to reopen parts of the US from the crippling lockdowns, which have prompted protests - encouraged by the President himself -- against the stay-at-home orders even as the virus has infected 803,018 and killed 43,558 in the country worst-hit by the pandemic.

The move drew sharp criticism from Democrats, with Indian-origin Senator Kamala Harris accusing the President of taking advantage of the situation to push his immigration policies. "Trump failed to take this crisis seriously from day 1. His abandonment of his role as president has cost lives. And now, he's shamelessly politicising this pandemic to double down on his anti-immigrant agenda," Harris tweeted.

More than 1 million new immigrants are admitted to the United States every year and in 2017, Indians accounted for the most immigrants (126,000) that year, according to a Pew study.

It is also not clear if immigration applications already in the system will be frozen due to the suspension, and if that could happen to Green Card applications as well. While Trump has previously spoken about introducing a merit-based H1-B visa, the programme -- popularly utilised by Indian IT professionals in the US -- is a non-immigrant visa.

On Tuesday, national security adviser Robert O'Brien cast the President's announcement as a move to protect the American people's health, saying the temporary move won't be "dissimilar" to restrictions announced in January on the entry of travellers from China, the ground zero of the pandemic.

Asked about Trump's reference to jobs, O'Brien said, "There's been an economic cost here, too."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com