London, June 29 -- The town of Leicester in the east Midlands, known as 'Little India' due to its large Indian-origin population, is facing the first local lockdown due to growing Covid-19 cases, even as public places elsewhere in England are due to reopen on July 4.

Health secretary Matt Hancock said there was an outbreak in Leicester, but local mayor Peter Soulsby on Sunday said data was yet to be shared before deciding on the local lockdown.

There was concern over messaging by the Boris Johnson government that continues to caution people about Covid-19, but has also announced reopening of several sectors of the economy.

Home secretary Priti Patel confirmed reports that Leicester could be placed under a lockdown. Claudia Webbe, Labour MP from Leicester East, called for the lockdown due to a "perfect storm" of poverty, positive tests and higher ethnic diversity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, June 11 -- The wildlife division of the Union environment ministry has issued rules for dealing with the import of exotic species and will assess the existing scale of possession within the country.

The Centre intends to streamline the process by officially identifying those handling such species or involved in their legal trade, as per mandates of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), which India is a signatory to.

Exotic live species are both plants and animals that are moved from their source (original) habitat to a new one due to human intervention.

The decision comes in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, its suggested linkage with wet markets in China, and the zoonotic factor, said Soumitra Dasgupta, inspector general of forests (wildlife), Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC). She added that the advisory, a copy of which HT has, is yet to be officially released to the public.

"There are many reasons for creating these guidelines but the Covid-19 pandemic is the primary one. So far there was no mechanism to regulate this, with the chief wildlife wardens (from different states) not in the loop. Things were haphazard," said Dasgupta. "We are now trying to develop a mechanism wherein genuine importers do not suffer and all levels of the government machinery are aware of the exotic species present in their jurisdiction. This will also allow us an overall control over the possible zoonotic disease transmissions," said Dasgupta.

The advisory highlights a period of six months (from the date of the official order) to be given for voluntary disclosure for persons in possession of exotic live species in India. The disclosure needs to be made before the chief wildlife warden of each state.

"Forest officials will physically verify the submissions, check whether the facilities where the species are being housed are safe, and issue online certificates to owners within another six months from the date of disclosure," said another senior MoEFCC official. "State chief wildlife wardens have been given the power to take action as they see fit for any violations."

For import of live exotic species, a license needs to be obtained from the Director-General of Foreign Trade along with a no-objection certificate from the chief wildlife warden of the respective state.

"Those intending to import have to obtain a health certificate from the national health agency of the country of origin from where the species is being brought, indicating that they are free from any diseases, and also carry health cards for each exotic species being imported," the official said, adding that concerned authorities need to take note of submissions, ensure the safety of species, and avoid contact or breeding with any indigenous species.

Prescribed formats for all processes will be provided in the Centre's final order, and details will be made public on the ministry's online portal - Parivesh.

Experts said this is a welcome step towards curbing illegal exotic wildlife trade in India. "These regulations will act as deterrents for both, buyers and sellers. We hope more measures follow which further help strengthen these regulations," said Jose Louies, deputy director and chief of the wildlife crime control division at Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).

Dr Neil D'Cruze, head (wildlife research), UK-based group World Animal Protection, said, "Covid-19 is understandably bringing the import of wild animals for commercial purposes under increasing scrutiny. Any steps to improve information on exotic species imported into India should be welcomed. However, there will always be some degree of risk, both, to animal welfare and public health, when non-native species are imported."

Others said the regulations were needed long ago. "Some non-license holders may have been misusing this trade channel for a long time. It is long overdue that we needed to be aware of the source of exotic species being brought to cities without any safeguards, that may have a potential health threat," said Ravi Singh, secretary-general and chief executive officer, WWF-India.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 17 -- As tens of thousands of migrant workers continue to walk back home, the Centre on Saturday created an online repository to monitor and facilitate their movement in coordination with the state governments.

This database, the Centre said, will also help in contact tracing of migrant workers and keeping in touch with them so as to ensure theat the benefits they are eligible for reach them, and to plan their reverse journeys. Through the database, the states will also be able to plan more effectively as they will have the exact number and details of migrants before they arrive, the ministry of home affairs said.

The database is currently on the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) portal accessible to government agencies and states. It is likely to be available for access to states/ministries from Sunday, said an official.

The lockdown imposed from March 25 to fight the spread of the Coronavirus disease stranded many migrant workers in cities where they were working; many lost their jobs on account of the lockdown and in the absence of public transport they couldn't travel back home. Many set out walking, or cycling back home, but some were turned back at state borders and housed in shelters. It was only in late April that some states started organizing buses to ferry them back home. Soon after the ministry of home affairs came up with a protocol on their movement by bus, and, on May 1, the rail ministry launched special trains for them. However, there aren't enough trains and some migrants do not have the documents required, so they continue to walk back home. Those who can afford to, hire trucks and buses, but many are just walking.

The format seeks the migrants' Aadhaar and mobile number, state or origin, address, mode of transportation and destination state. This data will also be collected for all stranded migrants, including students, tourists, and pilgrims.

Developed by National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), the online dashboard, National Migrant Information System (NMIS) will maintain a central repository. It will also help the states from which the migrants are departing, and the states to which they are headed, coordinate the movement, union home secretary Ajay Bhalla stated in his letter to all the states/union territories. Both sets of states have to sign off.

"This system will help in speedy communication between states without creating additional work at the level of field officers. It has additional advantages like contact tracing, which may be useful in overall Covid-19 response work," Bhalla added.

The states can upload data on the portal.

Many states have already collected migrant data.

"States will be able to visualize how many people are going out from where and how many are reaching their destination states. The mobile numbers of people can be used for contact tracing and movement during Covid-19," the letter said.

Each migrant worker will be provided a unique ID which can be used for all transactions and Central government ministries will also be able to track movement using this portal. These IDs of people moving by a particular train will be given to railways by the origin state while giving the requisition for trains. Railway minister Piyush Goyal tweeted - "To provide relief to migrant labour, Indian Railways is ready to run Shramik Special trains from any District in the Country. District Collectors should prepare lists of stranded labour & destination and apply to Railways through the State nodal officer."

The home secretary told the states that both individual particulars and special identifiers (origin, destination address) need to be captured to provide facility of contact tracing as more train and bus journeys are planned.

"A ready database can be of help in planning reverse journeys in a systematic manner," he wrote. The central database, government said, can also be used for e-pass generation.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 30 -- Metro stations in containment zones and a few other places may not immediately open when the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) restarts train operations from September 7, according to Unlock 4.0 guidelines issued by the Union home ministry, Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot said on Sunday.

The minister said tokens might not be issued initially, and only those with smart cards could be allowed. He also said that to manage footfall and enforce social distancing and other measures to curb the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), the Delhi government will deploy home guards outside the stations.

"We have discussed the opening of Delhi Metro and based on that, it has been decided that no tokens will be issued in Delhi Metro from September 7 until further orders. Also, not all Metro stations will open at once. Those in containment zones and a few others will not be opened immediately from the first day. The DMRC is currently preparing a list of stations, which will be opened based on footfall and other parameters. A list of stations where travel services are being restored will be made public soon," Gahlot said.

After five months with little to guard, Metro Police looks for reinforcements

While DMRC and CISF have prepared draft standard operating procedures, a final list of protocols for Metro travel will be issued by the Union ministry of housing and urban affairs (Mohua). Soon after the Centre announced that Metro operations will be allowed in a graded manner under Unlock 4.0, the ministry said a meeting of all metro rail bodies in the country will be held on September 1.

'Will live up to the challenge': Delhi transport minister on metro resumption

"All MDs have been asked to look into SOPs prepared by Mohua earlier in view of the current realities. All suggestions will be considered in the meeting and accordingly, SOPs will be finalised," Mohua spokesperson Rajiv Jain said on Saturday.

Gahlot said based on the SOPs issued by the ministry, the Delhi government will issue a formal order after careful consultations with Metro officials and the Delhi Disaster Management Authority (DDMA).

He explained that other than containment zones, "only a few other metro stations will not operate". "In our discussions with DMRC, it was found that ensuring social distancing and managing crowd will need a lot of manpower, which is not possible if each and every station is opened at once," he said.

As Metro reopens in a week, rickshaw-pullers feel their lives will get back on track

When asked about the deliberations with the Delhi government, the DMRC did not offer a comment.

There are 264 Metro stations in Delhi and as on Sunday, there were 820 containment zones. The relaxations being announced by the Centre under unlock guidelines to gradually ease restrictions do not apply in containment zones.

"Inside the Metro stations, CISF and Metro security staff will ensure social distancing and face masks. Outside the stations, the Delhi government will deploy civil defence volunteers. Anyone found without a mask will be fined. Inside the Metro, a distance of 1 metre will have to be maintained between people and seats will be marked accordingly," the minister said.

DMRC officials said the focus of the SOPs will be to effectively regulate crowd so as to ensure that only 50% of a station's commuter footfall capacity is allowed at a given time.

To be sure, before the Covid-19 lockdown, Rajiv Chowk Metro station witnessed a daily footfall of nearly 5 lakh passengers, which means that at any given hour around 20,000 to 21,000 passengers were on the station premises. Now, to provide ample space for passengers to maintain social distancing, only 8,000 to 10,000 passengers will be allowed inside the station at any given hour.

For enforcing the rule, DMRC will assign supervisors who will keep a tab on the footfall and help regulate entry.

Anuj Dayal, executive director, DMRC, said, "In the coming days, we shall focus on the preparations for the eventual resumption of services. Aspects such as the implementation of hygiene-related protocols, sensitisation of staff and other functional requirements, etc., will be looked into as per the detailed SOPs that will be issued in consultation with the ministry. We shall try to provide the best possible services to our valued commuters."

A Metro official said regulation of crowd will be imperative, especially on the first 10 stations from the train's point of origin. This is primarily because passengers usually do not alight immediately after boarding from a terminal, and it is only after the first 10 stations that the entry-exit balance is attained, the official said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, May 9 -- Sixteen people were killed when they were run over by a freight train near Maharashtra's Aurangabad early on Friday morning as they slept on train tracks after a long journey on foot in a desperate attempt to find transport to go back to their home towns hundreds of kilometres away in Madhya Pradesh.

The victims were in a group of 20 people who left Jalna for their villages the previous evening after deciding to no longer wait for their employer - a company running a steel factory - to pay their wages.These migrant workers did not have jobs, and sometimes food, for over a month as factories remained shut due to the nationwide lockdown in place to contain the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19).

"We tried to get passes for the special trains but did not get help from any of the authorities. Finally we started walking at around 7pm on Thursday and slept on the train tracks. We were so tired that we could not even discuss about the risk of sleeping on the tracks," Virendra Singh, one of the survivors, told local media at Aurangabad's Ghati Hospital.

"The contractor had assured payment on May 7 but later said he was not in a condition to do so," he said.

The group had walked some 36kms, at first on the roads before they moved to the tracks to avoid being stopped by police.

Singh was one of the four survivors who slept on a clearing next to the tracks, while the others slept on the rails when a freight train with empty wagons for petroleum products ran them over around 5.20am. "Two of the others and I tried to warn the victims but were unable to awaken them on time," he said.

District officials said they are now focussing on sending the bodies of the victims home by the special trains that they had been hoping to board.

"The case is being investigated by the police, but our priority is sending the bodies back. They are being sent by a special Shramik train departing for Jabalpur on Friday evening," said Sanjeev Jadhavar, resident deputy collector, Aurangabad.

Tens of thousands of people have been walking home from big cities and industrial hot spots after being laid off because of the lockdown in force since late March. There have been reports that some others like the victims have been killed in road accidents.

While the victims of Friday's fatal incident did not have the requisite documents to obtain a pass, the other reason why migrant workers have been making the punishing journeys on foot or bicycles is a reluctance by their home states to accept them. Officials in Telangana have decided this week to scrap dozens of requests for special trains after destination states for such travellers did not give the necessary approvals to allow the journey.

The Union government has allowed special trains -- called Shramik trains -- to be requested if the origin as well as the destination states agree on the travel, which many regions fear could also fuel the spread of Covid-19.

A senior Railways safety official in Delhi said the victims in Friday's accident had fallen asleep on the tracks believing there would be no train on the route. The engineer of the locomotive spotted the people and used the train's horns, but was not able to stop on time.

Mokshada Patil, superintendent of police, Aurangabad rural, said investigation was being carried out on the basis of the information given by the survivors.

"All of them were working at SRJ Steels in Jalna, about 35 km from the accident spot, and had started on Thursday evening. They were heading towards Aurangabad to check for any travelling facility back to their home state. They had planned to walk up to Manmad (about 130 km from Aurangabad), a rail junction, to catch a train," he said.

Jalna, one of the eight districts in Central Maharashtra, is known for steel industries and labourers from MP, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar migrate to the town for daily-wage jobs that fetch between ~400-~600 a day.

The steel factories employ them through contractors without any security of health services and life-accidental insurance, said an official from the Jalna district collector.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed anguish over the deaths. "Have spoken to Railway minister Piyush Goyal and he is closely monitoring the situation. All possible assistance required is being provided," he said in a tweet.

"Shocked by the deaths of migrant workers hit by train. We should be ashamed of how we treat our nation-builders," said Congress leader Rahul Gandhi.

Maharashthra chief minister Uddhav Thackeray appealed to migrant workers to not risk their lives by heading home on foot and that there will be more trains arranged. Thackeray also announced an ex-gratia of ~5 lakh each to the families of the victims from the chief minister relief fund.

"I have just heard the sad news about labourers coming under the train, rescue work is underway," railway minister Piyush Goyal said on Twitter.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- India will take up incidents of racism in the UK with the British government, external affairs minister S Jaishankar said on Monday against the backdrop of strains caused by a debate on the farmers' protest in the British Parliament.

Jaishankar made the remarks while responding to concerns raised in Rajya Sabha by BJP lawmaker Ashwini Vaishnaw, who contended that racism and cyber-bullying forced Rashmi Samant, the first Indian woman elected president of the Oxford University Student Union, to quit her post.

"What I do want to say is that we have strong ties with the UK, we will take up such matters with great candour when required. We will monitor these developments very, very closely," he said in his response after Vaishnaw brought up the matter through a zero hour mention.

"We will raise it when required and we will always champion the fight against racism and other forms of intolerance," Jaishankar said.

He further said: "I do want to say that as the land of Mahatma Gandhi, we can never ever turn our eyes away from racism, wherever it is, particularly when it is in a country where we have such a large diaspora. As a friend of the UK, we also have concerns about its reputational impact."

Vaishnaw also referred to the issue of alleged racism within the UK royal family that was brought up in a recent interview by Meghan Markle, the wife of Prince Harry. Noting that the behaviour of a society is a reflection of its beliefs and value systems, Vaishnaw said: "If such practices of racial discrimination are followed at the highest level in a society, what would be the following at the lower levels?"

He also contended migrants were poorly treated and segregated in the UK and this was a matter of concern in India because of the large diaspora in Britain. Vaishnaw also claimed a recent report had said the death rate among people of Asian origin because of Covid-19 was higher than the death rate of other communities in the UK.

Samant quit as president of the Oxford University Student Union after the emergence of old social media posts that were deemed to be "racist" and "insensitive" by groups representing Asian and Jewish students. She also upset others by comparing imperialist Cecil Rhodes to Adolf Hitler in a Student Union debate and separating "women" and "transwomen" in an Instagram caption.

She initially offered an apology for the social media posts, some dating back to 2017, but later stepped down as president-elect after facing continued criticism. Since returning to India, Samant has claimed she was unfairly targeted.

The remarks in Rajya Sabha came about a week after the foreign secretary summoned British envoy Alex Ellis to protest against what it said was an "unwarranted and tendentious" debate in the UK Parliament that saw lawmakers criticise the Indian government's handling of the farmers' protest.

The debate was held in response to a public petition that garnered more than 115,000 signatures, and saw Labour, Conservative, Liberal Democratic and Scottish National Party lawmakers calling on the Boris Johnson government to raise their concerns about the handling of the protest and media freedoms with the Indian government.

Most of the British MPs who joined the debate acknowledged India's agricultural reforms were a domestic matter but noted their constituents had strong links with India's farm sector and were upset by what they described as the use of force against protesting farmers.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh, April 16 -- Chandigarh-based CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology (IMTECH) has initiated whole genome sequencing of the novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2) in order to understand its evolution and mutation pattern.

Whole genome sequencing is used to determine the complete DNA/RNA sequence of an organism's genome. IMTECH with other sister CSIR laboratories, with specialisation in genomics, medicine and cell biology, will carry out large-scale genome sequencing of SARS-Cov-2 strains across the length and breadth of the country.

The institute will perform sequencing of the SARS-Cov-2 RNA genome isolated from the clinical samples it will receive as a testing facility. The testing facility at the institute was launched on April 3.

Director Dr Sanjeev Khosla said, "We have already started clinical testing of samples and now by sequencing viral strains, we will be better equipped to understand the nature of the virus."

Portable, real-time and direct genome sequencing will be used to study the chemical modification in SARS-Cov-2 strains in India.

Viruses have higher mutation rate than other microbes and their genetic material keeps on changing quickly as they replicate rapidly.

Genome sequencing will give researchers an insight into the origin of the virus, the different strains circulating in India and how it spread across the length and breadth of our country. The genomic resource obtained from the sequencing will also allow identification of new targets for diagnosis of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 8 -- China supports a World Health Organisation (WHO)-led review into the coronavirus pandemic after it is declared over, the foreign ministry said on Thursday.

The review should be conducted in an "open, transparent and inclusive manner" under the leadership of WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said at the regular ministry briefing on Friday.

Hua's comments come in the backdrop of increasing global pressure to allow an international probe into the origins of the pandemic and the novel coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

China has dismissed US allegations that the virus came from a laboratory.

More than 3.8 million have been sickened in the Covid-19 pandemic and over 268000 have died.

The epidemic situation in China has improved dramatically with the government having lowered risk levels for the country on Thursday; daily cases are in low single digits.

Hua said the enquiry should be carried out an "appropriate time after the pandemic is over".

It should also be based on the protocols of the International Health Regulations, and be authorised by the World Health Assembly or Executive Committee - the WHO's dual governing bodies.

Countries including the US and Australia have called for an international probe into the origins of the pathogen and others like the UK and Germany have urged greater transparency from China.

Until now, China has rejected similar calls for an investigation, accusing the US of "politicising the issue".

US secretary of state Mike Pompeo has claimed that the US has evidence that the virus originated from a high-security lab in Wuhan.

"We have asked him several times: where is the evidence? Take it out if you have it," spokesperson Hua said at Friday's briefing.

"We have stated the facts many times, but Pompeo still repeatedly smears and attacks China on the issue. We are forced to expose the US according to public information and media reports," Hua said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 10 -- Canadians of South Asian origin, including Indo-Canadians, have been the demographically worst-hit community due to jobs losses caused by the Covid-19 pandemic in the country. According to the country's data agency Statistics Canada (StatCan), as against an overall unemployment rate of 10.9 per cent for July, the comparative figure for South Asians was at 17.8 per cent.

In fact, according to the labour force survey released by StatCan, minority groups have largely suffered more than the mainstream due to the economic impact of the coronavirus crisis. While South Asians have been the worst affected, the unemployment rate among those of Arab origin is 17.3 per cent and black Canadians at 16.8 per cent.

The agency also pointed out that South Asians and Chinese Canadians has experiences "large" Covid-19-related increases in unemployment. It noted, "South Asian (+9.1 percentage points) and Chinese (+8.4 percentage points) Canadians experienced relatively large increases in their unemployment rates from July 2019 to July 2020."

And among South Asians, women were harder hit than men, with a 20.4 per cent unemployment rate as against 15.4 per cent.

Overall, the employment situation appears to be gradually improving in the country. Employment rose by 419,000 or 2.4 per cent in July which, when combined with gains from June of 953,000 and May of 290,000, indicates a degree of economic recovery with restrictions that hampered activity being gradually relaxed. However, the unemployment numbers were still 1.3 million behind the pre-February level. The unemployment rate overall was at 10.9 per cent below the record high of 13.7 per cent in May, but still not close to the pre-COVID-19 situation in February when the rate was at 5.6 per cent.

The gains in employment in July came largely due to part-time work, with that accounting for five-sixths of the additions, at 345,000 as compared to just 73,000 full-time positions.

"The relatively flat growth in full-time work in recent months is reflected in an increase in the proportion of part-time workers doing so involuntarily.," StatCan analysed, adding that 29.7 per cent of those working part-time would have preferred full-time work but are unable to secure such openings.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 26 -- In handing over the reins of Tokyo 2020 Organising Committee to seven-time Olympian Seiko Hashimoto, Japan will be hoping for some lady luck - besides her vast experience in sports, public life and administration - to a competition mired in crisis.

In exactly a month's time, Hashimoto, who until now was serving as minister of state for the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games in the Japanese Cabinet, will have her first big task at hand: conducting a safe and secure torch relay. The Olympics torch relay will start from Fukushima Prefecture on March 25 and travel to 47 prefectures in 121 days before culminating at the grand opening ceremony at the National Stadium in Tokyo on July 23. With several prefectures in Japan still under a state of emergency due to a spike in cases, strict Covid-19 counter-measures have been announced for the relay.

Taking over as new head of the Games, after her predecessor, 83-year-old former Japanese Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori resigned over sexist remarks, Hashimoto has brought positivity. International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach described her as the 'prefect choice' for the position as Tokyo enters the extremely difficult home stretch for the once-deferred Games scheduled from July 23 to August 8 this year.

Hashimoto's name has origins in Olympic flame. Her tryst with the Games began with her birth in 1964 in Hokkaido, just five days before the opening of Tokyo Summer Olympics -- the first Games in Asia and an event where Japan presented a new image of itself as a peace-loving and resilient nation after world war trauma.

Awe-struck watching the opening ceremony of Tokyo 1964 at the National Stadium, Hashimoto's father decided to name his new born Seiko, which is derived from "Orinpikku Seika" or Olympic flame in Japanese.

"I think for my whole life, the Olympics has been part of it. My father had the dream that his child would become an Olympian in the future. So, he gave me the name 'Seiko'. From then on, the Olympics has become my lifework," said Hashimoto in an interview published by Tokyo 2020 Paralympic Games.

When it came to the Olympics there was no stopping Hashimoto. She competed in speed skating at four Winter Olympics, from 1984-1994 and became the first Japanese woman to win an Olympic medal in Winter Games by finishing third in women's 1,500-metre speed skating at the 1992 Games in Albertville, France. If that wasn't enough, Hashimoto then took to cycling and participated in three Summer Olympics between 1988 and 1996.

First elected to the House of Councillors in 1995 Hashimoto charted out a successful career in politics, becoming a strong voice for women's empowerment in Japan. In that sense, she has moved forward with urgency and put plans in place to boost the presence of women on the Tokyo 2020 Board to 40 per cent, a move welcomed by the IOC.

Public mood in Japan is against hosting the Games, opinion polls say. A survey also showed more than half of Japanese firms want the Games to be either cancelled or postponed.

Hashimoto knows the difficulties of the task at hand. "How can we get through the Covid-19 situation? What are the significance and values of hosting Tokyo 2020? These are the questions I am facing now. With the Tokyo Olympic Games and Paralympic Games, I wish to show people the beauty of the athletes' motion and the beauty rooted deeply within them," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 14 -- A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson on Friday refueled his allegation that the novel coronavirus has US military origins by citing a story from a website known to promote conspiracy theories to bolster his claim.

Late on Thursday night, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian had tweeted to his large number of followers that the US military might be behind the covid-19 epidemic, and China, where it was first detected last year, wasn't the origin of the virus.

The covid-19 pandemic has gone to kill over 4000 and infect more than 1.32 lakh globally.

"When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an explanation," Zhao had tweeted in English and Chinese.

Zhao did not offer any evidence but referred to statement by a top US health official that a few flu-related deaths in the US that occurred earlier could have been caused by the coronavirus.

On Friday, he doubled down on his claim by referring to a similar story from the Montreal-based Centre for Research on Globalisation, which says it's an independent think-tank but is often called out for peddling outlandish theories including on 9/11.

Sharing a link from the website, Zhao tweeted on Friday that ".this article is very much important to each and every one of us. Please read and retweet it. covid-19: Further Evidence that the Virus Originated in the US."

It led to a bit of a firestorm on Twitter with thousands sharing Zhao's tweets and many trashing it, saying China was on the aggressive to help it cover up the fact had officials had covered-up information on the covid-19 in December and for nearly three weeks in January.

The Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post (SCMP), in fact, reported on Friday, citing government documents that the first case of the infection was detected at the epicentre Wuhan in November.

The SCMP report said Chinese health authorities had identified at least 266 people who contracted the virus last year.

They were put under medical surveillance, and the earliest case was November 17 - weeks before authorities announced the emergence of the new virus, and then finally put in place containment measures.

At the regular foreign ministry press conference, Zhao's colleague, spokesperson

Geng Shuang somewhat sidestepped questions on whether Beijing blames the US for the coronavirus.

"The international community including the US has different opinions about the origin of the virus," said Geng.

"The origin of the virus is a scientific matter and as such scientific views should be listened to," said Geng.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 5 -- China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus?

The lethal virus emanated from China, leading to a paralysing pandemic whose costs are immeasurable. Is it unreasonable for the world to want to know how and why it happened?

Investigating the genesis of the pandemic is critical for another reason - this is not the first deadly disease to spread globally from China. A Chinese cover-up of the 2002-2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) outbreak triggered the world's first 21st-century pandemic. Getting to the bottom of how the latest pathogen flared up and spread is essential for designing rapid-response efforts to prevent a future outbreak from spiralling into yet another pandemic.

Even the World Health Organization (WHO) agrees. This is the organisation whose repeated deference to Beijing since December helped China to cover its tracks. Several countries now want an inquiry to focus on the roles of both China and WHO. The WHO representative in China has said the "origins of the virus are very important" to prevent "reoccurrence". Yet Beijing has shut out even WHO from its national Covid-19 investigations.

United States (US) President Donald Trump has offered China an incentive for cooperation by contrasting a mistake with wilful action: "If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake. But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences." Beijing, however, has shied away from answering even basic questions.

For example, why did China stop flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak, yet allowed international flights to operate from Wuhan, thus facilitating the global spread of the virus? Why did it clamp down recently on further research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus? It instituted a new policy mandating prior vetting after several Chinese research papers highlighted dangerous work on bat coronaviruses, with one study concluding that "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan".

Authorities shut a Shanghai laboratory a day after its publication of the coronavirus genome opened the global path to diagnostic tests. China refused to share any live virus sample with the world, "making it impossible to track the disease's evolution," to quote US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. The dangerous lab research in Wuhan may explain why China, instead of sharing any coronavirus sample, destroyed its lab samples.

Just think - if China was not guilty of any cover-up, wouldn't it be welcoming the growing international calls for an independent inquiry and offering to assist in such a probe? This would give China a chance to clear the air with the rest of the world. Instead, Beijing seems to be showcasing its guilt by belligerently rejecting the pleas for such an inquiry and threatening economic reprisals.

Australia is Exhibit A. The country is more economically tied with China than with its security patron, the US. Yet Australia has come under a blistering attack from China for proposing that WHO member-nations support an independent inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus. Australia said it will push for such an investigation at the WHO assembly when it convenes for its annual meeting on May 17. In response, the Chinese ambassador to Australia threatened punishment through Chinese boycotts of Australian wine, beef and tourism and education sectors.

Meanwhile, as the Group of Seven (G7) countries, India and others seek a review and reform of WHO, China's decision to give an additional $30 million to the agency appears aimed at frustrating such calls. International rules require countries to notify WHO of "a public health emergency of international concern within 24 hours of assessment". China's failure to do so has led to calls for introducing WHO inspectors with the power to enter a country to probe a disease outbreak in the manner of weapons inspectors.

Make no mistake: Money alone can neither aid China's strategy to deflect blame for the current crisis nor help defuse the increasing global backlash against it. Calls are growing louder across the world to hold China publicly accountable for the pandemic's mounting human and economic toll. The only way China can silence such calls and begin to repair the serious damage to its image is through an independent international inquiry.

If it blocks such a probe, China will pay enormous costs - not as reparations but by compelling other major economies to restructure their relationships with it, a process that could ultimately end its status as the global hub of vital supply chains. China's mercantilist expansionism has already led to new regulations in the European Union, Australia, Germany, Spain and Italy. But India's recent new rule mandating prior scrutiny of Chinese investment in any form is the first of its kind. Another major recent move is by Japan, which has earmarked $2.2 billion to help Japanese firms shift manufacturing out of China.

If China refuses to come clean, important countries are likely to start economically distancing themselves from it, through new tariffs, non-tariff barriers, relocation of manufacturing and other policy moves. Eventually, this could undermine the communist party's monopoly on power in China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 28 -- PUNE Astronomy aims at finding the origin of the Universe," said Neeraj Gupta, who spoke on "Science with Square Kilometre Array", during the Science day celebrations held online by the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA).

"The Square kilometre Array is the world's largest radio telescope. It requires all the intelligence and resources from all countries across the globe. It will be built in two places in Australia and South Africa. All the radio astronomers are a part of this," said Gupta.

He further added that radio astronomy is the emission that comes from celestial objects like the sun, stars, and clouds, among other objects.

"Radio astronomy studies celestial objects at radio wavelength. The radiations that we study come to us due to different events. It is like we map one object through different ways to understand its origin, age and composition. Scientists have won the Nobel Prize by contributing on various interesting aspects of the subject," added Gupta.

In another session on the platform of Indian Institute of Science, Education and Research (IISER), Pune, Dr SG Srivatsan, associate dean of research and development at IISER Pune, spoke about "Making smart probes for the detection of Covid-19".

"If we develop diagnostics kits in India, the cost of testing kits will be much, much lower and its reach will also be more as compared to others. The Centre for cellular and molecular biology, Bengaluru, has recently launched a project of Indigenous diagnostics called Index. This project is funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, USA. IISER is also part of the project," said Srivatsan

He added that IISER is dealing with the chemistry aspect of the project.

"Index aims at the supply chain of Indian companies to make reagents and enzymes for diagnostic kits for Covid-19. We help companies maintain a high standard of diagnostic kit development so that problems can be avoided. Problems like false negatives and false positives can be completely avoided," said Srivatsan.

Along with this, the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), and National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR-NCL) also conducted their Science Day programs online.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 16 -- London mayor Sadiq Khan has released videos in Punjabi, Hindi, Bengali, Urdu and other languages to highlight precautions against Covid-19, amid concerns that official guidance is not reaching south Asian communities in parts of Britain.

The videos feature Khan, with deputy mayor Rajesh Agarwal joining in Hindi, along with others promoting the importance of face coverings, social distancing and regular handwashing. Due to lockdown curbs, major cultural and religious events have not been celebrated as they usually would through communal gatherings.

London has several boroughs with large population of Indian and south Asian origin. Campaign group Doctors of the World UK and several organisations including the Greater London Authority had recently written to health secretary Matt Hancock over the lack of translation of updates to key advice in languages other than English.

South Asians and other ethnic minorities have been disproportionately affected by the pandemic, with the Boris Johnson government setting up an inquiry to find the reasons behind it. Latest figures in England show that 793 patients categorised as 'Indian' have died.

South Asian Londoners are more likely to be employed as key workers in frontline health and service industry roles, and a recent study suggested that in hospital settings, people from South Asian backgrounds are 20% more likely than white people to die from Covid-19.

The videos are part of Khan's efforts to deal with the disproportionate impact of the virus on South Asian communities.

He said: "From key workers on the frontline to families staying home, London's South Asian communities have made extraordinary sacrifices to help stop the spread of this virus".

"We know that Covid-19 has disproportionately affected South Asian Londoners and yet, at a time when access to clear and accurate information is more important than ever, this government is failing them. A person's ethnicity should never mean the difference between life and death", he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 16 -- A petition filed in the Supreme Court by a US-based doctor of Indian origin has raised concerns about the possible side effects of using the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine in treating people infected by the coronavirus.

Hydroxychloroquine has been in focus in the fight against Covid-19 since US President Donald Trump described it as a "game changer", and India, the largest manufacturer of the drug, has approved its use in some cases. India is also in the process of supplying the drug to countries around the world, including the US.

The petition was filed by Kunal Saha in the Supreme Court in the name of his Kolkata-based NGO People for Better Treatment, and he is expected to argue the matter in person. It could not immediately be ascertained if the petition has been admitted by the apex court or will be taken up for hearing.

Indian authorities have so far clear the use of hydroxychloroquine in the case of asymptomatic healthcare workers involved in caring for suspected or confirmed Covid-19 case and asymptomatic household contacts of confirmed cases.

The petition argues that the use of hydroxychloroquine along with the broad spectrum antibiotic azithromycin (AZM) for Covid-19 patients is potentially known for life-threatening effects on the cardiovascular system.

The petition also refers to a health bulletin issued by the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and US-based Heart Rhythm Society on April 8 that warned doctors about this drug combination having the potential to trigger "arrhythmia" or abnormal heartbea), heart failure and death.

Saha also wrote to India's health ministry on April 8, sharing this information. He said the ministry ought to have specified precautionary measures to be adopted by doctors in line with those prescribed by the American organisations.

The petition also cites the extreme precautions in administering this drug suggested by the Canadian Medical Association and by an international study group of doctors based on the analysis of data from more than 300,000 patients. The finding showed no risk in short-term use of hydroxychloroquine but increased risks of 30-day cardiovascular mortality, chest pain or angina and heart failure were observed in the use of hydroxychloroquine and AZM.

Hydroxychloroquine's global demand is on the rise and India is exporting the drug to the US, the UK, Brazil, Israel and South Asian neighbours.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 3 -- Kerala, the state with the lowest Covid-19 mortality and highest recovery rate in India, is set to take the fight against the viral pandemic to the next stage by implementing a "reverse quarantine" to protect its elderly and people ailing with medical conditions that make them susceptible to the virus.

The state, which on January 30 was the first in India to report a coronavirus case, is seeking to preserve the impressive gains it had made in the battle against the pathogen, which has affected 499 people, of whom 95 are active patients. Four have died.

A blueprint for the reverse quarantine has already been prepared and health workers have started monitoring the medical conditions of the elderly and people whose immunity may have been compromised and left them susceptible to Covid-19 by existing health conditions.

Experts say reserve quarantine refers to a practice of isolating the most vulnerable people -- those of advanced age and under treatment for existing ailments -- from the rest of the population and monitoring their health closely to protect them from infection.

"In Kerala, we have 70 lakh people who are above 65 years of age and suffer from diabetes, cancer, blood pressure, heart ailments, kidney disease and respiratory tract infections. They are sitting ducks. Our priority is to detach them from others and protect them," said Dr B Iqbal, who heads an expert panel that advises the state government on prevention of the coronavirus disease.

"In case of a community spread we can isolate vulnerable population and check their mortality rate effectively unlike what happened in some of the western countries. We have formed grassroots committees to monitor their health conditions. Besides local body members, Asha {accredited health activist} workers, resident association office-bearers, youth volunteers and local police officers will be part of these committees," he said.

The plan is being implemented at a time when Kerala is preparing to receive, once flights resume, citizens from the state who are either stuck overseas, mainly in the Middle East, or have lost their jobs.Family members of Keralites settled abroad, pregnant women and students of Indian origin who want to pursue higher education at home are among the 300,000 people who have registered on a website opened by the Kerala government for such people last week.

Some returnees from overseas locations n March had turned super spreaders after jumping home quarantine, prompting the state to adopt a more cautious approach this time.

Experts like Dr. Iqbal say that a reverse quarantine is a viable option until an effective vaccine is found for Covid-19. Once a person is in put in reverse quarantine, a separate room with a toilet is given to him or her and their interaction with other family members is limited. Social distancing norms and face masks are a must. In north Kerala, many cancer patients have already been put in reverse quarantine.

"Since it is a new virus we need a multipronged strategy to deal with it. Reverse quarantine is one among them. We can't say how long the virus will be active and {when the local population will} achieve herd immunity. So we can isolate people who are more prone to it. As Kerala is an informed society it is better to practise it here," said epidemiologist Dr Jayaprakash Muliyil, also former principal of the Christian Medical College, Vellore.

A sense of deprivation and neglect can set in among those prescribed reverse quarantine, and it has to be addressed by family members and medical counsellors. Some areas, especially north Kerala, have strong palliative care services and volunteers from the region can be used elsewhere to tend to patients, said Dr Iqbal.

"We can't live in a lockdown like this for long. We have to live with it till a vaccine is found. So we have to evolve a mechanism to suit this. Like social distancing, reverse quarantine is a way to check the mortality rate," said another expert, adding the key is "minimum exposure" of the vulnerable to the outside world. In so-called red zones,a ban has been enforced on people above 65 and children below 10 years stepping out of their houses.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- China will hold its most important political event, the annual session of its rubber-stamp Parliament in the third week of May after postponing it for more than 10 weeks because of the Covid-19 outbreak, official media announced Wednesday.

The reconvening of the Two Sessions, as it is known here, on May 21 signals that China has effectively brought the outbreak in control.

The decision to allow thousands to come to Beijing from across China is a show of confidence by the Chinese government as it tries to show to the world its success in containing the virus.

Official news agency, Xinhua said China would begin its annual Two Sessions meeting on May 21, when thousands of delegates to the National People's Congress (NPC), the legislature, as well as to the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), the top political consultative body, gather in the capital for around 10 days.

The sessions are usually held early March.

The upcoming session, however, could be shortened, a separate state media report said, quoting Parliamentarian delegates.

During the choreographed meeting, about 3,000 national legislators from across China gather in Beijing to review work reports from the Communist Party of China-led central government as well as the country's highest courts and the budget including for national defence for the year ahead.

The announcement was made as Beijing health authorities said on Wednesday that the Capital's emergency response level to Covid-19 would be lowered from the first to the second level from Thursday.

On Wednesday, the Chinese mainland reported reports 22 new confirmed Covid-19 cases, with 21 imported cases, and 26 new asymptomatic ones in the past 24 hours.

No deaths from the disease has been reported from the disease for nearly two weeks, health authorities said.

China-Australia spat

Meanwhile, the ongoing diplomatic tussle between China and Australia seem set to deepen with Prime Minister Scott Morrison saying it was "entirely reasonable" for the world to ask for an international assessment into the origins of the pandemic.

The coronavirus first emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year before spreading to rest of China and the world: Until Wednesday it had killed more than 2 lakh people, sickened over 3 million and battered the world economy to its worst state in several decades.

Morrison's call for an international inquest has been aggressively opposed by Chinese diplomats who have said Australia should stop resorting to "petty tricks".

On Wednesday, the Chinese embassy in Canberra, said on its website that details of a call between the Chinese envoy and Australian officials had first been "obviously leaked by some Australian officials" and it needed to set the record straight.

"The Embassy of China doesn't play petty tricks, this is not our tradition. But if others do, we have to reciprocate," an embassy spokesperson said in the statement.

Chinse state media has strongly criticised Australia's stand.

Hu Xijin, the editor-in-chief of the nationalistic Global Times said on Chinese social media that Australia was always making trouble.

"It is a bit like chewing gum stuck on the sole of China's shoes. Sometimes you have to find a stone to rub it off," Hu wrote.

China is Australia's largest trading partner and Canberra has accused Beijing of economic coercion after the Chinese ambassador threatened a boycott of Australian goods and universities by Chinese citizens.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- At least three persons, who have been detected with corona in the last 48 hours, might not have travelled outside the state in the recent past, health officials said. It was not immediately clear if they came in touch with any infected person. Officials say they are trying to trace the source of the infections.

A 57-year-old man from Hooghly district in south Bengal with no 'known' history of travelling outside the state or meeting anyone from outside the state tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday.

In a separate case, a septuagenarian man from Burrabazar in Kolkata has also tested positive. Family members said he didn't go anywhere.

In another incident, a 56-year-old resident of Baranagar in North 24 Parganas district tested positive, raising eyebrows of health officials. Initially, it was thought he got infected from his brother who returned from Madhya Pradesh with fever. But his brother has tested negative. The patient has no history of travelling outside the state.

"We could not trace any travel history of some of the patients who tested positive in the last 48 hours. We are still trying to trace them," said Ajay Chakraborty, director of health services in West Bengal.

The man from Hooghly district works at a private firm in Durgapur in West Burdwan district. Before testing positive for Covid-19, he had travelled in train in the districts of Birbhum, Bankura, Kolkata and South 24-Parganas. He had attended an event at his firm in Durgapur on March 13, went to Bankura to attend another event of the company, and stayed the night at a hotel in Durgapur. He returned home on March 14. On March 26, he had fever and gradually developed breathing difficulties. He was admitted to a hospital on March 28 and tested positive for Covid-19 on March 29. Increasing worry for the administration, the domestic help at their home has also reported of fever and her swab samples have been sent for tests.

"It seems that probably we are entering stage three (community transmission). However officially we are still in stage two," said Dr Sumon Poddar, associate professor, Institute of Child Health

The 77-year-old a cloth merchant having his shop at Burrabazar area in Kolkata, did not travel outside the state or meeting anyone from outside the state, his family members reportedly told the authorities of the private hospital where he is admitted.

Reports of more patients being tested positive with COVID-19 have poured in since Monday night but the state government is yet to release any official figures after Monday afternoon. According to the last bulletin issued by the state on Monday, at least 22 cases have been detected and the total death toll was two.

"A few more cases have been tested positive since Monday evening. The numbers have gone beyond 22. There is also a report of one person dying. This could take the total death toll to three. We are yet to confirm as the man died before his swab samples could be tested," said Chakrabarti.

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission, a phase of the outbreak when the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the epidemic, has publicly maintained that India is still in Stage II, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact to an infected person or travel history rising over the past week.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 16 -- The retraction of influential studies published in two of the world's leading scientific journals last week was a rude reminder of the perils of moving at warp speed to find a treatment or cure for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has infected eight million and killed 430,000 in less than six months of the World Health Organisation (WHO)being informed by China about a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in Wuhan on December 31, 2019.

By January 30, it had infected 7,818 people, of which 82 were in 18 other countries, which forced a seemingly reluctant WHO to declare the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), as it was then called, a public health emergency of international concern. Scientists from across the world stepped up to defuse the emerging health threat with every tool that they had. Never before have so many scientists, researchers and clinicians from across specialties focused on a single disease or used such a wide variety of innovative techniques and platforms for vaccine and drug development. Never before have regulatory processes been fast-tracked at such scale for emergency use of drug and vaccine trials.

"The need for speed should not throw caution to the wind. Dubious data sources and poorly designed clinical trials of experimental drugs and vaccines have raised more concerns than solutions," said Sujatha Rao, a former health secretary of the ministry of health and family welfare.

Need for speed

As on June 12, the US National Library of Medicine Registry of ClinicalTrials.gov had 2,122 registered studies on the disease, with hundreds more registered in national registries.

"When publication is going at a high speed, you don't always notice the traffic signals. There are three things happening now. People are publishing through a rapid review process, studies are being published in pre-prints, people are writing blogs where they can write anything and interpret anything they call data. In the usual (scientific journal) publication cycle, nothing gets published in three or four days. From submission to publication, it normally takes at least three to four weeks and often more than six weeks. If I get an article for review from The Lancet, which I frequently do, I get a minimum of 10 days," said Dr K Srinath Reddy, president, Public Health Foundation of India.

Pre-print publication is a practice borrowed from other sciences, such as physics and Math, where researchers put their papers on a website and invite comments from the scientist community, based on which they modify and correct their analysis before publication.

What works for theoretical sciences, however, doesn't work as well for medical research, which has immediate implications on health and life. "Rapid reviews are causing problems because the reviewers are chosen in haste and they don't have adequate time to look at the data properly and they are under pressure to respond quickly," said Reddy.

Peer review is important to ensure quality of scientific communications, incorporating inputs of other experts. "While pre-publication peer-review is the standard, there are good examples of post-publication review as well. Validation by other researchers is perhaps the most important, especially when the findings are unexpected or controversial," said Dr Anurag Agrawal, director of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology.

Review, reform

But this very validation process spectacularly failed in the case of the two retracted studies in The Lancet and The New England Journal of Medicine. The Lancet paper raised safety concerns about the experimental use of the anti-malarial drugs for treatment and led to WHO suspending the hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine arm of its multi-country trial, much to the dismay of India, which is the world's largest producer of these affordable generic drugs that have been used to treat malaria for close to a century. "The key concern for us was that the data was questionable that made analysis unreliable and any results misleading. If not for the name of the journal, the paper would have not have been taken as seriously," said Agrawal.

While journals have established validation processes, such papers can slip between the cracks because of several reasons, including the authors belonging to reputable institutions like Harvard University, or the reviewers having confirmation bias, where they agree with the study's conclusion even before they begin scrutinising how the result has been arrived at.

For a disease barely six months old, generating high-quality data quickly and efficiently is a challenge, which makes review and scrutiny all the more critical. "It's the job of a journal's editorial team to do an independent review and ensure it doesn't get shoddy when it is inundated with research studies," said Dr Jacob T John, former head of the department of virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu.

Retractions are not rare, but they are growing. In 2019, there were 1,433 retractions from scientific journals, according to Retraction Watch, which has been tracking retractions for a decade. In 1997, the number was 44.

Trial by error

Vaccine development, on average, takes 10.71 years from the preclinical phase, and has a success rate of 6%, according to a study in the journal, PLOS One. Some remain elusive despite decades of massive investment, as we have seen in the case of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus that causes the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS.

Work on a Covid-19 vaccine began on January 11, within a day of China sharing the genome of the new coronavirus that came to be called Sars-CoV-2. By June 12, there were 10 experimental vaccines in advanced stages of clinical trials and 115 in pre-clinical evaluation stages, according to WHO.

Scientists are working across emerging technology platforms that have never been used for vaccine development before. Moderna's mRNA-1273, which entered into clinical trials just 66 days after Sars-CoV-2 was first sequenced in China, showcases the potential for DNA- and RNA-based vaccines that use the messenger RNA (mRNA) platform to elicit an immune response against the virus.

"If it is approved, it will be the first messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine against any disease in the world. We don't fully know the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines as yet. However, there is high quality science and pre-clinical evidence for this fast and flexible platform for vaccine development. We will have to wait and see," said Agrawal.

Vaccine development includes at least three human trials to test their safety, dosage and the strength and duration of the protection they offer, followed by production, licensure, deployment of vaccines and plans for post-marketing surveillance. Many of these trials have been collapsed and merged to have a vaccine ready for use within the next six to eight months.

"With Covid-19, the goal from the beginning has been to develop, test and manufacture a vaccine on a scale of hundreds of millions of doses within 12 to 18 months, so an unprecedented approach has been adopted. With promising preliminary preclinical and phase 1 data available, meticulously planned trials are needed to separate the contenders from pretenders. Since approvals are expected for an emergency use vaccine, developers start mass manufacturing as soon as they complete phase 2 trials, and in doing so, risk the failure of phase 3. In such cases, consortiums and countries fund for risk reduction and provide market commitments," said Dr N K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research. This is where new technology lab-based platforms help. RNA- and DNA-based vaccines are faster and cheaper to produce than synthetic vaccines as they involve synthetic production of the genetic material, and not the virus. "The production is lab-based, so it can be quickly standardised and scaled up," said Ganguly.

Getting a large enough sample size across age groups is essential as the results in one population might not translate to the other.

"Whether it is vaccines or drug development, what is crucial is independent scientific validation to ensure the vaccines and drugs are safe and effective because getting it wrong would mean playing with lives," said Ganguly.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, May 9 -- Sixteen people were killed when they were run over by a freight train near Maharashtra's Aurangabad early on Friday morning as they slept on train tracks after a long journey on foot in a desperate attempt to find transport to go back to their home towns hundreds of kilometres away in Madhya Pradesh.

The victims were in a group of 20 people who left Jalna for their villages the previous evening after deciding to no longer wait for their employer - a company running a steel factory - to pay their wages.These migrant workers did not have jobs, and sometimes food, for over a month as factories remained shut due to the nationwide lockdown in place to contain the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19).

"We tried to get passes for the special trains but did not get help from any of the authorities. Finally we started walking at around 7pm on Thursday and slept on the train tracks. We were so tired that we could not even discuss about the risk of sleeping on the tracks," Virendra Singh, one of the survivors, told local media at Aurangabad's Ghati Hospital.

"The contractor had assured payment on May 7 but later said he was not in a condition to do so," he said.

The group had walked some 36kms, at first on the roads before they moved to the tracks to avoid being stopped by police.

Singh was one of the four survivors who slept on a clearing next to the tracks, while the others slept on the rails when a freight train with empty wagons for petroleum products ran them over around 5.20am. "Two of the others and I tried to warn the victims but were unable to awaken them on time," he said.

District officials said they are now focussing on sending the bodies of the victims home by the special trains that they had been hoping to board.

"The case is being investigated by the police, but our priority is sending the bodies back. They are being sent by a special Shramik train departing for Jabalpur on Friday evening," said Sanjeev Jadhavar, resident deputy collector, Aurangabad.

Tens of thousands of people have been walking home from big cities and industrial hot spots after being laid off because of the lockdown in force since late March. There have been reports that some others like the victims have been killed in road accidents.

While the victims of Friday's fatal incident did not have the requisite documents to obtain a pass, the other reason why migrant workers have been making the punishing journeys on foot or bicycles is a reluctance by their home states to accept them. Officials in Telangana have decided this week to scrap dozens of requests for special trains after destination states for such travellers did not give the necessary approvals to allow the journey.

The Union government has allowed special trains -- called Shramik trains -- to be requested if the origin as well as the destination states agree on the travel, which many regions fear could also fuel the spread of Covid-19.

A senior Railways safety official in Delhi said the victims in Friday's accident had fallen asleep on the tracks believing there would be no train on the route. The engineer of the locomotive spotted the people and used the train's horns, but was not able to stop on time.

Mokshada Patil, superintendent of police, Aurangabad rural, said investigation was being carried out on the basis of the information given by the survivors.

"All of them were working at SRJ Steels in Jalna, about 35 km from the accident spot, and had started on Thursday evening. They were heading towards Aurangabad to check for any travelling facility back to their home state. They had planned to walk up to Manmad (about 130 km from Aurangabad), a rail junction, to catch a train," he said.

Jalna, one of the eight districts in Central Maharashtra, is known for steel industries and labourers from MP, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar migrate to the town for daily-wage jobs that fetch between ~400-~600 a day.

The steel factories employ them through contractors without any security of health services and life-accidental insurance, said an official from the Jalna district collector.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed anguish over the deaths. "Have spoken to Railway minister Piyush Goyal and he is closely monitoring the situation. All possible assistance required is being provided," he said in a tweet.

"Shocked by the deaths of migrant workers hit by train. We should be ashamed of how we treat our nation-builders," said Congress leader Rahul Gandhi.

Maharashthra chief minister Uddhav Thackeray appealed to migrant workers to not risk their lives by heading home on foot and that there will be more trains arranged. Thackeray also announced an ex-gratia of ~5 lakh each to the families of the victims from the chief minister relief fund.

"I have just heard the sad news about labourers coming under the train, rescue work is underway," railway minister Piyush Goyal said on Twitter.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 29 -- Hundreds of people who came back from the United Kingdom (UK) are either missing or not cooperating with health authorities who fear that some of them could be infected by the new, hyper-infectious, mutant strain of SARS-CoV-2 identified in the UK, and still worse, spreading it.

(Hindustan Times) -- Many of the missing are from Karnataka and Telangana, the two states where maximum number of persons returned from UK since November last week.

To be sure, it isn't clear how many of the close to 3,500 people from Punjab who returned from the UK are missing, although a state government official said most are yet to be traced.

Click here for complete Covid-19 coverage

The Union health ministry asked the states to test all persons who returned from the UK in the past one month using the RT-PCR test, the gold standard of tests, to detect Covid-19 virus. From November 25 to midnight, December 23, 2020, about 33,000 passengers disembarked at various Indian airports from UK, said a health ministry statement.

Of them, 2406 people came to Karnataka . The local government is struggling to locate nearly 570 of them who have gone missing, according to Karnataka Medical Education minister Dr K Sudhakar.

The minister added that the state home department and the police have been pressed into service to trace these people, who have also switched off their phones.

Of the 1,614 passengers who came to Bengaluru, 26 tested positive for Covid-19 ; and three of the 26 tested positive for the new UK strain of the virus according to the minister. The three include a 34-year-old woman and her six-year-old daughter.

"I have been promised that within 48 hours all of them will be traced," Sudhakar said. Of the 570 missing passengers, 204 have given addresses in Bengaluru.

Telangana government officials said that of 1,100 UK returnees to the state, 279 were not traceable. Dr G. Srinivasa Rao, director of public health of the state said his department has forwarded the names and details of the missing returnees to district officials. "Rest have been traced and their swab samples have been taken for testing," he said.

Punjab has not yet completed tracking of UK returnees. Dr Rajesh Bhaskar, nodal officer for Covid in the state said 1822 Punjab-origin people have landed in Indira Gandhi International Airport at Delhi and 1604 in Guru Ram Dass International Airport at Amritsar since Diwali.

"We are yet to complete the task of tracking all of them. Our district administrations are on toes to track them. There is a large number who are yet to be traced. We are expected to come out with the exact figures by Wednesday evening."

In Tamil Nadu, where one person has tested positive for new strain of Covid-19, health secretary J Radhakrishnan said that the state has been able to trace almost all 2,200 people who came from the UK since December 1.

"We have provided details of a few who could not be traced," he said, without giving the number of missing returnees.

Odisha health officials said 27 UK returnees of the 181 who came back between November 30 and December 21 remain untraceable. Director public health, Dr Niranjan Mishra, said some of them gave only their phone numbers or vague addresses.

Of the 227 people who have returned from the United Kingdom to Uttarakhand in the past one month, about 20 are not traceable, Abhishek Tripathi, chief operational officer for COVID-19 in the state said.

Most of the returnees are from Dehradun and incomplete addresses and mobile numbers are the reason for the missing returnees, according to officials.

However, in some states such as Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, the administration has been able to trace all the returnees and have collected their swab samples for RT-PCR tests.

In Uttar Pradesh, the Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, Alok Kumar said of the 1,655 people who have returned from the UK since December 9, 568 are not traceable.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- Battered on various fronts, the UK economy faces a 14% shrink this year, registering the deepest recession since 1706, the Bank of England said on Thursday, as Prime Minister Boris Johnson prepared to announce some easing of lockdown curbs from Monday.

Presenting century-wise data on the size of the British economy since 1700, the apex bank, however, said growth could bounce back to 15% for 2021 as a whole, with GDP recovering to its pre-coronavirus peak by the second half of next year.

Andrew Bailey, the bank's governor, said he expected any permanent damage from the pandemic to be relatively small, since the economy was likely to recover "much more rapidly than the pull back from the global financial crisis" of 2008.

"The scale of the shock and the measures necessary to protect public health mean a significant loss of economic output has been inevitable in the near term," he said.

Referring to wage subsidy schemes announced by chancellor Rishi Sunak for the employed and the self-employed, Bailey said the success of these schemes and the bank's own stimulus meant there would be "limited scarring to the economy".

Johnson is due to address the nation at 7 pm on Sunday on easing some lockdown measures from Monday, with ministers keen to re-start the economy. The main message to 'stay at home' is likely to be withdrawn with limited allowances for travel and gatherings.

Scotland and Wales have separately announced their approaches about easing the measures. The two UK constituents and Northern Ireland have the power to diverge from measures announced by London, but there are efforts that the easing is applied uniformly across the UK. Johnson was due to chair a meet on the issue on Thrusday.

A new official analysis by the Office for National Statistics said the risk of death from coronavirus among Indian and other non-white groups in the UK is "significantly higher" than those of white ethnicity, complementing similar reports from other sources.

It said that Indian and other non-white males are 4.2 times more likely to die from a Covid-19-related death and non-white females are 4.3 times more likely than white ethnicity males and females. The UK's Indian-origin population is estimated to number 1.5 million.

Meanwhile, health officials said 4 lakh surgical gowns imported from Turkey did not meet UK standards and were unusable, adding to growing concerns over shortage in personal protective equipment (PPE). In Nottingham, Indian-origin Labour MP Nadia Whittome was dismissed as a carer for the elderly when she raised the issue of lack of PPE.

The Department of Health and Social Care said: "We are working night and day to source PPE internationally and domestically and brought together the NHS, industry and the armed forces to create a comprehensive PPE distribution network to deliver critical supplies to the frontline".

"All deliveries of PPE are checked to ensure the equipment meets the safety and quality standards our frontline staff need. If equipment does not meet our specifications or pass our quality assurance processes it is not distributed to the front line."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 14 -- Bihar on Wednesday reported its seventh death of a coronavirus patient, as migrant workers contributed to more than one-third of the total cases, with the virus spreading to cover the entire state late on Tuesday.

Fifty-three people, including two nurses - one from the Nalanda Medical College Hospital (NMCH), a dedicated Covid-19 hospital, and another from the Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS), both in Patna - also tested positive, while a 56-year-old woman, suffering from cancer of gallbladder and infected by the virus, died at the NMCH on Wednesday.

This was Bihar's first female fatality to the Sars-CoV-2 virus, with co-morbid conditions, as the total number of cases swelled to 932.

A resident of Ashiana-Digha More, the NMCH nurse had come in contact with two Covid-19 patients during the course of their treatment at the hospital, said NMCH medical nodal officer, Dr Ajay Kumar Sinha.

Five health personnel at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (IGIMS) in Patna have already tested positive for the virus so far, the latest being a nurse on Wednesday. The nurse who stays on the hospital campus, used to reside with another nurse who had previously tested positive and had to terminate her pregnancy due to some gynaecological complications.

The two nurses were among the four people to have tested positive in Patna. Nine other cases were reported from Nawada, seven from Bhojpur, six from Bhagalpur, four each from Siwan and Banka, three each from Begusarai, Rohtas, Khagaria and Muzaffarpur, two from Gopalganj and one each from Madhubani and Kaimur.

Around 130 people reported positive on Tuesday in what was the biggest single-day spike in Covid-19 cases since March 22, when Bihar reported the first three cases of the fast spreading contagion.

As of Tuesday, 343 Covid-19 cases were reported last week, according to government data shared through a tweet by its principal secretary, health, Sanjay Kumar.

MIGRANTS LEAD SPIKE IN CASES

The government attributed the sharp increase in the number of cases to the return of migrants from other states.

"Of the total Covid-19 cases, 332 are those who came to the state from within India during the lockdown period. Of them, 277 people came after May 3 (lockdown 3.0)," said Bihar's health secretary Lokesh Kumar Singh.

Singh said of the 277, most had come from Delhi (78), followed by Gujarat (71), Maharashtra (57), and West Bengal (20) and Haryana (13).

He also said the percentage of cases testing positive as against the samples tested, had gone up of late.

"As of now, 2.32% of the total samples tested (39,149) have turned positive. This figure used hover between 1.7%-1.8% until recently, but has shown an increase since the migrant workers have begun returning home in an organised and structured manner. The increase in number of cases is the outcome of the random tests we have been conducting on them," added Singh.

Bihar's concern may be far from over as over 4.27 lakh migrants are still expected to come by 267 additional Shramik Express trains.

"Till May 11, we had received 1,37,401 migrant workers by 115 special trains for them. We are now planning to run 267 more trains, which are expected to ferry an additional 4,27,200 passengers. Together, we will receive 5,64,600 migrant workers. This is not the final figure on migrant workers expected to reach Bihar from outside the state," said Anupam Kumar, secretary information and public relations department (IPRD).

Over 85,500 migrants are expected to return to Bihar between Wednesday and Thursday.

"We transported 34,629 passengers by 25 trains today and expect another 50,910 passengers by 34 trains tomorrow," said Kumar.

He also clarified that the increase in the number of Covid-19 cases in the state was not due to increased testing of samples, but because of the home-coming of migrant workers.

QUARANTINE PARAMETERS

Around 1.89 lakh people, mostly migrants, were staying for 21 days in 4,163 block quarantine centres, set up to curb the large-scale spread of the virus if they were to directly return to their respective villages.

Spelling out the different parameters set by the government for quarantining people coming from outside the state, he said students coming from outside the state, including Kota, had been allowed home quarantine, as many of them were minors and girls.

"Those returning from abroad will have to stay at institutional quarantine centres on payment basis. The government has already identified hotels in Gaya and Bodh Gaya, where international passengers coming to the state will be quarantined," added Kumar.

Normal train passengers would not be quarantined as they were coming under relaxation measures after proper screening at the station of origin, he added. The government re-started limited train operations from Tuesday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 12 -- Global money laundering watchdog - Financial Action Task Force (FATF) - has claimed that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by the terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking assistance, according to report released by it.

It warns that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as fund their terror operations.

"In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF says in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

Tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens, the report adds.

Many countries are reporting an "overall" increase in banknote withdrawals, which the FATF claims is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," the FATF states.

Some of the countries have also reported an increase in fundraising scams where criminals posing as international organizations or charities circulate emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fundraising campaigns (purportedly for research, victims and/or products), according to the report.

The health crisis, the Paris-based body says, is also impacting the government and private sectors' abilities to implement anti-money laundering measures and counter terrorist financing as well as international cooperation. Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extradition are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter terror financing (AML/CFT) 'on-site' inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections. Several countries, according to the report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators. In fact, some Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs) in lower capacity countries are either significantly "reducing their operations" or even "shutting down completely". There is also reporting of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to suspension of trials and hearings.

"There are reports that diversion of law enforcement and security resources to Covid-19 responses in high-risk, poorly resourced countries, may embolden terrorists and terrorist financiers in their activities," FATF states.

While banks worldwide are trying to follow anti-money laundering measures, several countries have flagged that there is increased activity in non-banking sectors like online gambling, the insurance sector, dealers in precious metals and stones and securities, while there is decreased activity in other sectors like real estate and casinos.

The movement of migrant workers in various countries - India is one of them - will particularly cause disruption for money value transfer service sector due to confinement measures and company shutdowns.

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," FATF notes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 26 -- Former Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe, legendary singer SP Balasubrahmanyam, spiritual leader Maulana Wahiduddin Khan and controversial archaeologist BB Lal were among seven people awarded the Padma Vibhushan, India's second-highest civilian award, the government announced on Monday.

The list of Padma awards also comprised 10 Padma Bhushan and 102 Padma Shri recipients. This included 29 women, 10 people of Indian origin, non resident Indians and foreigners, 16 posthumous awardees and one transgender person.

Abe, Japan's longest-serving PM, stepped down last August and was the first Japanese PM to be the chief guest at the Republic Day parade in 2014.

Indian-American physicist Narendra Singh Kapany, who is known for his work on fibre optics, was awarded posthumously along with Balasubrahmanyam, who recording 40,000 songs in 16 languages and died last September after being infected with Covid-19.

Dr Belle Monappa Hegde, cardiologist and former vice chancellor of Manipal University, was given the Padma Vibhushan, as was Islamic scholar and peace activist Wahiduddin Khan and Odia sculptor Sudarshan Sahoo.

BB Lal, former director general of the Archaeological Survey of India whose books first suggested the presence of a Ram temple at the disputed site in Uttar Pradesh's Ayodhya town, was also awarded.

Former bureaucrat Nripendra Misra, who now heads the committee for the construction of the Ram temple in Ayodhya, was among 10 Padma Bhushan awardees. The list included former Assam chief minister Tarun Gogoi, former Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan, former Gujarat Chief Minister Keshubhai Patel, who were all chosen posthumously.

Kannada author Chandrashekhara Kambara, former Lok Sabha speaker Sumitra Mahajan, industrialist Rajnikant Devidas Shroff, politician Tarlochan Singh, Shia leader and educationist Kalbe Sadiq and renowned singer KS Chithra were also given the Padma Bhushan.

The Padmi Shri was awarded to 102 people across the fields of medicine, social work, sports, literature and education, trade, sports, public affairs and art.

Among those awarded posthumously were former Goa governor Mridula Sinha, Gujarati actor duo Maheshbhai and Nareshbhai Kanodia, renowned Delhi pulmonologist Dr JN Pande, author CL Sapru and artist KC Sivasankar. Singer Bombay Jayashree, Theatre director Peter Brook, Lijjat Papad co-founder Jaswantiben Jamnadas Popat, Bhil artist Bhuri Bai, transgender activist Matha B. Manjamma Jogati and legendary Bihar launda naach exponent Ramachandra Manjhi were among the other awardees.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

DRDO develops UV disinfection tower to fight Covid-19

In its latest contribution to the fight against coronavirus disease Covid-19, the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has pitched in with an ultra-violet disinfection tower that can be used for sanitising places such as airports, shopping malls, metro stations, hotels, factories and offices, two officials said on Monday. Read more

'Better to not try your luck...': Mumbai Police's witty Covid-19 message

In another attempt to drive home Centre's message to stay at home during the Covid-19 lockdown, Mumbai Police took inspiration from the game of Ludo. In a tweet, the Mumbai Police posted an image of the board game with all the tokens housed in their respective 'homes'. Read more

Admit patients without asking for Covid-free certificate: Bengal govt to private hospitals

West Bengal recorded 17 coronavirus disease (Covid-19) related deaths between Friday and Sunday - the highest toll in 72 hours in the state - as a worried state government ordered all private hospitals and clinics to admit all patients without seeking certificates showing that they have not contracted SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease, or face strict penal action. Read more

Women Jan Dhan account holders start getting second instalment of Rs 500 from today

Women Jan Dhan bank account holders started getting the second instalment of Rs 500 from Monday as part of the Rs 1.7 lakh crore Prime Minister Jan Kalyan Yojana package announced by Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman on March 26. Read more

Global markets drop, spooked by China-US row over Covid-19

Shares took a turn for the worse on Monday as tensions between the Trump administration and China over the origins and handling of the coronavirus pandemic rattled investors. Read more

Gautam Gambhir picks all-time India Test XI, chooses Anil Kumble as skipper

Former Indian cricket team batsman Gautam Gambhir revealed his choices for an all-time India Test XI and he decided to go with Anil Kumble as the skipper of the side ahead of MS Dhoni and Virat Kohli. Read more

The Taste with Vir: Covid is a crisis not Armageddon

I am always a little intrigued by the casual ease with which politicians discuss the fate of the hospitality industry. When the industry does pop up in their consciousness it is nearly always in the context of safety. Read more

Mi 10, Xiaomi's 108-megapixel camera phone to launch in India on May 8

Xiaomi on Monday said its Mi 10 smartphone will launch in India on May 8. The company earlier this morning had resumed taking prepaid orders and delivery to "Green" and "Orange" zones during the Lockdown 3.0. Read more

Watch| 'Delhi should have minimum relaxations': Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 14 -- A top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

Earlier this month, Chinese news outlets quoted Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, as saying that the virus originated in Italy.

"The novel coronavirus running rampant around the world is not the Wuhan variant, but a variant that mutated in north Italy," China's national broadcaster quoted Kekule as saying in an interview on German television.

"The starting point of the pandemic is not in Wuhan, " official news agency Xinhua quoted him as saying.

In an emailed interview with the Hindustan Times, Kekule strongly denied the version of his argument published in Chinese state media, saying his words were twisted out of context.

"Chinese media are quoting from my recent bestseller book Der Corona-Kompass (The Corona Compass, available only in German so far) and from an interview I gave about the book in the popular German TV show Markus Lanz," said Kekule, who also holds a chair as University Professor and Director of the Institute for Medical Microbiology at Martin Luther University in Halle.

"The origin of the virus in China is described in detail in my book, and also the Chinese efforts to conceal the magnitude of the outbreak at the beginning. I never stated that the virus originally came from Italy, this is pure propaganda," he added.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Kekule's interview to a German channel was similarly picked up to fit into the narrative.

By the time the German expert reacted, his interview had spread across Chinese social media, with many thanking him for clearing China's name.

"Unfortunately, they are taking one or two phrases out of context, giving my statement a made-up twist. Chinese state media are referring to my account of the outbreak in Northern Italy and my critique of the WHO and EU in this context," Kekule said.

"There is, however, no scientific basis to deny that the virus originally came from China. I explained (on the television show) that the virus came of course from China, but the "G" variant was able to prevail in northern Italy because the outbreak was not detected there for several weeks, paving the way to the pandemic around the globe, including re-imports to China."

Kekule explained that the "G variant" (carrying a D614G mutation in the S gene) of the virus emerged in northern Italy, possibly because the outbreak went undetected for several weeks there.

"The G variant is most likely more contagious than the variant originally detected in Wuhan. This might be the reason why it spread world-wide from Italy. Since July 2020, more than 99% of the virus strains analysed worldwide are G variants, i.e. the viruses presently circulating have their common origin in Northern Italy."

The German scientist said that he went on the same television show to explain his position.

"The same evening I spoke again on the TV show Markus Lanz and we made it crystal clear that I had been misquoted in an act of propaganda," he said.

"Science tells us, that humankind must change its behaviour towards nature, including the habit of killing wild animals that carry dangerous viruses," he said.

"When even nations refuse to take responsibility of their actions, how should individuals learn to change their dangerous habits?"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 13 -- The global money-laundering and terrorist financing watchdog has warned that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking aid.

In a report released last week, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) cautioned that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as funding their terror operations. "In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF said in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

The report said FATF members highlighted that tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens. Many countries are reporting an overall increase in cash withdrawals, which FATF said is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe-haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," it said.

It added some of the countries have also reported an increase in fund-raising scams involving criminals, who have posed as international organisations or charities and circulated emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fund-raising campaign (purportedly for research, victims and/or products).

The FATF said the health crisis is also impacting the abilities of governments and private sectors in implementing anti-money laundering measure as well as international cooperation.

Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extraditions, are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter-terror financing (AML/CFT) on-site inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections.

Pakistan last month got a four-month reprieve for meeting a deadline set by the FATF to counter terror financing as the multilateral watchdog announced a temporary suspension of its activities because of the Covid-19 crisis. Several nations, according to report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators. There are reports of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to the suspension of trials.

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," the FATF said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 4 -- Local villagers in parts of Nepal bordering Uttarakhand are opposing the proposed Citizen Amendment Bill, which makes residency in Nepal for seven years a mandatory condition for citizenship, according to local government officials. The locals claim that the proposed bill is discriminatory towards women and will dent the age-old 'Roti-Beti' relationship between the people of the two countries. Villagers on the Indian side of the border said if the bill is passed, they would stop marrying off their daughters in Nepal.

On June 21, Nepal's parliamentary committee had endorsed the proposed bill mandating a seven-year probation period for women marrying Nepalese men.

Nepal's citizenship amendment bill is the latest in a series of recent developments to impact ties with Uttarakhand's bordering villages. There's already an uncertainty clouding trade with Nepal in the border areas amid the pandemic and ongoing tension over conflicting territorial claims between the two countries.

For Coronavirus Live Updates

The residents in bordering areas claim that if the proposed citizenship amendment bill is passed, the people in border areas of India would stop marrying off their daughters to men in Nepal.

"If the law gets implemented then will be a major and upsetting development for us because we have not just trade but strong cultural ties with people in border areas on the Nepal side," said Gopal Singh, village head of Khumti village in Pithoragarh, about 15 km away from Nepal border.

Pithoragarh is among the three Uttarakhand districts including Champawat, and US Nagar, that share borders with Nepal. Banbasa, a border town in Champawat district, is the major border crossing point in the state.

"If our daughters will get Nepalese citizenship after seven years of marrying a Nepalese man, then why would we marry them to a Nepalese man? She would have no rights there and is likely to be a stateless person despite living there," Singh said, adding that marriages between people of Khumti and those across the border is an old tradition.

The HT Guide to Coronavirus COVID-19

There have been reports of protests in some parts of Nepal against this seven-year naturalization provision of the proposed citizenship amendment bill. Nepali Congress, Samajbadi Party Nepal and Rastriya Janata Party Nepal have also opposed the proposed bill, according to government officials who quoted sources in Nepal.

Vinod Kala, a social activist in Banbasa town in Champawat district said, "It will definitely affect the 'Roti-Beti' relationship between the people of two countries and would further dent the bilateral ties."

Kala claimed that "at least 90%" of the locals in Banbasa would be affected by the amendment. "Only the remaining 10%, who are of Nepalese origin and have settled here, would be able to marry their daughters in Nepal," he said.

He also claimed that the law, if enforced, would further hamper the border trade which is "already under a cloud of uncertainty".

"The border trade with Nepal has already hit a low in Banbasa. And if this law comes, then it will probably hit the dead-end because the nationalistic sentiments of the people might get hurt," said Kala.

However, some people in border areas of Nepal think the proposed law will not hurt the cultural ties between the people of the two countries as it was a 'political matter'.

Madhav Prasad Joshi, a prominent and influential trader in Kanchanpur town of Nepal near the border said, "The matter is a political one but the ties are cultural which have been there for centuries...The law is not for just Indian women but every non-Nepalese women marrying Nepalese men," said Joshi.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 10 -- The fate of 23 Indian sailors stuck on a merchant navy ship anchored off a port in northern China appears to be uncertain with Beijing reportedly not allowing them to get off the vessel in the backdrop of increasing imported Covid-19 cases in the country.

The bulk carrier Jag Anand has been anchored off the Jingtang port on Bohai Sea in northern China's Hebei province since June, putting the physical and mental health of the sailors at risk.

The ship sailed from the port of Gladstone in Australia on May 26 - carrying Australian coal - and reached Jingtang port in China on June 13.

Since that day, the ship has been anchored 2-3 km away from the port.

In April, China's General Administration of Customs had announced strict management measures for crew members of international ships and flights coming into the country.

In October, China opened up 10 ports for foreign crew exchange while implementing a circuit-breaker mechanism to prevent imported Covid-19 cases - Jingtang, an artificial deep water port, wasn't among the 10.

Shipping companies have been advised to closely monitor the port's local quarantine conditions and implement a closed-loop management as per the quarantine requirements issued by the local port, Copenhagen-based BIMCO, an organisation for shipowners, shipbrokers and agents, said in a report in October.

It's not clear whether the rapidly deteriorating ties between China and Australia also played a part in the situation that the ship and its crew find themselves in.

The Chinese foreign ministry did not respond to questions from the Hindustan Times asking about the well-being of the Indian sailors and on the protocols that need to be followed in such cases.

At the regular ministry briefing on Tuesday, foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, however, said "convenience" was being provided to the sailors.

"As I understand, China has clear regulations on ports epidemic prevention and control and crew members quarantine requirements and as much as the regulations allow, we are providing convenience for these crew members," Wang said.

Responding to the question on whether the ".ship has been arrested and denied departure", Wang declined to share details.

"As for the specifics, I would still refer you to the competent Chinese authorities or relevant local government," he said.

A report by India's ANI earlier this week said the 23 Indian crew members on board are seeking help to return home; some are suffering from health issues and the ship is running short of medicines, the report said.

HT has learnt that while the local port authorities have not allowed the "crew change" - whereby a ship's crew can disembark and head back to their country of origin - it has been communicated to them that anyone needing treatment could be allowed to come ashore temporarily for medical attention.

Many of the crew members have completed their tenure with the company and were expecting to be back home months earlier.

Port authorities have also communicated to the ship that it has the option to sail away from the port or wait its turn - in a queue of multiple ships - to discharge its cargo.

No timeframe, however, has been given when Jag Anand's turn would come to discharge its cargo.

According to the ANI report, the family members of the crew have written a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and external affairs minister S Jaishankar regarding the situation.

"Due to severance of diplomatic ties between China, the Australia vessel is on anchor since June 13. The Customs authorities have not cleared the concerning cargo. At present, most of the crew have ended their stipulated contractual obligation and been on board for more than a year, some of them even exceeding 15 months," the letter, quoted in the ANI report said.

"Despite various attempts by the company through diplomatic resources, there has been no respite to crew sufferance who have been inflicted with not only physical stress but mental fatigue," the letter read.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 1 -- External affairs minister S Jaishankar and his New Zealand counterpart Nanaia Mahuta on Monday discussed ways to strengthen bilateral cooperation and to work jointly for peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific region.

This was Jaishankar's first interaction with Mahuta who took charge as New Zealand's foreign minister last November. The two ministers also discussed the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines, people familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity.

Since her appointment, Mahuta has established contact with her counterparts from key countries. The idea of an introductory phone call with Jaishankar was proposed by New Zealand, the people said.

"It was a pleasure to speak to New Zealand FM @NanaiaMahuta for the first time. Discussed the COVID challenge and our expectations of an early recovery. Our shared interests are expressed bilaterally and in the Indo-Pacific. Look forward to meeting her in person," Jaishankar said on Twitter.

The two ministers discussed bilateral issues, a shared vision of the Indo-Pacific and regional issues, the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines and expectations related to post-pandemic recovery, the people said.

The ministers also agreed to keep in touch to further strengthen bilateral cooperation and to promote peace, prosperity and stability in the Indo-Pacific, the people added.

Mahuta was named the foreign minister after the landslide victory of the Labour Party under the leadership of Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern. She has over 20 years of experience as a lawmaker and is the first woman and the first Maori to be appointed to the post.

In her inaugural foreign policy speech to the diplomatic corps on February 4, Mahuta outlined her country's priorities and said New Zealand has a deep stake in the stability and prosperity of the wider Indo-Pacific region, including through greater economic integration and adherence to its institutions and norms.

She said ties with the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), along with Japan, South Korea and India, are all important relationships for New Zealand. She added that New Zealand has much in common with these countries and will continue to invest in efforts to bolster ties with them.

India-New Zealand trade for the year ending September 2020 was worth $1.65 billion, making New Delhi Wellington's 11th largest trade partner.

There are about 250,000 people of Indian-origin in New Zealand, making up almost 5 per cent of its population. In the general election of October 2020, two candidates of Indian origin, Priyanca Radhakrishnan and Gaurav Sharma, emerged victorious for the first time. Radhakrishnan subsequently became the first person of Indian-origin to be appointed a minister in New Zealand.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 1 -- India on Thursday responded to a World Health Organization (WHO) report on the origins of the Coronavirus disease by calling for a "comprehensive and expert-led mechanism" to speedily investigate the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Without naming China, India noted that WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had raised the issue of "delays and difficulties in accessing raw data" for the report, and sought "more timely and comprehensive data sharing" for future investigations.

WHO and China released the long-awaited report on the origins of Covid-19 on Tuesday, listing four hypotheses in order of probability. The report said the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 most probably jumped from bats to humans via an intermediary animal. It also said it was "extremely unlikely" that the virus had been leaked from a laboratory.

"We share the need for a comprehensive and expert-led mechanism that would expeditiously investigate the origin of Covid-19 in cooperation with all stakeholders," external affairs ministry spokesperson Arindam Bagchi said.

"It is pertinent to note that the director-general of the WHO has separately raised the issue of delays and difficulties in accessing raw data for the team conducting the study. We fully support the director general's expectation that future collaborative studies will include more timely and comprehensive data sharing," he said.

India also welcomes the WHO chief's readiness to deploy additional missions, Bagchi said.

Ghebreyesus, who has for long been accused of being soft on China, has called for further investigation of the theory that Covid-19 began from a laboratory leak and also rebuked Beijing for sitting on crucial data. China has consistently rejected the hypothesis that the virus leaked from a lab.

"Although the team has concluded that a laboratory leak is the least likely hypothesis, this requires further investigation, potentially with additional missions involving specialist experts, which I am ready to deploy," the director-general told WHO's 194 member states during a briefing on the report.

"I do not believe that this assessment was extensive enough...Further data and studies will be needed to reach more robust conclusions," he added.

The US and 13 other countries have raised concerns about the report in a joint statement, saying the WHO team was "significantly delayed and lacked access to complete, original data and samples". These countries have also backed an "independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence" of the origins of the pandemic.

Bagchi said the WHO report is an "important first step" in establishing the origins of the pandemic as it has stressed the "need for next-phase studies across the region". He said, "The report also stresses the need for further data and studies to reach robust conclusions."

He added, "We join other stakeholders in voicing their expectations that follow up to the WHO report or further studies, including on an understanding of the earliest human cases and clusters by the WHO on this critical issue, will receive the fullest cooperation of all concerned."

India will continue to work with WHO to strengthen capacity and improve global health security so that the current report and further studies will provide inputs for developing protocols and building a knowledge base and expertise that facilitate genomic surveillance to track virus mutations and proactively respond to the next global pandemic, Bagchi said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Delhi, Jan. 13 -- Lohri is a traditional winter folk festival celebrated in India by people specifically in the North zone. It is a festival of joy that commemorates the passing of the Winter Solstice and looks forward to longer days as the sun journeys towards the northern hemisphere.

Lohri is primarily celebrated in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent by Sikhs and Hindus. Each year, the festival is observed on the night before Makar Sankranti, in accordance with the solar part of the lunisolar Bikrami calendar.

Date:

This year, the mid-winter festival is being observed on January 13, 2021.

History and significance

There are several tales surrounding the origin of the Lohri festival. A few accounts attribute the origin of the festival to the Himalayan mountain region where the winters are colder than the rest of the country.

After weeks of harvesting the Rabi crop, people would gather around a bonfire and celebrate the passing of the winter solstice and the promise of the coming spring season. The festival is also dedicated to the sun deity, Surya, as on this day the devotees expect it's returning after the cold winter days and ask it for warmth and sunshine.

Another legend attributes the celebration of Lohri to the tale of 'Dulla Bhatti' who was a local hero of the Punjab region and during the reign of Akbar, worked as a saviour of the people. He famously saved a group of young girls from being sold into slavery.

His deeds have been passed down as a legend and are deeply inculcated in the Punjabi folklore. On Lohri, 'Dulla Bhatti' is celebrated and various songs and dances are performed in his honour.

Celebrations

Each year the festival of Lohri is celebrated with the traditional bonfire. Unlike most festivals in India which witness people visiting family and friends and distributing sweets etc., Lohri celebrations are marked by people gathering at a common place and set up a huge bonfire with various kinds of sweet delicacies on display for eating together.

In Punjab, the festival is celebrated by eating sheaves of roasted corn from the new harvest. As the January sugarcane harvest also wraps up during this time, many sugarcane products such as gurh and gachak are central to the celebration food.

People gather on this day to dance their hearts out and enjoy the warmth of the fire and friendly spirit. No Lohri festival is complete without the energetic moves of Bhangra and Gidda and some people also decorate their homes.

Even during the Covid-19 pandemic, the spirit of Lohri carries on as people connect over zoom calls with their family members to mark the celebrations of this festival. Here's wishing everyone a bright and cheerful Lohri!

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 3 -- I have written in these columns about Gandhi's response to the plague epidemic in Johannesburg, South Africa in 1905.



When after an abatement, the contagion was threatening to reappear, he wrote an article in his journal Indian Opinion on January 16, 1905, which bears substantial reproduction. "Once again the dark clouds are gathering. It will be to the great benefit of our people if they bear in mind the following rules; otherwise there would be immense harm. What is more, it might be used as an argument for enacting more severe laws against us: (1) No one should think that the government will harass the patient after removing him to the hospital.

(2) The government should be immediately informed in case of a sudden attack of fever or asthma. (3) A doctor should be immediately consulted. (4) Everyone should stay where he is without becoming panicky. (5) Those who might have come in contact with a plague patient should not try to conceal the fact but should come forward to have their clothes etc, disinfected. (6) One should not, under any circumstances, have one's bedroom attached to the shop to save money. (7) One should not stock any goods for sale in one's house. (8) One should keep one's house scrupulously clean. (9) Every house or room should be well-lighted and well-ventilated. (10) One should sleep with the windows open. (11) The clothes worn by day as well as those used during the night should be kept clean. (12) The food taken should be light and simple. (13) Lavish dinners and feasts should be stopped. (14) Dry earth or ashes should be provided in latrines where buckets are used; and everyone should after easing himself cover the night soil thoroughly with these so that no flies sit thereon. (15) Lavatories and urinals should be kept clean. (16) The floors and other parts of the house should be washed clean with disinfecting fluid mixed in hot water. (17) No article from an infected place should be used elsewhere. (18) More than two persons should not sleep in a room of normal proportions. (19) One should not sleep in the kitchen, dining room or the larder. (20) Walls should be plastered with cement in order to keep out rats. Care should, most of all, should be taken to see that foodstuffs are kept beyond their reach. (21) Those who always work indoors should go out into the open air and walk a couple of miles daily for exercise."

One can see behind each of the items he has listed the presence of the rat. It is a plague-resisting list. Yet, the notes of caution, in points 4, 5, 11, 12, 13 , 14 , 15, 16 , 17 and 18, read like they have been written for our present Covid-19 pandemic.

If Gandhi spelt out in no uncertain terms the responsibilities of individuals and of society, he did not spare the municipality its share of the blame. The municipality's all-white officers believed and led others to believe that the spread of plague among the Indians was due to their insanitary ways - an impression that Gandhi sought strenuously to dispel by writing in the South African press and lobbying with members of the House of Commons and political leaders such as Dadabhai Naoroji in Britain and Gopal Krishna Gokhale in India.

The town council, at that time, had begun to take insensitive, callous and medically-uncalled-for steps such as shifting patients to canvas sheds in an open field about 13 miles from the city. Gandhi pilloried the council for its initial sluggish response to the epidemic and - most important- its treatment of the spread (until Gandhi made it realise the error of its ways) as something to do with the colour of the sick man's skin.

He was fighting plague and prejudice.

I must remind readers that Gandhi had, a little earlier, worked with chosen volunteers, to minister to 23 victims of the plague outbreak in that city. All the victims were of Indian origin, working in a gold mine just outside the city. Twenty one of the victims died, as did the sole nurse the municipality had provided. Rigorous hygiene and luck helped Gandhi and his colleagues, including a brave doctor, William Godfrey, to survive.

So, is this narrative merely a historical recall?

No historical allusion should be regarded as "merely" that, for history, when accurately and fairly recalled, without exaggeration or embroidering is not a story, but the living truth of the present in the past and the living past in the future.

But that truism apart, this narrative is vital for we can be sure that the world is going to live with this pandemic for a long while, as will the need to fight both the virus and, where they occur, our mistakes in handling it.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- The Union government on Wednesday informed Parliament that 255 Indian citizens were infected by the novel coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in Iran, one of the countries worst hit by the infection. Although the government has evacuated hundreds of Indians from China, where the infection originated, and other countries such as Iran, official data shows that a large number of Indians abroad may still be vulnerable.

According to data compiled by the United Nations in 2019, India was the leading country of origin of international migrants. It estimated that 17.5 million Indian migrants lived across the globe.

Even as some of the Indians living outside the country would have voluntarily travelled back home or been evacuated by the government in view of the virus outbreak, coming to India has become difficult with multiple airlines cancelling international flights and the government imposing travel restrictions.

This leaves many Indians living in the worst-hit countries more vulnerable to the virus. According to MEA data, more than 15% NRIs (nearly 2 million people) were in 10 countries that have by far recorded the highest number of positive coronavirus cases, including China. Of them, the highest number of NRIs, at nearly 1.3 million, is living in the United States.

There were more than 300,000 NRIs in Italy, Iran, Spain and Germany - the four worst-hit countries outside China. Also, more than 86% NRIs lived in countries where at least 100 positive cases of coronavirus have been confirmed. Of them, Indians from Iran are the only ones who can come into the country right now, but they will be quarantined. The others cannot.

In some countries, mainly in the Arabian region, Indians make up a large number of migrants, UN data says. For instance, 43% of migrants in Bahrain, where 256 people have been found Covid-19 positive, were Indians.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- New Delhi

It is a concept that has been around since the 1950s when it originated in Germany (although some put its year of origin even earlier); in the decades since, there has been enough research to show that its cons far exceed its pros; yet it has lingered on.

It, of course, is the open office, and the coronavirus disease, Covid-19, may have finally killed it.

As the coronavirus pandemic spread across the globe in February, most workplaces around the country (and the world) began to implement rules among employees to avoid clusters, maintain physical distance, wear masks, sanitise hands. and avoid biometric entry. Many put in place strict deep cleaning protocols. And finally, all suddenly discovered the merits of WFH (work from home).

Once the lockdown is lifted and at least some employees look to rejoin work -- many will work from home; for instance, India's largest software services firm Tata Consultancy Services has said that up to 75% of its global workforce will work from home by 2025 -- one of the most important questions facing organisations is simply this: Can the open office plan, marked by a lack of cubicles such that all employees are required to sit or work in clusters, still make sense in a world ravaged by the ongoing pandemic?

The straightforward answer? No

The open office was aimed at improving collaboration and proficiency among employees. By the turn of the century, and after a few decades of cubicles, the open office became the norm. Different types of furniture, which demarcated different spaces of work, was a distinct feature of the open office floor plan: hubs for private meetings, longer tables around which larger groups could gather for meetings or scribbles, single or two-seater sofas for more private conversations and glass-walled meeting rooms that also offered the same transparency that marked the rest of the office. Work desks became workstations where clusters of employees would be seated, often sharing resources such as lamps and telephones, and that great luxury of the modern workplace -- coffee machines.

In a post-Covid-19 world, this translates into zero social distancing, not to mention multiple shared surfaces. In other words, heightened risk of transmission of Sars-Cov-2. Sorry, but that's how everyone thinks now.

"We are looking at a complete 180-degree shift [in offices]. The whole premise of how offices have been designed has been about collaboration and people coming together. Now the premise about people coming to office is about social distancing. So the whole focus will be on how to get people to interact in such a way. The communal spaces that the open office plan allowed for will not be possible anymore. It won't be possible for three people to sit on a sofa and have a discussion," said Aparna Piramal, author and columnist on business and design.

Neetish Sarda, founder of Smartworks, a firm that offers co-working spaces across nine cities in India, said that his company instituted workplace measures on March 20 itself, five days before the nationwide lockdown was announced. The measures, which included disinfecting all surfaces and floors, temperature checks using an infrared thermometer at entry points, placement of sanitizer bottles at "high touchpoints" and emphasis on hand wash/sanitization while entering office spaces,mandatory masks , sanitising packages, physical distancing , and preventing sharing of dishes or drinks and eatables, will also be enforced once the lockdown is lifted, he said.

Will companies redesign the office space altogether?

US-based furniture maker Steelcase recently released a report-cum-catalogue titled Navigating What's Next: The post-Covid workspace has some thoughts on that. "Planning for now also means retrofitting the workplace, based on a common-sense approach that adheres to governmental and global health guidelines, including physical distancing, adding barriers, cleaning and safety measures," it said.

"Work environments in the future will require reinvention as science-based evidence and emerging technologies offer new solutions. Planning paradigms of the past were driven by density and cost. Going forward they need to be based on the ability to adapt easily to possible economic, climate and health disruptions," the report added.

Some of the more immediate suggestions it offers includes reconfiguring desks, or pulling them apart to reduce face-to-face orientation, which can be achieved for instance, by turning workstations through 90-degree angles which would prevent workers from working directly across or behind one another. It also suggests using open spaces for meetings of more than five people as well as leveraging flexible furniture with movable whiteboards and screens to create boundaries.

Shields between people - such as those made of material like plexiglass or plastic - will make a comeback, Carol Bartz, former CEO of Yahoo! Inc., recently told a magazine. "I think people are going to want protection, plexiglass or whatever. There will also be more teleconferencing, absolutely less flying - you will teleconference with customers," the longtime Silicon Valley chief executive told Marketwatch in an interview.

Bimal Patel, director of Ahmedabad-based HCP Design, Planning and Management Private Limited - the architecture firm mandated to develop New Delhi's Central Vista - said that it was too early to think of lasting design changes.

"The most interesting thing that has emerged out of the present crisis is not so much this idea that we may need to make lasting [design] changes in the long run but that a lot of people, particularly in the service industries like our own, have discovered the potential of working online. We [at HCP] have discovered that there is quite a lot of stuff that we can manage to do (without coming into the office). [Of course,] when we do come, it will be because we need to sit around a table, and draw on the same drawing, or stand around a drawing and discuss it. There is work that we all need to do that will bring us close together."

In the short run, he said, the important thing for firms to figure out is how many people can actually stay away from the office so as to reduce the number of people coming in to work.

Though Patel may not agree with this, his remark highlights a larger question -- forget open offices, do we even need offices?

Around the world too, organisations are beginning to rethink work schedules of employees to stagger their return, and enable more people to work from home. Global commercial real estate services firm Cushman & Wakefield is testing a design concept called the Six Feet Office to help employees stay six feet apart. This includes signage that helps people recognise distance, usage of disposable desk covers, and ensuring that people walk only clockwise through the office space to minimize bumping into each other.

A PricewaterhouseCoopers pulse survey among 305 US companies published on April 27, found that more than three-quarters (77%) were putting new safety measures in place, while others said they were taking steps to promote physical distancing, such as reconfiguring workspaces (65%). More than half the companies (52%) were planning on changing shifts and alternating crews to reduce exposure, while 49% of the companies said they were planning to make remote work a permanent option for roles that allow it.

Indian furniture maker Godrej Interio has a four-person team, called the Ergonomics and Workspace Research Cell, whose mandate is to study issues commonly faced in offices - like noisy colleagues - and publish findings that eventually guide their product design team. When the global pandemic hit and offices around the globe and India began to close down, it began to study the challenges of working from home.

"Our aim is to reach 10,000 [respondents] so the research is still ongoing. We asked questions like, what are the issues people face; how can we help them stay productive? Our focus is on the health and well-being of people," said Sameer Joshi, an associate vice president in the marketing division of Godrej Interio who leads the team. Based on the findings, a "work from home" range of 40 furniture items will be rolled out once factories open, Joshi said.

"We are getting a lot of interest from corporates to supply furniture for home. So we're taking these learnings and quickly adapting [them] to reconfigure [existing] home furniture [models]. Indian homes are denser, there's often no space for a separate office. Same piece of furniture is used by multiple users, unlike the office. The solution has to be flexible enough so that it adapts to different users," Joshi said.

At a time when the world stares at yet another economic recession, it is crucial to ask whether firms will make such additional investments in office spaces or infrastructure to enable people to work from home. Piramal said it would be in their own interest to do so.

"For the first time, many organisations will have to think of their employees being in a kind of life and death situation [inside the office]. In most industries, you don't think about this, unless you're in the manufacturing space or in the armed forces. So, if you view it from that perspective, then certain investments have to be made. [Of course] somebody has to bear that cost. Maybe that cost may come out of employee salaries," she said.

Or they may simply come out of the savings companies hope to make from rent payments.

(With inputs from Abhishek Behl)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 29 -- India on Saturday recorded 135 new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), one of the highest single-day spikes, as the number of cases crossed 1,000 amid a mounting challenge of controlling the spread of the disease that has killed about 30,000 people across the world.

Fresh deaths were reported in India from Kerala, Gujarat and Maharashtra, taking the death toll from the disease to 21, according to official data from states. Maharashtra has reported the highest number of Covid-19 cases so far at 186, with 29 fresh cases on Saturday, followed by Kerala at 182. In Telangana, the number went up to 67, while Karnataka has reported 76 cases so far.

The official data of the Union health ministry, however, said the case count was 918, which showed there was a lag in the official numbers released by states being taken into account.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who on Tuesday declared a 21-day national lockdown to contain the spread of the disease, announced the creation of a Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund where people can contribute and help in the fight against Covid-19.

"It is my appeal to my fellow Indians, kindly contribute to the PM-CARES Fund. This Fund will also cater to similar distressing situations, if they occur in the times ahead," he said. "This will go a long way in creating a healthier India," Modi added.

A statement posted on his official website said that while the Prime Minister is the chairman of the new public charitable trust, its members include the defence minister (Rajnath Singh), home minister (Amit Shah) and the finance minister (Nirmala Sitharaman).

As per officials in Kerala, which has the second highest number of cases after Maharashtra, the state reported its first Covid-19 death on Saturday after a 69-year-old man died at Ernakulam Medical College Hospital, but it was not included in the central data.

The man was admitted to the isolation ward on March 22 after his return from Dubai, the government hospital said. Maharashtra has reported 286 cases.

In Delhi, among the eight people who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday was a 48-year-old doctor at a private clinic in Hari Nagar. The Delhi health department wasn't immediately able to trace the source of the infection. "From the history given to us by him, he had gone for a home visit to a person who had returned from New Zealand. However, no such person has tested positive in Delhi yet," said a senior official from the Delhi health department. The total number of cases in Delhi went up to 49.

The Union health ministry's joint secretary, Lav Agarwal, said the government was working with states on health infrastructure preparedness and the focus was having dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and blocks in every state. Arrangements were being made to ramp up isolation and intensive care beds. Seventeen states have so far started work on this, he said, adding that doctors and nurses were being provided online training from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.

The developments came on a day the government faced a fresh challenge - the exodus of many of India's 100 million migrant workers from the national capital after a nationwide lockdown left them stranded without jobs, food and shelter. India's response to Covid-19 has been "pre-emptive, pro-active and graded", the government said, brushing aside the allegation that the nationwide lockdown was announced without any planning. The information and broadcasting ministry said the government had already put in place a "comprehensive response system" at the borders of the country, much before the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a public health emergency of international concern on January 30.

The ministry of home affairs issued another advisory urging all states and Union territories (UTs) to take immediate relief measures to provide temporary accommodation, food, clothing and medical care to homeless people, including migrant workers stranded due to the lockdown.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Singh Puri said aircraft were crisscrossing the Indian airspace to ensure that the Covid-19 testing kits of ICMR reached their destinations on time. The Indian Navy, too, deployed its aircraft to help the Goa government transport 60 samples to the Pune-based National Institute of Virology for testing, an official said on Saturday. The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said there were "sporadic cases" where the origin of the infections could not be traced but denied there was an alarming spread in the country. "Till the time we see a significant number of cases to indicate community transmission, let us not over-interpret things," said Raman R Gangakhedkar, head of the Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases at ICMR.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- The Trinamool Congress (TMC) has announced a minimum income scheme for the poorest families of Bengal in its election manifesto for the upcoming state elections, as has the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) in Tamil Nadu. The Congress, in Kerala and Assam, has also talked about a minimum income guarantee scheme, and the Bharatiya Janata Party too has promised a variant of income assistance in its election manifesto.

Political parties of all hues, across states, are embracing the idea of a basic minimum income for citizens. It may be tempting to dismiss this as hollow election propaganda. But it is no coincidence that different parties have all converged on this one core idea. View this along with the other recent nativistic policy announcements by the governments of Haryana and Jharkhand to reserve jobs in their states for local citizens, and there emerges a larger pattern.

"Household income" is perhaps the most critical political, economic and social issue in the country today. The jobs and income situation is staggeringly dismal. In the absence of any other concrete and immediate solution to boost incomes or create new jobs, political parties are seeking to address this issue by providing income assistance to citizens in the form of cash and/or in the form of job reservations.

The idea of a basic minimum income in India has so far been discussed primarily as an economic idea to reform government welfare delivery and make it more efficient in the form of cash transfers. This is a misplaced positioning of the idea.

The notion that no family should fall below a certain minimum income threshold, which can guarantee a life of dignity and respect in society is, foremost, a political-philosophy construct. A basic minimum income is not an efficiency tool for governance to replace in-kind welfare with cash assistance. It is a doctrine for a harmonious society where the gap between the haves and the have-nots does not become so enormously large that it threatens to erupt into violence and cause social disorder. Politics is the medium to resolve the contests of such forces and hence, the idea of a basic minimum income in a society should primarily be championed by political leaders.

In India, the idea of a basic minimum income was first articulated to the mass public and championed politically during the 2019 elections, when the then Congress president, Rahul Gandhi, unveiled the Nyuntam Aay Yojana (Nyay) initiative. Under Nyay, the woman head of the poorest 20% of India's families would get Rs.6,000 a month as income assistance for her family directly in her bank account or through some other easily accessible window.

The logic behind the numbers of Nyay was that in today's India, a family needs a basic minimum income of Rs.12,000 a month to lead a life of dignity and respect, which represents the 20th percentile of the household income distribution in India. The poorest one-fifth of India's households, on average, earn only Rs.6,000 a month. Hence, the gap between their average current earnings and what it takes to live a life of dignity is Rs.6,000 ( Rs.12,000- Rs.6,000) a month. Nyay was envisaged as a federal scheme to be funded by both the Centre and the states and implemented by the states.

A cheeky counter-factual would be that had India elected the Congress in May 2019, and had a functioning Nyay scheme by April 2020, when the pandemic hit, millions of families may not have had to struggle to eat or millions of migrants may not have been desperate to walk back to their homes for food and income. A sudden lack of income was the biggest damage inflicted on families by the lockdown and Nyay would have provided the required safety net.

A Nyay-type programme is perhaps even more critically required in post-Covid-19 times where economic recovery is extremely skewed in favour of the wealthy and exacerbates India's already large income inequality. The finance minister took great pride in announcing a positive headline Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in the October to December 2020 quarter. But, even in the shorter month of February 2021, 28 million families, with absolutely no other source of income, pleaded for work at paltry minimum wages under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS).

This was the highest demand for MGNREGS work in the last seven months, just when India's economy was apparently recovering strongly. Clearly, these 28 million families did not experience any of the robustness of the economic recovery that the government waxed eloquent about. A recent report indicated that 75 million more Indians may have slipped back into poverty post-Covid, just when the financial markets have blessed the richest Indians with even greater wealth.

The basic income proposals announced by the various parties may vary in its details from Nyay but the idea is the same. However, in a post-Goods and Services Tax (GST) era, states have very little fiscal autonomy or the money to be able to fund and implement their own income schemes on a large-scale. Hence, any version of an income scheme designed and funded only by the state without assistance from the Centre will be limited in its impact.

The very idea of a minimum basic income is to set an income floor and provide a cushion for people that slip below it. The resurgence in Nyay-type ideas is neither mere populism nor a coincidence. It is a manifestation of the ominous income inequality that threatens to rupture our social disorder.

I recall a meeting in 2019 when Rahul Gandhi told some of us, "Political parties will soon have to address income inequality with a concrete plan such as a minimum income threshold", which laid the origins for Nyay. Similar to his early warning about Covid-19, his call for a political embrace of a minimum income initiative has proved to be prophetic.

Praveen Chakravarty is a political economist and senior office-bearer of the Congress

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 22 -- Extending further relaxations to Covid-19 travel restrictions, the Centre on Thursday has decided to allow more categories of foreign nationals and Indian nationals to travel to India. All OCI (Overseas Citizen of India) and PIO (Persons of Indian origin) card holders and all other foreign nationals intending to visit India for any purpose, except on a tourist visa, will be allowed to enter by air or water routes through authorised airports and seaport immigration check posts. This also includes flights operated under Vande Bharat Mission, air transport bubble arrangements or by any non-scheduled commercial flights as allowed by the ministry of civil aviation.

All such travellers will, however, have to strictly adhere to the health ministry guidelines, the notification said.

Under this graded relaxation, the Centre has also decided to restore with immediate effect all existing visas (except electronic visa, tourist visa and medical visa). If the validity of such visas has expired, fresh visas of appropriate categories can be obtained from Indian Mission/Posts concerned, the ministry of home affairs has said.

Foreign nationals planning to visit India for medical treatment can apply for a medical visa including for their medical attendants.

In its earlier order, the home ministry had specified four categories of OCI cardholders to travel to India.

Those were:

1. Minor children who hold OCI cards and whose parents are Indian nationals.

2. OCI cardholders who wish to com eto India for some medical emergency of immediate family members or death.

3. Married couples when one is an OCI card holder and the other is an Indian national

4. Students who are OCI cardholders and at least one of their parents is and Indian national or an OCI card holder.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- In a case of alleged negligence, a Covid-19 patient at M R Bangur hospital, a designated Covid hospital in Kolkata, was told he had tested negative and discharged on April 26. Later that very night, the patient was told that there had been a mistake, that he had tested positive and readmitted to the hospital. He died on April 28 at the hospital.

The deceased's son has alleged gross negligence, pointing out that after returning home and the assurance of having tested negative, his father had spent time with his granddaughters, one of whom is a seven-month-old baby.

Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha, director of health services Ajay Chakraborty and health secretary Vivek Kumar did not respond to questions sent by text messages and WhatsApp about the incident.

However, at the state secretariat, without mentioning Bangur hospital, chief minister Mamata Banerjee had said on Wednesday that minor clerical mistakes do take place.

"There could be some errors at the ground level. Those must be forgiven for the time being. This is not a deliberate mistake. This is a new task and a new initiative. Some minor mistakes may happen." She, however, did not mention the name of the hospital or patient.

"...There can be a minor error in a notice, a printing mistake. Some are trying to malign the government with these. All that health workers need at this hour is some appreciation," she added.

The man was admitted to the hospital on April 22 as he was suffering from a dry cough.

"On April 25, I received a call from the hospital at night, saying my father had tested negative and would be released. He was discharged on the morning of April 26 and the discharge certificate had 'Covid-19 negative' written on it. However, that very night, hospital authorities telephoned me again, this time to say that there had been a mistake and he was actually positive. They asked me to take him back to the hospital," said the son of the deceased, a resident of Bechu Chatterjee Street in North Kolkata.

The man was readmitted to the hospital on April 27 and died on April 28.

"Who is responsible for this mistake? They killed my father! Also, what if my children now test positive? My father spent time with them after coming back home. My mother is 63. They are all vulnerable," said the deceased's son.

A senior doctor at the hospital said that the error was not due to defective kits, since those had been sent back. It could not be ascertained whether the hospital is using kits of Chinese origin.

"It was a human error. The report came positive but got wrongly listed as negative," said the doctor, who did not want to be identified.

A senior health official, who did not want to be named, said that all members of the family would be tested for novel coronavirus infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 19 -- A new study by US scientists has sought to dispel speculation that the novel coronavirus had been created in a laboratory and leaked from a bio-warfare facility, triggering the pandemic the world is struggling to contain, concluding instead that Covid-19 indeed had natural origins.

Based on publicly available genome sequence data of the virus released earlier by Chinese scientists, researchers at the Department of Immunology and Microbiology at the Scripps Research Institute found that the virus could not be a "laboratory construct" or "purposefully manipulated."

The study, published in Nature Medicine journal on March 17, proposed two natural scenarios through which the virus, also known as SARS-CoV-2, may have originated. It flies against unconfirmed reports, blogs and discussions on Twitter and other social media that the virus was a bio-weapon. The novel coronavirus has left at least 7,529 people dead.

Scientists analysed the spike protein - the sharp point on the outside of the virus that it uses to penetrate the outer walls of human and animal cells. They found that the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein (a hook like structure that grips host cells) had evolved to effectively target the ACE2 receptors, responsible for regulating blood pressure in humans.

The SARS -CoV-2 spike protein was so effective at binding the human cells, in fact, that the scientists concluded it was the result of natural selection and not the product of genetic engineering, according to ScienceDaily, a website on science and research news. Scientists also found that the molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2 was similar to those of bats and pangolins.

"By comparing the available genome sequence data for known coronavirus strains, we can firmly determine that SARS-CoV-2 originated through natural processes," said Kristian Andersen, associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research and corresponding author on the paper in ScienceDaily.

The two scenarios suggested by the authors of the study are that the virus may have evolved through natural selection of an intermediate host animal and then transferred to humans from that animal. There are no documented cases of direct bat-human transmission. The other scenario suggested a non-pathogenic (an organism that does not cause disease) version jumped from an animal host on to humans and then gradually transformed into a pathogenic state within humans.

Co-author Andrew Rambaut of the University of Edinburgh said it was difficult to ascertain at this point which of the scenarios was most likely.

"Even before this study within the scientific community it was clear that the virus was not designed on purpose. This is simply because the genetic sequence and molecular structure of Coronaviruses in earlier outbreaks like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) was very different," said Shashank Tripathi, assistant professor and Wellcome Trust India Alliance intermediate fellow, Microbiology & Cell Biology Department, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

Tripathi, commenting on the issue in his individual capacity, added: "The structure of SARS-CoV-2 is too far apart from those and that it was not designed or replicated. The closest match of the virus structure is in fact those found in horseshoe bats and pangolins."

"Having said that we need to know what kind of research was going on in the Wuhan Institute of Virology with respect to Coronaviruses. China needs to be forthcoming on that," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 7 -- Health authorities say they are focusing on four areas within a 4km radius in northeast Delhi's Dilshad Garden that appear to be reporting a bunch of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases. Experts suggest limited community spread has begun in the area, after reports that in many of these cases the source of the patient's infection is unclear.

Officials have declared these four places as containment areas. Each of them has a focal patient (the person who might have infected others). Three of these containment areas were declared on Monday - two separate blocks of GTB Enclave and one in Dilshad Colony. Officials have been unable to establish travel or contact history of the focal patients in these areas.

The developments come amid a debate on whether India has entered the community transmission stage of the pandemic, in which the source of a patient's infection could not be traced or isolated.

"One of the blocks (in GTB Enclave) is linked to a nurse from Delhi State Cancer Institute who tested positive and the other is linked to an old man. We are not sure where he got the infection from," a senior Delhi government official said, requesting anonymity.

On Monday, 10 nurses from the Delhi State Cancer Institute in GTB enclave tested positive for Covid-19, taking the hospital's tally to 18 (of which two are doctors and 16 nursing staff). After this, the cancer institute decided to test all 48 of its patients.

"We have sent all samples for Covid-19 testing. If they test negative, patients will be moved to various private hospitals. However, if they test positive, they will be taken to the nearby Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital, which is a dedicated Covid-19 centre," said an official from the Delhi State Cancer Institute.

Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital is one of the two Delhi government hospitals completely dedicated for treatment of the deadly infection caused by the Sars-Cov-2 virus. At present, there are 85 Covid-19 positive and 164 suspected patients admitted to the hospital.

Separately, in the Dilshad Colony containment area, a middle-aged man (the focal patient) with unclear history (meaning no foreign travel or no established contact with a Covid-19 positive case) tested positive for Covid-19.

The fourth containment area is linked to two mohalla clinic doctors who practise in Dilshad Garden. (So far, 34 health care workers and hospital sanitation staff have tested positive for the viral infection across Delhi).

The J and K blocks of Dilshad Garden were declared containment areas after a 38-year-old woman (the focal patient), who returned from Saudi Arabia on March 10, passed on the infection to at least 11 people, including the two mohalla clinic doctors. Six of them are from the Dilshad Garden area. In the same cluster, officials were not able to establish the source of infection of a patient in Maujpur. This patient did not have any direct contact with the woman who returned from Saudi or the two doctors.

"In hot spots, some community spread may be occurring," said Randeep Guleria, director, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and a member of the national task force on Covid-19.

Although a Union health ministry document late last month said limited community transmission of the Covid-19 disease has begun in India, authorities maintain that the country is not witnessing large-scale community spread.

Jacob John, professor emeritus and former head of virology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, said community transmission was happening in the Dilshad Garden containment areas.

"Now, we should not focus so much on getting the history of the patient and figuring out where they might have got the infection from.We must focus on keeping people out of hospitals. And, to slow the community spread, everyone must wear masks," he said.

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 18 -- The government's decision to open the gates for private facilities to test for the coronavirus infection has the potential to urgently scale up the country's testing capacity that experts say is necessary to effectively fight the deadly disease that has claimed 7,500 lives worldwide.

But experts warn that if diagnosis criteria is not relaxed and more people allowed for testing, the benefits of allowing private labs might be nullified and India left fighting an uphill battle against the infection that can dramatically expand in reach over a few days.

Currently, the Indian authorities limit testing to only government facilities for only people with a history of travel abroad, who have come in close contact with someone testing positive for the virus, or health workers. Only people showing symptoms are tested.

But the strict eligibility criteria and limited number of testing centres - 72 in a country with a population of 1.3 billion people - has ensured that many people are finding it difficult to get tested.

Moreover, the need to rope in more labs and private players is made clear by the problems plaguing government testing and sample collection centres, where experts admit there exists a clear infection risk because of long hours of waiting and overcrowding.

India currently tests the lowest number of people per capita among major countries grappling with the coronavirus outbreak: a mere 8.6 tests per million, compared with 4,831 per million in south Korea, 2,820 in China and 533 in the United Kingdom, which has been criticised for not testing enough and reversed its "herd immunity" policy after grim projections.

"We do need to do more testing. I have made that clear. You don't know what you are dealing with until you test. What is the harm in testing?" asked Dr Gagandeep Kang, director of Translational Health Science and Technology Institute.

A number of experts have called for private players to be roped in, testing eligibility relaxed and more aggressive diagnosis protocols adopted.

"There are enough PCR [polymerase chain reaction] machines and we have the ability to make reagents for testing. Open it up to the Indian companies. They are good at reducing cost. They can develop tests that are cheaper," said Kang.

Even in the national capital, patients have complained of many problems. Overcrowded hospitals have turned away travellers who travelled from affected countries and wanted to get tested on the basis that they didn't show symptoms, even though research has shown that symptoms may take up to 14 days to appear.

"I was impressed by the response of the Indian government, till I reached the sample collection centre. I have been standing here for over two hours and now I just feel like running away," said a 27-year-old Australian national, who was standing outside the sample collection centre at Dr Ram Manohar Lohia hospital. She had travelled to Delhi for work.

On Tuesday morning, the Australian woman called the government helpline number and informed them she was fatigued and had a sore throat. "They came to my hotel and picked me up in an ambulance. All the health care workers were in complete protective gear. It was scary but it was also good. Then, they just dropped me here with my bags and asked me to wait," she said.

For almost an hour, she couldn't figure out what to do because none of the hospital staff posted outside the sample collection centre spoke English. "They took me inside the hospital to find someone who could explain what I needed to do," she said.

If she had the infection, she may have infected people inside the hospital.

And it is not just her. In the corridor outside the two rooms collecting the samples at the collection centre, close to 70 people sat next to each other waiting for up to two hours. Open on all sides, several people passed by this "restricted area" all day round. There was no check on who entered the corridor.

RML hospital collects nearly 70 samples for Covid-19 each day.

But the corridor outside has hundreds of people waiting. Many reached the hospital without checking with a helpline or a doctor and waited in the queue.

Many of them were likely to be turned away after hours of waiting, and potentially exposing themselves to the coronavirus infection.

"The person I brought to the hospital today has been given the token number of 318, I think," said the ambulance driver stationed outside the centre. It will be hours before she gets her turn.

Safdarjung hospital collects samples only for suspected patients admitted to its isolation ward. Sample collection facilities will soon start at 14 Delhi government and corporation hospitals.

"Who has the time to wait for three hours? We have a flight tonight and we just wanted to get tested to get a certificate declaring that we are virus-free. And, we were told to come to this centre but if we sit around here we are more likely to get the virus," said Ravi Shingari, an Australian citizen of Indian origin. He and his wife travelled to London before coming to India.

Another 25-year-old woman, who did not want to be named, filled out the form asking for her contact details, address, symptoms, and travel history. But she did not wait for her turn. "I have been sitting here for a while now. I have to be somewhere now, so I am leaving. I don't think they will even come to know who left," she said.

She had come to the testing centre on her own after meeting up with a friend who had travelled abroad.

Some wait it out, only to be refused at the door. "In the last two hours, I have seen around 10 people being refused the test after they reach to the front of the line. They must have been waiting for a couple of hours. And, what if one of these people actually has the disease? That's why I am waiting my turn here a little farther away," said one of the persons waiting near the sample collection centre.

Getting information on testing is difficult on the helplines as well, with only one of the 30 calls made by the HT reporter to the toll-free number getting through.The government helpline advise people with cough and fever but no travel history to maintain personal hygiene and get in touch with district surveillance officers or a local physician.

Experts say cramped government facilities pose a clear danger.

"This is an infection risk, naturally. We are advocating social distancing and here are people who need to get tested for the disease sitting close to each other. The government has to make arrangements for a large waiting area.. or start more sample collection centres because clearly there is a need," said Dr MC Mishra, former director of the All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.

He added that there was a need to ensure that people who didn't need the tests to not show up because they are at a higher risk of getting the infection. "Someone needs to be stationed outside the centres to ask people who do not need testing to leave rather than them waiting for hours before leaving," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 31 -- The Union health ministry clarified on Monday that community transmission of Covid-19 hadn't yet begun in India, a day after signalling the onset of "limited community transmission" of the disease. The ministry said limited community transmission isn't the same as community transmission -- Stage 3 of infectious diseases such as the one caused by the SARS-Cov-2 virus.

"Limited community transmission means where a more than one person has acquired, directly or indirectly, infection from the same source. Community transmission of alarming proportions has not been seen in India yet. There is nothing to hide...if we get evidence of large-scale community transmission, where the source of transmission is not known, we will declare it. As of now there's no community transmission in India," said Lav Aggarwal, joint secretary in the health ministry.

Later, India's health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan tweeted: "Today, related to #CoronaVirus, the @MoHFW_India (ministry of health and family welfare) made it clear that its spread has not reached the community transmission level yet and its transmission is still in the local phase. "

In Stage 3, the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated.

India has reported 1,308 cases and 32 deaths due to Covid-19. On Monday,25new cases were identified in Delhi, of which 18 cases were in one cluster, Nizamuddin.

There are four main stages of the disease outbreak. Stage 1 is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage 2 is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage 3 is community transmission. Stage 4 is an epidemic.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the pandemic, has maintained that India is still in Stage 2, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact with an infected person or travel history rising over the past week. Community transmission happens when the source of infection is untraced and the patient has no travel history or known contact with a confirmed Covid-19 case.It indicates that undiagnosed cases are infecting others, which is when infection clusters spiral out of control and turn into epidemics.

A senior public health expert, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said: "We've had pockets of community transmission in several locations in half-a-dozen states, but now the number of people with untraceable infection is increasing, which is a sign that community transmission has begun."

According to T Jacob John, head of the department of clinical virology and microbiology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, community transmission in India began in mid-February.

"Instead of splitting hairs, the focus should be on preparing to be three steps ahead of the virus. It's not a cops and robbers game, we should not be fooled into reacting to the virus but should be fooling the virus by anticipating the curve and proactively deciding what we need to do stop the spread," said John, emeritus medical scientist, ICMR.

The US Centers for Disease Control declared its first case of a person in California with no relevant travel history or exposure to another known patient asa "possible instance of community spread of Covid-19 in the United States" on February 26.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Srinagar, March 7 -- Over 15 lakh (1.5 million) tulips are expected to bloom at the end of this month in Kashmir's Tulip Garden, one of the largest in Asia, and will mesmerize thousands of tourists and locals.

The bloom usually lasts up to a maximum of four weeks but the efforts in making the garden reach this stage is a long, painstaking and cumbersome process involving the blood and sweat of some 120 gardeners, labourers, among other workers.

For a few weeks of visual aesthetics for the visitors in the months of March-April, the gardeners and labourers toil yearlong, braving the vagaries of weather and indulging in constant hard work.

"The tulip flowers last for a maximum of one month but the process continues for the whole year and involves a very cumbersome activity. The garden is the result of sweat and blood of our employees and workers," said Sofi Inam-ur-Rehman, assistant floriculture officer and in-charge of the Tulip Garden.

This year, an additional two lakh bulbs have been added to the 30-hectare terracing garden at Siraj Bagh in Srinagar than last year when the bloom of 13 lakh (1.3 million) tulips had quietly withered away without catching an eye of any visitor due to the Covid-19 lockdown.

This year, te bloom is expected to happen in the last week of March as the temperature-sensitive flowers need mercury to stay above 15 degrees at a stretch.

"The opening of the garden is weather dependent. The temperatures in March have gone down from above-normal in February. There is also a prediction of rains from March 07. The garden won't open before March 20," said in-charge deputy director of the floriculture department, Shayiq Rasool.

Usually, the blooming begins by late March. The average life of a tulip flower is 20 days and can stretch to a maximum of 25 with overall bloom getting extended by adding late-blooming varieties of tulips.

The flowers start to fall by late April. "During the bloom, the work gets doubled because we have to take care of the flowers as well as deal with the enthusiastic visitors," said Abdul Rehman, 55, who has been working as a gardener in Tulip Garden for the past five years.

He said that they have to observe the plants as the foliage of the tulip bulbs is allowed to dry up for May and up to June 15. He said that the rigorous work starts a the beginning of July when the summer heat is at its peak.

"In July, August and September, we have to painstakingly remove the bulbs with proper caution to store them in cold stores with proper grading," Rehman said. "Mind you, these are not a few hundred or thousand bulbs but over a million and a half," he said.

The temperature in the cold sheds is maintained at around 15 to 18 degrees.

Rehman said that there is a depreciation of tulip bulbs year after year and the officials have to import more tulip bulbs every year. "Around 30 per cent bulbs get damaged or diseased during and after the extraction process and have to be replaced by new bulbs," he said.

Sofi said that they import the bulbs every year from Holland.

"This year we bought 4.6 lakh tulip bulbs from Holland which is the world's biggest flower bulb market," Sofi said.

A tulip bulb may cost anywhere between Rs.12 and 24. "The rates depend on the condition of the international market which works on euro rates," he said.

The picturesque garden, one of the biggest tulip gardens in Asia and located on the foothills of the Zabarwan range and the banks of majestic Dal Lake, has over 63 varieties of red, yellow, pink, white, purple, blue, yellow and multi-color - early blooming, mid blooming and late blooming - tulip bulbs this year.

"The colours are to cherish. It is an array of hues. Besides the usual ones, we also have crimson and brick red, maroon and apricot colour. The early and late blooming varieties have been added to extend the total blooming period," he said.

In addition to tulips, the garden also has hyacinths, daffodils and spring-flowering shrubs. "We also have ornamental trees like apricots and almonds which coincide with tulip blooming. This has been done to enhance the beauty of the garden," he said.

The garden has been divided into 36 plots with 16-18 beds in each plot. There are three parks also inside the garden where the visitors can sit and visualize themselves in a sea of colours, dominated by the Zabarwan Mountains. Various small ornamental trees including the tulip tree decorate the sides of the numerous paths of the garden.

In October, soil preparation is done by using tractors. The beds are also prepared during the period with proper channels for draining of water as well as for beautification.

"By November 15, the sowing of tulip bulbs starts. It takes around a month by which time the winter sets in," said Mohammad Ayoub Lone, another gardener who has been here for the past 16 years.

"By February 20, when the snow has already melted, we start to loosen the soil and remove unwanted grass. The spray is done as the flowers start to grow," he said.

Kashmir's connection with tulips traces back its origin hundreds of years when the flowers were grown on muddy rooftops of houses. Gradually, they were grown in kitchen gardens and flower beds till in 2005-06 the then state government decided to convert Siraj Bagh into a regal Tulip Garden in keeping with Kashmir's historical ties with tulips.

On the foothills of Zabarwan range, the Tulip Garden was opened in 2007 on sloping ground with multiple terraces, overlooking the scenic Botanical Garden.

In 2019, the garden attracted 2.58 lakh visitors, including many local Kashmiris and 1.9 lakh in 2018 as the annual Tulip Festival gained popularity.

Tourism nosedived in Kashmir in 2019 as the central government revoked the special status under Article 370 of the erstwhile state and split the region into two Union territories on August 5 and put it under restrictions. The lockdown implemented in March 2020 owing to the Covid-19 pandemic further exacerbated the situation.

Shayiq Rasool, the deputy director, said that the garden has become a landmark for tourism and indirectly benefits thousands of people in the sector.

"Our annual budget for the garden is around one crore rupees and in return, it gives us a lot of bookings for the hotels, houseboats and transport sector. We have to look at its trickle-down benefits," he said.

Meanwhile, gardener M Ayoub Lone is eagerly waiting for the mesmerizing bloom.

"The beauty is not actually of the garden but of the hard work I and my colleagues have put in to make it bloom. When it does we want to be here, day and night," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Bhubaneswar, June 24 -- For the first time in its history, the famous Rath Yatra of the Jagannath temple in Puri, Odisha, began on Tuesday morning with priests pulling the three colourful chariots of the presiding deities in the absence of the tens of thousands of devotees who typically throng the town every year for the annul event.

Around 1,500 priests of the iconic 12th century temple milled around the wooden chariots which they started pulling from the main temple to the Gundicha temple amid the beating of cymbals and drums in praise of the Lord Jagannath, Lord Balabhadra and Goddess Subhadra.

The pulling of the chariots - Nandighosh, Taladwaja and Darpadalana - is the foremost ritual of the festival. It was performed by the priests who had been tested for Covid-19 on Monday.The Supreme Court on Monday allowed the conduct of the Rawth Yatra, recalling its June 18 order that prohibited the event, but laid down strict conditions, including a ban on pubic attendance and the imposition of a curfew in Puri during the festivities.

Theerstwhile King of Puri, Gajapati Dibyasingha Deb, who is also the first servitor of the Lord, performed the Chhera Panhara, a ritual sweeping of the chariots, before they were pulled by the priests. "It's hard to imagine Rath Yatra without devotees on Badadanda (Grand Road). But Lord Jagannath stepped out of temple for the whole universe." Puri Govardhan Peeth Shankaracharya Nischalananda Saraswati paid obeisance atop the chariots along with his disciples.

Until Monday afternoon, uncertainity clouded the Rath Yatra as a three-judge bench of SC led by chief justice SA Bobde heard dozens of intervention petitions seeking recall of the court's June 18 order. For a few days, it had seemed that the Rath Yatra would not be held for the first time in 285 years.

Since Tuesday morning, the district administration had disinfected the 2.5 km long road from the main temple to Gundicha temple ahead of the pulling of chariots. From 9 pm Monday, the police had enforced a curfew around the holy town for the next 41 hours. "We have mobilised 50 platoons of forces in Puri with two primary objectives - smooth and incident-free movement / pulling of the chariots from origin to destination and restricting entry of unauthorised persons into the town," said state director general of police (DGP) Abhay, who goes by one name.

The devotees, who are an intrinsic part of the festival, remained glued to TV sets as Doordarshan telecast the proceedings live. "It's all the wish of Lord Jagannath. I am happy with the decision of the Supreme Court...," said Binapani Mallik, a housewife in Bhubaneswar.

On Monday, 1,143 servitors of the temple were tested for Covid-19, of which one tested positive. who was shifted to a hospital.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Dharamshala,, Sept. 16 -- The Dharamshala municipal corporation (MC) has issued a notice to Yashi Dolma, a woman of Tibetan origin, for illegally building a three-storeyed building adjoining Hotel Norbu House, 250 metres from the abode of the Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama.

The MC notice was issued last week on the complaint of a local resident, Ashok Rai, on whose plot (about 780 yards) the illegal construction was made during the lockdown. "There was no construction on the site till the middle of April," Rai said, demanding action against the owners of Hotel Norbu House who raised the building "by taking advantage of the Covid-19 lockdown".

Not only has the structure come up without the approval of the civic body and town planning department but it has also been built on encroached land and three trees have been damaged at the site. One tree has been taken inside the construction site.

Meanwhile, Ghazala Abdullah, a green activist who took the matter of illegal felling to the high court, alleged that the same people had carried out digging for the construction of a water tank endangering four Deodar trees.

MC commissioner Pradeep Thakur said, "A case has been registered against owner Yashi Dolma under Section 253 of the Himachal Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1994, and a notice has been issued to her." The section provides for demolition of illegally raised structure if violations are confirmed.

Yashi Dolma and her husband, Indian citizens of Tibetan origin, run hospitality business in Mcleodganj and own several properties.

When contacted, Wangdu admitted that the construction they raised was illegal. He, however, maintained that the construction was an old one and they had submitted a regularisation plan to the authorities.He alleged that person who submitted complaint with the MC wanted to grab his land.

Wangdu also denied commissioning the digging.

Dharamshala mayor Devinder Singh Jaggi said that the civic body will take strict action not only against the owner but also against officials who failed to keep a track of such activities. "Responsibilities will be fixed and action will be taken as per law," said Jaggi.

OFFENDER LEFT OFF THE HOOK EARLIER

MC sources said that this was not the first time that Dolma was involved in illegal construction. Two years ago, the water and power supplies to Hotel Norbu House was cut after she built a six-storeyed building despite having permission for only two storeys. The case is still pending in the court.

In recent years, illegal structures have come up in McLeodganj. After High Court took cognizance of the matter notices power and water supply to about 180 hotels and guest houses for violation of building and environmental norms. The court also appointed a local commissioner and had "warned" to stop the salaries of erring officials after the commissioner had reported rampant violation in McLeodganj area.

Later, court provided some relaxations by restoring the water and power supply on the condition that the illegal portions shall be demolished or fine be imposed as per the law. The owners had also submitted affidavit in the court in this regard. The matter is still pending.

The town and country planning department allows only two-storeyed buildings in the hill town as it is in the seismic sensitive zone.

Also, in July 2019, the National Green Tribunal had banned any kind of commercial construction in McLeoganj area.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 16 -- The retraction of influential studies published in two of the world's leading scientific journals last week was a rude reminder of the perils of moving at warp speed to find a treatment or cure for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has infected eight million and killed 430,000 in less than six months of the World Health Organisation (WHO)being informed by China about a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in Wuhan on December 31, 2019.

By January 30, it had infected 7,818 people, of which 82 were in 18 other countries , which forced a seemingly reluctant WHO to declare the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), as it was then called, a public health emergency of international concern. Scientists from across the world stepped up to defuse the emerging health threat with every tool that they had. Never before have so many scientists, researchers and clinicians from across specialties focused on a single disease or used such a wide variety of innovative techniques and platforms for vaccine and drug development. Never before have regulatory processes been fast-tracked at such scale for emergency use of drug and vaccine trials.

"The need for speed should not throw caution to the wind. Dubious data sources and poorly designed clinical trials of experimental drugs and vaccines have raised more concerns than solutions," said Sujatha Rao, a former health secretary of the ministry of health and family welfare.

Need for speed

As on June 12, the US National Library of Medicine Registry of ClinicalTrials.gov had 2,122 registered studies on the disease, with hundreds more registered in national registries.

"When publication is going at a high speed, you don't always notice the traffic signals. There are three things happening now. People are publishing through a rapid review process, studies are being published in pre-prints, people are writing blogs where they can write anything and interpret anything they call data. In the usual (scientific journal) publication cycle, nothing gets published in three or four days. From submission to publication, it normally takes at least three to four weeks and often more than six weeks. If I get an article for review from The Lancet, which I frequently do, I get a minimum of 10 days," said Dr K Srinath Reddy, president, Public Health Foundation of India.

Pre-print publication is a practice borrowed from other sciences, such as physics and Math, where researchers put their papers on a website and invite comments from the scientist community, based on which they modify and correct their analysis before publication.

What works for theoretical sciences, however, doesn't work as well for medical research, which has immediate implications on health and life. "Rapid reviews are causing problems because the reviewers are chosen in haste and they don't have adequate time to look at the data properly and they are under pressure to respond quickly," said Reddy.

Peer review is important to ensure quality of scientific communications, incorporating inputs of other experts. "While pre-publication peer-review is the standard, there are good examples of post-publication review as well. Validation by other researchers is perhaps the most important, especially when the findings are unexpected or controversial," said Dr Anurag Agrawal, director of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology.

Review, reform

But this very validation process spectacularly failed in the case of the two retracted studies in The Lancet and The New England Journal of Medicine. The Lancet paper raised safety concerns about the experimental use of the anti-malarial drugs for treatment and led to WHO suspending the hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine arm of its multi-country trial, much to the dismay of India, which is the world's largest producer of these affordable generic drugs that have been used to treat malaria for close to a century. "The key concern for us was that the data was questionable that made analysis unreliable and any results misleading. If not for the name of the journal, the paper would have not have been taken as seriously," said Agrawal.

While journals have established validation processes, such papers can slip between the cracks because of several reasons, including the authors belonging to reputable institutions like Harvard University, or the reviewers having confirmation bias, where they agree with the study's conclusion even before they begin scrutinising how the result has been arrived at.

For a disease barely six months old, generating high-quality data quickly and efficiently is a challenge, which makes review and scrutiny all the more critical. "It's the job of a journal's editorial team to do an independent review and ensure it doesn't get shoddy when it is inundated with research studies," said Dr Jacob T John, former head of the department of virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu.

Retractions are not rare, but they are growing. In 2019, there were 1,433 retractions from scientific journals, according to Retraction Watch, which has been tracking retractions for a decade. In 1997, the number was 44.

Trial by error

Vaccine development, on average, takes 10.71 years from the preclinical phase, and has a success rate of 6%, according to a study in the journal, PLOS One. Some remain elusive despite decades of massive investment, as we have seen in the case of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus that causes the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS.

Work on a Covid-19 vaccine began on January 11, within a day of China sharing the genome of the new coronavirus that came to be called Sars-CoV-2. By June 12, there were 10 experimental vaccines in advanced stages of clinical trials and 115 in pre-clinical evaluation stages, according to WHO.

Scientists are working across emerging technology platforms that have never been used for vaccine development before. Moderna's mRNA-1273, which entered into clinical trials just 66 days after Sars-CoV-2 was first sequenced in China, showcases the potential for DNA- and RNA-based vaccines that use the messenger RNA (mRNA) platform to elicit an immune response against the virus.

"If it is approved, it will be the first messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine against any disease in the world. We don't fully know the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines as yet. However, there is high quality science and pre-clinical evidence for this fast and flexible platform for vaccine development. We will have to wait and see," said Agrawal.

Vaccine development includes at least three human trials to test their safety, dosage and the strength and duration of the protection they offer, followed by production, licensure, deployment of vaccines and plans for post-marketing surveillance. Many of these trials have been collapsed and merged to have a vaccine ready for use within the next six to eight months.

"With Covid-19, the goal from the beginning has been to develop, test and manufacture a vaccine on a scale of hundreds of millions of doses within 12 to 18 months, so an unprecedented approach has been adopted. With promising preliminary preclinical and phase 1 data available, meticulously planned trials are needed to separate the contenders from pretenders. Since approvals are expected for an emergency use vaccine, developers start mass manufacturing as soon as they complete phase 2 trials, and in doing so, risk the failure of phase 3. In such cases, consortiums and countries fund for risk reduction and provide market commitments," said Dr N K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research. This is where new technology lab-based platforms help. RNA- and DNA-based vaccines are faster and cheaper to produce than synthetic vaccines as they involve synthetic production of the genetic material, and not the virus. "The production is lab-based, so it can be quickly standardised and scaled up," said Ganguly.

Getting a large enough sample size across age groups is essential as the results in one population might not translate to the other.

"Whether it is vaccines or drug development, what is crucial is independent scientific validation to ensure the vaccines and drugs are safe and effective because getting it wrong would mean playing with lives," said Ganguly.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- South Korea is one such country which has succeeded in cutting down the number of coronavirus infections after being one of the worst-hit outside China. Even though on Thursday it reported 114 new cases of coronavirus and six more deaths, the numbers are far lower than the peak of 909 cases reported on February 29, news agency Reuters reported. Health officials say the trend does appear to be slowing in what has been the largest outbreak in Asia outside of China.

South Korea's trace, track and test approach seems to have been working in its favour, something which the South Indian state of Kerala also seem to have tried recently to contain the rise in coronavirus cases.

On Wednesday, Pathanamthitta district administration released two sets of maps giving a detailed account of three people's travel after they arrived at the Cochin International Airport on February 29. The chart gives an account of their movement from the airport to their hospitalisation on March 6.

The three travellers flew in from Italy and slipped out of the Cochin International Airport after dodging health authorities. They surfaced after testing positive for the novel coronavirus and are believed to have transmitted the virus to eight of their relatives.

"It was a laborious job. This flowchart helps people who came in contact with them to get tested for possible infection," said district collector PB Nooh.

The maps were prepared with the help of health officials, the police, locals and relatives of the three people and exhibit a detailed account of all the places they had visited. According to the maps, the three patients had visited banks, hotels, bakeries, a church, hospitals, a bar and had taken public transport.

The South Korean authorities are also reported to have been vigorously tracing down the contacts of all those who tested positive for the virus. The infected individuals would also be traced back to at least 14 days to understand the possible spread of the virus. The process would even include tracking their credit card use, CCTV footage and mobile phone activity, news agency AFP reported.

Kerala continues to be on a coronavirus high alert. The total number of people under observation has crossed 3,000, state Health Minister KK Shailaja said on Wednesday.

"Of the 1,179 samples sent for testing, today 889 samples report came and all were negative and we are waiting for the results of another 213. As on date, we have 14 people who are positive and are under close observation," said Shailaja yesterday.

The first three positive cases of coronavirus in India were confirmed in Kerala, all of them had recovered successfully.

The number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning in India. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, May 6 -- With the city witnessing a rapid rise in Covid-19 cases every day, the question that is repeatedly being asked is: Has the community transmission begun in Mumbai? While experts say there is a possibility of the community transmission, civic officials have outrightly denied the same.

Majority of the city's Covid-19 cases have come from certain areas - Worli-Prabhadevi, Dharavi, Govandi, Kurla and Byculla. While the count in Worli-Prabhadevi could be reaching 1,000, Dharavi has crossed 700 cases.

Dr Shashikant Ahankari, a community health specialist, said that there is a thin line between local and community spread of coronavirus. "The community spread of the virus has already started, but don't know why the authorities are denying it. In the last 15 days, several people have tested positive for the virus without any travel or any contact history. " BMC has estimated 75,000 coronavirus cases, which indicates the community spread," said Ahankari.

"If there is no community spread in Mumbai then authorities should tell why Covid-19 cases [with no travel or contact history] are increasing daily, specifically in Dharavi?", he said.

A document detailing a three-pronged surveillance strategy, to screen people for possible Covid-19 symptoms, drafted by the BMC on May 4, 2020, also states that the community spread is limited since only 238 out of 11,591 who were tested in fever clinics were found positive.

However, municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi said, "There is no community spread of disease in our city. Our rate of detection of cases through fever clinics is very less, which is a good sign for the city."

Dr Daksha Shah, deputy director, health department BMC said surveillance regarding the community spread is being conducted by the experts from the ICMR. "To declare community spread of disease is not under our jurisdiction. As of now, we have not any such information about the community spread of disease in the city."

There are four main stages of the disease outbreak. Stage one is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage two is when there is a local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive has come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage three is community transmission and stage four is an epidemic when there are several clusters of the infection.

Anticipating the future outbreak of the coronavirus, BMC is ramping up healthcare infrastructure.

Elaborating strategy further, the document states that the BMC has divided Covid-19 patients under the symptomatic and asymptomatic category. All symptomatic patients will be sent to dedicated Covid-19 hospitals. The civic body has arranged 7,500 beds. 5,000 more beds are identified from different private hospitals.

As of now more the than 25,000 isolation beds already in place at hotels, lodges, marriage halls and sports complexes. In a view to upgrade bed capacity, the civic body has identified more than 350 municipal schools to create additional capacity of 35,000 beds.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 9 -- Two stranded persons, who were evacuated from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on Thursday amid the lockdown restrictions imposed to contain the spread of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, tested positive on Saturday, said Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan.

Both the persons, who have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease, arrived in Kerala on Thursday by two Air India special flights from Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the UAE, the CM said.

Vijayan warned that the state has to maintain utmost vigil because of the influx of expatriates and all those who are stranded in other parts of the country because of lockdown restrictions.

Three flights from the Persian Gulf are expected to arrive in Kerala as part of the 'Mission Vande Bharat' -- the largest-ever evacuation since Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990 -- on Saturday evening.

Similarly, a naval ship, which is ferrying 650 stranded people from the Maldives, will reach Kochi port on Sunday.

The CM said that Kerala would observe a total shutdown on Sunday in a bid to step up its vigil and only essential services would be allowed to be delivered.

"If we lower our guard at this juncture, we'll forgo our advantage. We'll continue our strict surveillance. We can't allow people to enter Kerala without valid passes. It's mandatory for people coming from other states to carry passes from their place of origin to their chosen destination in a bid to contain the viral outbreak," he added.

The CM also announced that the state government would arrange special trains from New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, etc; to bring back all those who are stranded.

"We're in talks with the Union Ministry of Railways. Among the stranded, students, pregnant women, and senior citizens will get first priority to come back home," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion curated for you. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

India begins controlled trials of plasma therapy

Trials using the antibody-rich blood of patients cured of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) have begun, with doctors turning to a pool of 1,600 people in India who have recovered from the infection to test their antibodies as a potential cure for those fighting the disease. Read more

Bengal BJP MP booked under Disaster Management Act, another alleges 'house arrest'

The police in Bankura district of West Bengal has booked Bankura's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Subhas Sarkar under different sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Disaster Management Act (DMA), 2005, for allegedly spreading false alarms. Read more

Odisha tops forest fire incidents in the country for a week

With daytime temperatures breaching over 40 degrees Celsius in around a dozen places in the state since last week, Odisha has topped the list of states in the country concerning forest fires in the last one week. Read more

After WHO row, US is probing China lab link

US President Donald Trump's administration is urging an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic, saying that the US doesn't rule out that it came from a laboratory researching bats in Wuhan. Read more

'Hope cricket resumes as soon as possible'

The Covid-19 pandemic has made us face a difficult time. Especially as an athlete, because we are used to a busy life-we're always training, travelling and playing matches. Read more

Sussanne Khan's sister Farah Khan Ali tests negative for Covid-19 after staff member tested positive

Jewellery designer Farah Khan Ali has tested negative for the coronavirus. She got the tests done after an in-house staff member had tested positive for the virus earlier this week. Read more

Google, SpaceX to NASA: Top companies, government agencies that banned Zoom

As quickly as Zoom's popularity rose, so did its security woes. Ever since Zoom's skeleton of privacy and security issues were out, the company has been trying to fix its mistakes. Read more

Online dating's new lockdown norms: Are the rules changing?

The first date is so exciting: hair smoothed down, skin glowing, big smiles as both sides see each other and settle down. before the laptop. Sadly, that's what it's come to, in lockdown. Video rendezvous, virtual romances, and endless social distancing. Read more

Watch| Coronavirus: 106-year-old beats disease, cheered by hospital staff in UK

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- The United States on Thursday called for "complete transparency" in the reporting of coronavirus data at the UN Security Council's first meeting on the pandemic, in an unmistakable reference to China, which it did not name but has previously accused of concealing the true extent of its outbreak.

China hit back calling for the need to oppose "stigmatization" of the crisis and "racial discrimination" in a clear reference to US efforts to pin the epidemic on China, calling it the "Chinese virus" or the "Wuhan virus", which is said to have fueled a spate hate crimes against Asian Americans.

The Security Council had been largely missing from action as the coronavirus tore through the world. China, which held the body's rotating presidency for March, did not allow a debate or a meeting arguing the pandemic was outside the mandate of the Security Council; it was backed by Russia and South Africa.

The UNSC finally met Thursday, virtually, at the request of nine of the 10 non-permanent members of the body, but failed to even consider two resolutions that it had expected to take up this week. The UN general assembly passed a resolution last week calling for "intensified international cooperation".

The UN's top decision-making clearly remains divided on its mandate and role in dealing with the pandemic that had killed more than 97,000 people worldwide and infected more than 1.6 million, with the United States and China, two of the body's five permanent members, hit the hardest.

"The United States reiterates today the need for complete transparency and the timely sharing of public health data and information within the international community," said Kelly Craft, the US ambassador to the UN.

She added that "accurate, science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics, and spread of the virus" was the most effective way to tackle the epidemic.

While the start of the epidemic in Wuhan, China last December is well documented, its spread around the world has been as a consequence of a combination of factors, with the urgency, or the lack of it, of the response of respective nations playing a key role; how soon they initiated mitigation measures, when they close their borders or shut down travel from affected areas.

The Trump administration has been criticized at home for responding late and inadequately, despite the president's claims to the contrary. And it has been seen to be trying to deflect responsibility by pinning it on China and, lately, the WHO, accusing it of aiding Beijing hide the extent of the outbreak. Trump has he re-evaluating US contribution to the WHO, which is the highest of all at more than $450 million.

Trump began calling the virus the "Chinese virus" and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo named it the "Wuhan virus". Trump has since stopped after he was widely criticized for fanning racial backlash against Asian Americans, who have been subjected to verbal abuse and whose businesses have faced boycott calls.

Calling for the international community to "act with solidarity" against the pandemic, Chinese ambassador to the UN Chen Xu, focussed on the Trump administration. "All parties should jointly oppose stigmatization and politicization of public health issue," he said. "The virus is common enemy for all mankind, which respects no borders and hurts all ethnic groups. Instigating racial discrimination and xenophobia, and creating divisions and confrontations deliberately should be abandoned."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- India cannot depend on rapid antibody tests of unproven quality for coronavirus disease (Covid-19) diagnosis and molecular tests remain the gold standard, says Dr Soumya Swaminathan, chief scientist at the Geneva-based World Health Organisation (WHO) who is leading the global partnerships on scientific research on a vaccine and drug therapies for the infection. In a phone interview with Sanchita Sharma, Swaminathan said India, for now, is doing enough testing, but will have to scale it up as the numbers rise. Edited excerpts:

Is India testing enough people?

Data from India shows that 4-5% people, mostly at-risk populations (symptomatics, contacts, healthworkers or people in containment zones), who have been tested in India are positive for Covid-19, compared to 30-40% in other countries. This indicates testing is appropriate to the situation, but it will have to be scaled up as numbers increase.

India has suspended rapid antibody tests because of quality issues. How reliable are rapid tests?

Quality serological tests take around six months to be developed with ample data and validation. There's a flood of tests with unproven quality, which cannot be depended on for diagnosis.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

Molecular (polymerase chain reaction, or PCR) tests are the gold standard for diagnosis because they reveal current infection. This result is actionable, as it can be followed by isolation and treatment for the patient, and quarantine and testing for close contacts. Rapid antibody tests show past infection, and are useful as an epidemiological tool to map community infection and study Sars-Cov2 transmission.

Are high summer temperatures expected to slow Sars-CoV2 transmission?

We don't know if temperature will have an effect. From what we know, it may reduce transmission by 10%-20%, but we can't depend on it to stop transmission.

Only 2-8% people in affected populations have antibodies against Covid-19, indicates early data. How many does herd immunity offer protection to?

We are very far away from herd immunity. For diseases with high rates of transmission, a higher number of people need to be infected for herd immunity. This virus has an R0 of 2-3, so at least 80% people need to have antibodies against the virus for herd protection. (R0, or R-nought, is the basic reproduction ratio that gives the number of people infected by one case).

South Korea has reported reinfection or reactivation in recovered patients. Will reinfection affect global efforts to develop a vaccine against Covid-19?

There is no evidence reinfection can happen. Molecular tests often detect fragments of the virus RNA that is not viable (cannot cause infection) several days after patients have clinically recovered. Diagnostic results depend on several factors, on how samples are collected, how procedures are followed, and depending on which tests are used, can show false positives or false negatives. We need more studies of the natural history of this infection and what kind of immunity is generated by people.

CEPI (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) has identified several promising candidates, including some that are already in clinical and pre-clinical trials. How soon can a vaccine be ready?

Our goal is a vaccine before 18 months. Normally, it takes about a decade to develop a vaccine, but global partnerships (between health agencies, academics, donors, industry, nations and philanthropies) have helped hasten development of vaccines against emerging public health threats. A vaccine against Ebola took five years, the one against zika took less than two years. The global effort to develop a Covid-19 vaccine in less than 18 months is unprecedented and would be an amazing achievement.

How has the virus evolved? Is the new vaccine expected to offer long-term protection?

Over 10,000 viral genome sequences of Sars-Cov-2 have been shared by 70-80 countries with GISAID , which is a global initiative to share influenza data. Since the start of the pandemic, laboratories in countries across the world have generated viral genome sequence data with GISAID, which has enabled real-time progress in the research and development of vaccines and drug therapies.

Some evolution in the virus is bound to happen, but the rate of mutations is lower than the influenza viruses. Scientists have identified three different closely related lineages, which give valuable insights into the origin of the virus and epidemiological data on how it is spreading across the world.

None of the changes are on any important sites - the spike protein, polymerase or protease -- which are being targeted by potential vaccines and drug therapies. These sites have no major mutations, so an effective and long-lasting vaccine appears possible.

What is the progress on WHO's Solidarity Trial for Covid-19 treatment? Which are the most promising therapies?

It's too early for results. India is part of this trial, with 1,200 patients enrolled so far globally. The approvals have been obtained by the National AIDS Research Organisation in Pune, which will coordinate the study.

How do you rate India's Covid-19 response?

India's containment response was very prompt and robust and was rolled out very early, much before cases started rising. It's exemplary, and the doubling rate of Covid-19 is now eight days. The challenge for India now will be to sustain the gains when the lockdown lifts and to ensure infection rates stay low across all states.

New infection rate has dropped in some states like Kerala.

Kerala has done a great job. Several things contribute to its success, such as a strong primary health system, a good panchayati raj system and local governance, high education levels and public participation. This was also evident during the containment of Nipah virus disease outbreak, when robust public health measures ensured infection did not spread to other states.

Do you think Covid-19 has ushered in a new social reality for the world?

I believe it will, at least for the next two to three years before we get a vaccine to the majority of the susceptible population. Social distancing will become the norm, which will change the way we work and socialise, with fewer conferences, events and large gatherings.

The WHO warned of a second wave of infection on Monday. How high is the threat of resurgence after lockdowns lift?

That's really the question everyone is interested in and is impossible to predict. It depends on a number of things, and can be different in different countries. A lot depends on what steps are taken between lifting the lockdown and the steps post that, and most countries are going for a phased lifting. We see in China that it's come down to a very low level of new infections, they still have infections. It's important to get the infection rate down, as places like Taiwan, Hongkong, South Korea and Singapore have done. They still have new infections, but they are more localised outbreaks, which are quickly detected and contained.

Will US President Donald Trump's freeze on funding affect WHO's work?

The WHO will stick to its mandate and continue to support countries in implementing science-based measures to slow transmission, reverse and stop Covid-19. The 193 United Nations member-states recently pledged solidarity in the response to Covid and to support the WHO, in its global role to coordinate and give technical guidance on international health. It's early days yet, and we hope this decision does not affect our important work too much.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 11 -- A special train carrying 1,140 people from Manipur, who were stranded in Chennai due to the lockdown to check the spread of Covid-19 is on its way to the northeastern state, officials said on Monday.

According to Manipur's Covid-19 common control room sources here, this non-stop train which left Chennai on Sunday evening was scheduled to arrive at Jiribam which is Manipur's only railway station, 220 km west of Imphal, on May 12.

"But we cannot say the exact timing of the arrival as of now (in view of the recent gas leak incident at Visakhapatnam)," an official of the control room said.

Also read: Report 90 minutes in advance and other rules as limited trains start tomorrow

"A second special train is scheduled to leave Bengaluru on May 14," the official said. The second train is expected to bring about 1,220 stranded people of the state.

On May 9, the state consultative committee for Covid-19 in its meeting had decided those returning by the trains will undergo 14 days of compulsory quarantine at government and community quarantine centres after their arrival.

The state government will be sending 50 buses from Imphal to pick up those returnees while authorities of Jiribam district where the rail head is located, is setting up separate screening counters, sources said.

In case the train arrives late in the evening, the screening may be done inside the coaches and the passengers shall stay in the train overnight till the arrangement is made for bus movement early in the morning, according to a standard operating procedure (SOP) issued by the state government to facilitate smooth transport and screening of stranded people of the state.

Since the trains are run on non-stop mode from station of origin to station of destination, the first priority would be given to locations where the number of stranded people is sufficient to run a train, the SOP said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 26 -- China on Monday said the issue of supplying Covid-19 vaccines to countries that need the jabs should not be marred by "malign competition" or "rivalry" but its tightly controlled state media is simultaneously running a smear campaign against both Indian and western vaccines.

Not only are Chinese official media outlets questioning the efficacy of western vaccines and safety records, but the Chinese foreign ministry is also - like its diplomats did last year - plugging conspiracy theories about the origin of the coronavirus.

A statement from foreign ministry spokesperson to state media recently implied the coronavirus could have emerged from a laboratory at the Fort Detrick Army Medical Command in the US state of Maryland.

"If America respects the truth, then please open up Fort Detrick and make public more information about the 200 or more bio-labs outside of the US, and please allow the WHO expert group to go to the US to investigate the origins," foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying told The Global Times.

Hua's statement comes in the backdrop of a World Health Organization (WHO) team currently stationed in China to investigate the origins of the coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019.

The article and Hua's statement were well-timed. The hashtag "American's Ft. Detrick", started by the Communist Youth League, had been viewed more than a billion times on China's Twitter-like Weibo platform.

The WHO team's presence in China is particularly sensitive for China as it continues attempts to deflect criticism about the authorities' slow response to the Covid-19 outbreak at the beginning.

A flurry of articles in Chinese state media in the past weeks have also promoted Chinese vaccines while criticising western and Indian ones.

India's efforts to make and supply vaccines to neighbouring countries have not been spared by Chinese media.

The Global Times has published stories critical of the vaccines made in India and whether India has the capacity to supply the shots globally.

A recent article in the nationalist tabloid not only raised questions about India's capacity to manufacture vaccines after the fire at the Serum Institute, but also claimed that Indians in China were "embracing" Chinese vaccines.

Last week, Reuters news agency calculated that Global Times, the official newspaper of China's ruling Communist Party, "had published more than ten reports in the past week critical of vaccines and inoculation schemes in the West".

About half of those reports referred to reported deaths of some frail, elderly patients in Norway after being inoculated with the Covid-19 vaccine developed by Pfizer and BioNTech, the Reuters report said.

The Global Times ran a report quoting Chinese experts as saying Australia should not use western vaccines and opt for Chinese ones.

The state-run China Daily newspaper on Monday ran a report extolling China's vaccines and the country's efforts to supply doses to developing countries.

"While western countries invest enormous capital in developing vaccines to fight the increasing number of confirmed Covid-19 cases, China is fulfilling its promise to make vaccines a global public good," the article said.

There have been questions about the lack of clinical data related to Chinese vaccines.

Business and political news website, Caixin, quoted a leading Chinese vaccine expert as saying that China's needs to share more data on the vaccines -- a rare instance of a Chinese media outlet taking a critical look at the developing story on vaccines.

"Ding Sheng, dean of Tsinghua University's School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and director of the Global Health Drug Discovery Institute (GHDDI), called for the original clinical trial data from Chinese experimental vaccines to be made public so that experts can better assess their efficacy and eliminate lingering safety concerns which have emerged in China and abroad," the website reported.

"The clinical data (of our vaccines) need to be further disclosed," Ding said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 25 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi wants the G-20 conference tomorrow to turn the battle against the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen into a global fight where participant countries pool in their medical knowledge and resources to block the spread of contagion, people familiar with the developments said.

Rather than be confined to the 15-member UN Security Council currently headed by China, the G-20 is a representative body of 46 countries (if the European Union is divided into individual entities) with a large number of them battered by the rampaging infection. The expected G-20 call will be for member nations to ramp up their medical infrastructure capacities to handle the worst-case scenario and pool scientific effort towards prevention and treatment of the virus.

Although PM Modi announced the historic 21-day nationwide lockdown on Tuesday evening, he had taken the first decisive step towards it by stopping long-distance trains on the north-south corridor on March 18.

The decision was clearly designed to contain the virus that causes Covid-19 to big metros such as Mumbai and Pune, where the medical infrastructure was better. The effort was to minimise the possibility of immigrants from states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh spreading the disease to their remote villages that have virtually non-existent medical facilities.

The Janta curfew on March 22 was a test run to calibrate the Indian response to combat the virus and plan for the degree of enforcement required for the worst-case scenario. At the same time, PM Modi was keeping a very close watch on the ramping of medical capacities such as manufacture of ventilators, masks, hazmat suits and preparation of isolation wards.

PM Modi had thrown the "wait and watch" option out of the window early in the day as it would be impossible to contain the disease if it moved into the community transmission stage. The assessment was that the lockdown was the best option, particularly given how the virus had multiplied in geometric progression in countries such as Italy, France, Spain and the US.

The prime minister fronted the bitter pill of lockdown given his huge following in the country.

With hardly any vaccine for Covid-19 on the horizon in the next two to four months, India hopes to contain the virus spread till April 15. The dry April heat in the Indian sub-continent would help slow down the virus. But it could continue to be spread by droplets. It is still early to figure how the weather plays out, particularly since the western disturbances are highly active with intermittent rains and have lowered the temperature of Gangetic plains.

India's approach on Covid-19 has contrasted sharply with the one adopted by the US' Donald Trump that has been needling China over its origin in Wuhan. Instead, India has kept all its lines open to talk to all countries to ensure that medical help is available in case the worst-case scenario plays out. The fact is that China, where the virus first surfaced in November 2019, has utilised the past three months to really ramp up its medical capacities and adopted unconventional methods to contain the spread of Covid-19. In fact, both the countries have decided to beef up bilateral efforts to contain the disease.

Even though the virus has led to a forced shutdown of the world economy's most prominent economies, the first priority has been to save lives with the economy taking the second place. This is the only option.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 31 -- AustraliaonThursday backed India's position on the border standoff with China, saying it opposes attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo along theLineofActualControl(LAC) as that could increase the risk of instability.

Australian high commissionerBarryO'Farrellconveyed hiscountry'spositiontoexternal affairs minister S Jaishankar during a meeting where the two sides discussed developments across the Indo-Pacific region amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Australian side urges restraintalongtheLACandsupports continued moves towards de-escalation, said a statement from the Australian high commission.

"As I told the external affairs minister of India today, Australia opposes any attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo, which only serves to increase tension and the risk of instability," O'Farrell was quoted as saying.

"It is important that the bilaterally- agreed principles and norms that have helped prevent escalation or miscalculation in the border areas over many decades continue to be observed." India has repeatedly said in recentweeksthatitisopposedto any unilateral efforts to change the status quo along the LAC, alongwhichtensofthousandsof Indian and Chinese troops continue to be deployed.

There has been growing convergencebetweenIndiaandAustralia on security issues and the role of China in the Indo-Pacific in recent months. The two sides elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed an agreement for reciprocal access to military logisticsduringavirtualsummit last month.

Australia, which is set to be invitedtojointheMalabarnaval exercise conducted by India, Japan and the US, has also backedIndia'scallsforreformof international bodies such as the WHOandsoughtaprobeintothe origins of the pandemic.

DuringameetingoftheUSand Australian defence and foreign ministers in Washington on Tuesday,thetwocountriesenvisaged a key role for India in defence cooperation and post- Covid-19 recovery efforts in the Indo-Pacific.

The Australian mission's statementfurthersaidthat"Australia remains vigilant about strategic trends inimical to our vision of the region" even as it focuses on health and economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis.

Australia envisages an Indo- Pacificthatisanopen,free,rulesbased region that is "resilient to coercion" and supported by inclusive institutions, the statement said. "Territorial disputes and competing claims should be resolvedpeacefullybytheclaimant countries, and in ways consistentwithinternationallaw," it added.

Australia also continues to be deeply concerned by China's actions in the South China Sea thatare"destabilisingandcould provoke escalation", the statement said. On July 23, Australia lodged a note with the UN Secretary General refuting China's "unlawfulmaritimeclaimsinthe South China Sea".

Rory Medcalf, head of the National Security College at the AustralianNationalUniversity, recently said the Indo-Pacific "serves as a canvas for framing policy responses to Chinese power", including a web of securitycooperation based on the US alliance system, and "emerging middle power coalitions, involving Japan, India, Australia and occasionally others such as Southeast Asian or even European states".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 30 -- India has dealt with the worst crisis on the border with China in decades with "firmness and maturity" even as it has worked with partners to create an open and inclusive architecture for the Indo-Pacific region, foreign secretary Harsh Shringla said on Thursday.

Speaking on the theme "India's foreign policy in the post-Covid world" at the Institut Francais des Relations Internationales (IFRI) in Paris, Shringla said India's actions, as it prepares for the world order emerging amid the pandemic, were not "seeking to target or exclude any country" but to create an environment in which all countries can operate with respect for the sovereignty of others.

He reiterated India's condemnation of the recent terror attacks in France, including the one in Nice, and conveyed the solidarity of the Indian people in confronting terrorism and extremism. He also noted that one of the two recent terrorist incidents in France had its origins in Pakistan.

"Despite the pandemic, we have dealt with the worst crisis in decades on our border with China and we have done so with firmness and maturity. At the same time, we have continued to ward off terrorism from across our western border," said Shringla, who is on a three-nation tour that will also take him to Germany and the UK.

India's immediate challenges have not distracted the country from its broader strategic goals, especially in the Indo Pacific, where "we are moving purposefully at multiple levels to create an open, inclusive architecture", he said.

New Delhi has a cooperative and inclusive outlook, as laid out in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's SAGAR vision or "Security And Growth for All in the Region", and India has steadily enhanced its diplomatic and security engagement in Southeast Asia too, he said.

"With Australia, Japan and the US, there is tangible progress in realising our shared vision. We are not seeking to target or exclude any country, but create an environment that induces all countries to operate with respect for the sovereignty of others and in a manner consistent with international norms in global commons," Shringla said against the backdrop of the military standoff with China that is set to enter its seventh month.

Noting that the pandemic has led to "geopolitical repositioning primarily by China and the US", Shringla outlined what he said were four key outcomes of the accelerated global transition and increased geopolitical competition and tension triggered by the Covid-19 crisis.

These developments, he said, will shape the nature and terms of India's engagement with major economies such as the US, China, the European Union, Japan and ASEAN. There is a need for greater global conversations on resilient supply chains, he added.

The practices that New Delhi perfects at home in response to the pandemic will "inevitably become exportable abroad", and India's thinking "about deeper global economic engagement with the world will be influenced by both geopolitical divides and pandemic pressures," he said.

"There was already a reassessment of FTA experiences, keeping in mind the unsettling impact they have had on India's manufacturing. The attention could now well shift to becoming part of global value chains, complemented by focused trading arrangements," Shringla remarked.

"This would be so especially as efforts towards making India an easier location for doing business gain traction. We are conscious of the need not just to improve on our own record but to become more competitive," he added.

Like-minded countries need to coordinate to emerge from the pandemic more resilient than before, he said, adding: "We cannot afford to let multilateralism be held hostage by great power competition. A multipolar world without an international order based on rule of law and collaboration will lead to uncertainty and turbulence."

Turning to terrorism, Shringla said India and France face similar non-traditional security threats in the form of radicalism and cyber-security challenges. "Both India and France have suffered. The fight today is not against specific communities or individuals but against a radical politico-religious ideology that attempts to negate the progress made by secular democracies...," he said.

"This radical ideology espouses violence and separatism, very often fanned and supported by foreign influence...It was horrifying to hear about the two recent terrorist incidents in France, one of which, as is very often the case, had its origins in our western neighbourhood - Pakistan," Shringla said.

"For the past three decades, we have experienced what unbridled radicalism can wreak - and what malevolent violent forces it can unleash. The civilised world needs to act together and act with firmness to address this threat to our cherished democratic value systems."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 24 -- China on Wednesday said it was in touch with Indian authorities on the circumstances of the 23 Indian sailors stranded on a ship anchored off a northern Chinese port since June, but did not specify when they will be allowed to leave the vessel.

The sailors are stuck on bulk carrier MV Jag Anand, which has been anchored off the Jingtang port on the Bohai Sea in China's Hebei province.

In a separate instance, at least 16 more Indian seafarers have not been allowed to leave their ship MV Anastasia, stranded off the Caofeidian port in the same province. Beijing has not allowed the 23 sailors to get off the vessel in the backdrop of an increasing number of imported Covid-19 cases in the country, putting the physical and mental health of the sailors at risk.

There's been no report of any positive Covid-19 case on the ship in the past six months on Jag Anand. But that hasn't stopped the Chinese port authorities from implementing strict anti-epidemic protocols, preventing the sailors from disembarking. "China has explicit stipulations on the epidemic control measures and quarantine of seafarers at ports," Zhao Lijian, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson. "The local authorities of China have been in close communication with Indian side and replied to their requests in a timely manner. We also provide necessary facilitation and assistance while meeting certain quarantine and epidemic prevention requirements," Zhao said.

The ship sailed from the port of Gladstone in Australia on May 26 - carrying coal - and reached Jingtang port on June 13. Since then, the ship has been anchored 2-3 km away from the port.

HT reported in November that while the local port authorities have not allowed the "crew change" - whereby a ship's crew can disembark and head back to their country of origin - it has been communicated to them that anyone needing treatment could be allowed to come ashore temporarily.

However, at least 16 more Indians are stuck on MV Anastasia off the Caofeidian port in Hebei. "Onboard the Anastasia are 18 seafarers - 16 of them Indian, one Russian and one Filipino - forced to work at sea for far longer than their current anchorage, with crew clocking up to 20 months as ports refuse to let them disembark for fear of spreading contagion," a report in The Sydney Morning Herald said Tuesday, adding that at least four them were on "suicide watch".

On December 17, an MEA spokesperson told a briefing: "The Chinese authorities have conveyed that on account of various Covid-19 related restrictions imposed by local authorities, crew change is not being permitted from these ports. The government continues to be in regular touch with the Chinese authorities to seek a resolution of these issues,"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 10 -- Indian-origin doctors, nurses and pharmacists are among nearly 1,500 people awarded in the Queen's Birthday Honours List 2020 for 'outstanding contribution' to British society, including during the Covid-19 pandemic, reflecting the Indian community's significant presence again in the royal list released on Saturday.

The list is usually published in June, when Queen Elizabeth celebrates her official birthday, but it was postponed to include individuals who played key roles in the first months of the pandemic. Several Indian-origin doctors and nurses have died earlier in the year while dealing with the virus.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the recipients were "a testament to the sort of country we are - caring, compassionate and resolute in the face of a global pandemic. The hard work and dedication of these local, often unsung heroes has helped carry us through".

The list includes several leading individuals from the Sikh community, such as Rajinder Singh Harzall - the 'Skipping Sikh' - who receives an MBE for encouraging elderly people to stay active in lockdown; and Yadvinder Singh Malhi, professor at the University of Oxford, for services to Ecosystem Science.

The Issa brothers - Zuber and Mohsin - who recently bought the retail giant Asda, have been named for the OBE for services to business and charity. Members of the 1.5 million-strong Indian community jn the UK have figured prominently in the royal honours lists over the years.

Individuals honoured for medical and other services during the pandemic include Harmohinder Singh Bhatia, Sarbjit Clare, Sandeep Singh Daheley, Jatinder Singh Harchowal Archowal, Manvir Hothi, Sanjeev Kumar, Lavina Mehta, Gurjinder Singh Sandhu, Chandni Sejpal Shah, Carter Singh, Vinod Bhagwandas Tailor, Rita Chohan, Rani Kaur, Manju Malhi and Neeraj Kumari Singadia.

They will be handed the honours at special ceremonies by members of the royal family at various venues in the coming months.

Others named for significant services in other walks of life include Neeta Patel (entrepreneurship and technology), Deesha Chadha (faith communities), Herminder Kaur Channa (education), Sanjiv Nichani (medicine and charity), Alpesh Bipin Patel (economy and international trade), Sarabjit Singh Purewal (health and safety, and cyber security), Anant Meghji Pethraj Shah (education, health and animal welfare).

The 1,495-member list for 2020 also includes Neeta Avnash Kaur Atkar JP (small business finance), Yadvinder Bolina (law and order), Bijna Kotak Dasani (diversity and inclusion in finance), Manjit Kaur Gill (provision of menstrual products to women in developing countries), Pushkala Gopal (South Asian dance), Rita Hindocha-Morjaria (education), Parminder Kaur Kondral (services to the Sikh community), Vasant Patel (adopted children and their families), Hemantkumar Kiritbhai Patel (museums and heritage), Baljeet Kaur Sandhu (equality and civil society), Jayantilal Shah (promoting anti-racism in Southampton and Hampshire), Gurpreet Singh (healthcare, equality and fairness), Amolak Singh Dhariwal (business), Parbir Kaur Jagpal (diversity and inclusion in health), Parminder Singh Purewal (hospitality), Satyavir Singhal (services to community in Belfast), Bharat Thakrar (voluntary and charitable services), Paul Chakravarti (services to national security).

---

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- There is no evidence of community transmission of the coronavirus infection in India as all samples collected randomly to check the spread of the Covid-19 disease have tested negative, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) director-general Balram Bhargava said on Thursday.

"All random samples that we tested for severe acute respiratory infections are negative for Covid-19. This suggests there is no community transmission in India yet," Bhargava said.

India has so far registered three deaths and 166 positive cases.

Community transmission takes place when a person tests positive for the disease but doctors are not able to trace the source of the infection. It indicates undiagnosed and often asymptomatic people are unknowingly causing infection, which makes it difficult to break the chain of transmission.

ICMR has been conducting community surveillance by lifting random samples from intensive care unit (ICU) patients suffering from severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), including severe pneumonia. These samples are taken from people with no travel history or contact with a positive patient.

Almost all of 1,000 samples collected since March 15 have returned negative for Covid-19, Bhargava said. ICMR is expected to release the exact data later in the day.

However, a section of experts says the sample size is too small and that community transmission began in India two-three weeks ago.

According to ICMR, India is still at stage II of the disease. There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

"The exercise of random testing is to establish evidence of community transmission," said Dr Nivedita Gupta, scientist, ICMR. According to Gupta,a sample returning positive would mean that the infection has found its way into the community. That would call for a change in the disease control strategy, she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 28 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said India was able to combat Covid-19 far better than experts around the world believed it could because of the timely countrywide lockdown, which gave it time to ramp up health system significantly. The epidemic also taught India, he added, to be "self-reliant".

"With timely lockdown, India successfully protected the lives of tens of thousands of its citizens," Modi said in his address to a virtual annual meeting of the American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin. He added it was contrary to fears expressed by experts around the world that India could be in "deep crisis".

The lockdown was imposed from March 25 to check the spread of the disease before the government last month announced the phased plan to lift the stringent restrictions.

Modi said Covid-19 fatalities were less than 12 for every million people in India. "Not even 12," he repeated to emphasise the low number compared to more than 350 in the US and over 600 in the UK, Spain, and Italy.

The US is the worst-hit by the Covid-19 in terms of the death toll and infections.

"If India today has been able to fight the coronavirus, it is because the lockdown played a very big role in it."

Modi said India was able to increase the number of hospital beds, isolation wards, and labs to test coronavirus infections during the lockdown. He added three months ago, India was an importer of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), testing kits, and even N-95 masks. He added today India produces 4 million PPEs a week and 3 million N-95s. "We used to import earlier, and now we are moving towards exporting them," he said.

He added even ventilators, which are needed for severely ill and hospitalised patients, were mostly imported earlier, whereas 50,000 of them made in India are in the process of being deployed.

"It is said that every crisis teaches us something or the other," Modi said. He added Covid-19 has taught India to be self-reliant and this will help further strengthen the healthcare system.

Modi spoke about his government's approach to health, wellness and initiatives like eradication of TB and mitigation of Kala-azar (black fever.

He said India has supplied medicines and medical equipment to over 150 countries and provided training to personnel of 16 countries. He added India sent anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine to deal with the pandemic to many countries, including the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 1 -- Identifying Brexit and the Covid-19 pandemic as two issues that defined his tenure as president of the Royal Society, Nobel laureate Venki Ramakrishnan, who left the role after five years on Monday, said the UK was "poorly prepared" to deal with the coronavirus pandemic.

Ramakrishnan, who won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2009, was the first Indian-origin scientist elected president of the society in 2015. The society is a fellowship of many of the world's most eminent scientists and is the oldest scientific academy in continuous existence. The new president is statistician Adrian Smith.

Delivering the anniversary day address 2020, Ramakrishnan, 68, dwelt on various issues, focusing on the impact of Brexit on science and the ways in which the UK government dealt with the pandemic.

He said, "It is not surprising that in this rapidly evolving situation, there were missteps and mistakes. Despite a pandemic being the No. 1 item on the national risk register, we were poorly prepared. We did not take the virus seriously enough, early enough."

"It does not strike me as a coincidence that in January and perhaps even part of February, we were distracted by Brexit and our main focus was on plans for a post-EU Britain. We did not have the PPE needed; we were slow to go into lockdown; we spread infection from our hospitals to our care homes; we did not have the procedures in place to stem infections in hospitals; our understanding of who was being impacted the most was hindered by a failure to gather and understand data - that left some groups more exposed; we had insufficient testing capacity; and we likely went into a second lockdown too late as well, despite scientific advice to the contrary," he added.

Ramakrishnan, who will return to his research role in the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, is a member of the UK government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies that is key to decisions on dealing with the pandemic. He also led groups in Royal Society on issues related to Covid-19.

On the impact of Brexit on the UK's position in science, he said it was vital that London retains highly-skilled scientists working and ensures that talented people from around the world still choose to come and contribute to the country's globally competitive science. The establishment of the global talent visa has been a significant step, he added.

Recalling that he thought of himself as an "unlikely choice" when he was elected president of the society in 2015, he noted the turn of history that eventually led to an Indian-origin scientist leading it.

"When I was approached, I must confess I thought of myself as an unlikely choice and made that clear. Ironically, the first fellows to come into contact with India were colonisers like Robert Clive and Warren Hastings, or colonial administrators like Thomas Macaulay and Richard Temple. They certainly did not regard Indians as their equals in any way, and would frankly have been astonished that one day, someone born in India would go on to become a fellow, let alone a president of the Society.

"I came to Britain relatively late in life, and spent much of the time since in the confines of the LMB in Cambridge working on ribosomes. I had neither the large networks of someone who grew up here, nor indeed any familiarity with the British establishment."

"So it was particularly broad-minded and generous, and perhaps a bit foolish of you to have entrusted me with this position. I was very touched that you did so, and in turn, I have given it my best in what has been an exceptionally challenging and turbulent five years. Perhaps being a somewhat naive outsider who tried to see both sides of issues may actually have helped make the case to people of divergent political persuasions," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 19 -- The government barred all commercial international aircraft from landing in India from March 22 and instructed states to enforce work-from-home protocol for all private sector employees, except essential services, amid a raft of measures aimed at staving off the coronavirus epidemic that has claimed four lives in India.

In a statement by the press information bureau, the government said no commercial flights will be allowed to land until March 29. All children under 10 have been asked to stay at home and citizens above 65 - except public representatives, medical professionals and government servants -- were instructed to not venture outside.

"States are being requested to enforce work from home for private sector employees except for those working in emergency/essential services," the statement read.

The government also suspended all concessional travel on trains and flights, except for students, patients and disabled people. All group B and C central government employees have been asked to attend office on alternate weeks, with staggered timings.

The statement came hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses the nation at 8pm on Thursday.

India is currently grappling with stage 2 of the coronavirus outbreak, with 169 cases and four deaths. The Indian Council of Medical Research has ruled out community transmission - where the origin of the infection is not known -- as of Thursday morning.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 23 -- Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has said that while US-India ties were "photo-ops" for President Donald Trump, for him they were about "getting things done", and reiterated his promise to work with India to combat terrorism and prevent China from threatening its neighbours.

To illustrate his contrast with the US president, Biden recalled the role he played in the passage of the "historic" India-US civil nuclear deal as chairman of the US Senate foreign relations committee in 2008.

"At the time, I said if the United States and India became closer friends, then the world will be a safer place," Biden wrote in an Op-Ed in India West, a news publication focused on the Indian diaspora.

President Barack Obama's 2009-2016 tenure saw "some of the best years" between the two countries, Biden wrote, adding that he and his Indian-descent running mate Kamala Harris will "build on that great progress and do even more."

"We can and should be natural allies," wrote Biden, who currently has the upper hand in the election according to opinion polls, using a phrase first used by late Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee during a trip to the US in 1998.

Also Read | India is filthy, claims Trump at his final clash with Biden before race for White House closes

Leaders from both countries have since tried their own version to define the relationship in their own vision.

Biden reiterated his promise-first laid out in an expansive platform he unveiled on August 15 at a virtual event to mark India's Independence Day-to work with India on its key foreign policy concerns.

"If elected President, I will continue what I have long called for: The US and India will stand together against terrorism in all its forms and work together to promote a region of peace and stability where neither China nor any other country threatens its neighbours." The resolve to combat terrorism was a reference to cross-border terrorism emanating from Pakistan.

Both Biden and Trump have wooed Indian Americans voters-estimated to number 1.9 million-for their potential to make a difference, howsoever small, in battleground states that will determine the outcome. "The Indian American electorate of nearly 2 million voters is a powerful force that can make all the difference from North Carolina and Virginia to Pennsylvania and Michigan to Georgia and Texas and across the country," he wrote, leaving no doubt the Op-Ed was an appeal to Indian American voters.

Also Read | 2020 is the year of Indian-Americans, and they're not with Trump

He added: "And as we value the Indian-American diaspora, we'll continue to value the US-India relationship. For Donald Trump, it's photo-ops. For me, it's getting things done."

It could not be immediately ascertained if the former vice-president was referring to a video released by the Trump campaign of clips of the president with Prime Minister Narendra Modi from their joint appearances at the 'Howdy Modi' and 'Namaste Trump' events in Houston and Ahmedabad to woo Indian American voters.

US Final Presidential Debate: When Donald Trump called India filthy

Biden promised them better ties with their country of origin and better lives for them in the US, addressing their main concerns, as with other Americans-promise to contain the Covid-19 epidemic, expand healthcare, not raise taxes for those under a certain income, encourage legal immigration, and make colleges tuition-free for some certain income categories.

Bide also noted in the Op-Ed the importance of respecting diversity among other shared values. "We will meet every challenge together as we strengthen both democracies-fair and free elections, equality under the law, freedom of expression and religion, and the boundless strength both nations' draw from our diversity," he wrote, adding, "These core principles have endured throughout each nations' histories and will continue to be the source of our strength in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 16 -- India on Tuesday sought to dispel misgivings among British lawmakers about the farmers' protest and the government's willingness to address all concerns, even as it contended that "vested interests" abroad were trying to fuel the agitation through misinformation.

The Indian government's views were reflected in an open letter issued by the Indian high commission in London to British MP Claudia Webbe, who has repeatedly raised the handling of the farmers' protest by New Delhi in the UK Parliament and outside. Webbe is the MP from Leicester East, which has one of the largest percentages of people of Indian-origin.

The Indian mission said the information about the farmers' protest was being shared with Webbe to "dispel any misgivings with regard to the objectives of the reforms, the ability of those having reservations to protest peacefully and the willingness of the Government of India to address all concerns in a manner most acceptable to the protesting farmers' unions".

Also Read | Delhi Police ask Zoom to share details of farm stir 'toolkit' meeting

"The efforts continue - but Government of India is more than aware of efforts by vested interests abroad to fuel the protests through misinformation and incendiary assertions that are not helpful in progressing the dialogue between the protesters and Government or addressing the issues through the democratic processes that our people have traditionally relied on," the open letter added.

Webbe and Labour Party MP Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi have been at the forefront of UK MPs who have raised the farmers' protest. Over the past two days, Webbe tweeted in support of the protesting farmers and Disha Ravi, the 21-year-old activist arrested over a toolkit used to organise the protests.

The Indian mission's letter said Webbe, as the representative of British citizens of Leicester East, including many connected to India through family and business ties, would have been "most welcome to convey any apprehensions of the community" that she represents to the high commission in London.

"We would have been able to comprehensively and in detail provide clarifications to assuage the concerns of your constituents with regard to the recent path-breaking Indian farm laws, against which a small section of India's farming community has been protesting," the letter said, repeating the position taken by the external affairs ministry in response to the farmers' protest being raised by other countries.

The Indian mission said the reforms, "intended to protect and empower farmers in India", were based on "inputs from experts and recommendations by committees that have analysed the specific challenges of the agricultural sector in India over the last 20 years".

Also Read | Deep Sidhu, accused in Republic Day violence, remanded to 7-day police custody

It added that the farm laws were discussed and debated in Parliament and their "benefits have started reaching more than 100 million small farmers instantly".

"With the section of farmers having reservations, 11 rounds of talks have been held. Though Government of India has suggested numerous ways to address their apprehensions, including postponing implementation of the Acts or amendment of the same, these options have been summarily rejected by them," the letter said.

The Indian high commission also said the farmers participating in protests have been "treated with utmost respect and restraint by the government and security forces - more than may have been the case in similar situations elsewhere in the world".

The letter also provided a detailed brief on the three farm laws against which the farmers have been protesting since late November last year.

It said that during the Covid-19 lockdown, there was an urgent need to "allow free direct marketing outside the mandis in order to not only facilitate the farmers in selling their produce near [the] farm gate at remunerative prices but also decongest the mandis", and that the "demand suppression and logistics and supply chain breakdown only accentuated the need to liberalise the ecosystem".

In the face of pressure from British MPs, UK foreign secretary Dominic Raab had raised the farmers' protest with his Indian counterpart during a visit to New Delhi in December.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 6 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

With lone patient testing negative, Mizoram claims 'Covid-19 free' status

Mizoram has announced that it is free of coronavirus disease (Covid-19), as the north-eastern state's lone patient has recovered. The patient, a 50-year-old pastor who had visited the Netherlands, tested Covid-19 positive on March 24. Read more

Survey reveals over 50% urban Indians maintain social distancing even at home, sleep and eat separately

As the number of coronavirus cases in India near the 50,000 mark, a survey has found that nearly 90% of Indians have taken the coronavirus pandemic seriously and have strictly adhered to the social distancing norms. Read more

Chargesheet filed against foreign jamaatis, AU prof

Shahganj police have filed the chargesheet against 18 persons including seven foreign 'jamaatis' and a professor of Allahabad University (AU), who was also named in the FIR lodged against them under Epidemic Act and other relevant sections of IPC. Read more

24 cases in two days: Veggies come at a premium as Meerut mandi closed for 3 days

Two dozen Covid 19 cases inside the vegetable mandi in the past two days have thrown a scare among traders as well as buyers. Read more

Singapore court jails Indian-origin man for abusing police

An Indian-origin man in Singapore was on Wednesday sentenced to seven months in prison for verbally abusing police and safe-distancing enforcement officers who were urging compliance with the Covid-19 measures. Read more

Arogya Setu app on privacy issue: Read full statement here

India's Covid-19 contact tracing app Aarogya Setu released a statement today responding to the claims of French hacker Robert Baptiste of a privacy issue in the app. Read more

Twilight fans, rejoice! Edward Cullen's perspective is going to be out soon in Midnight Sun

Stephenie Meyer's long-awaited prequel to her hugely successful human-vampire love story series, Twilight is releasing on August 4, the author announced on her website (www.stepheniemeyer.com). Read more

Brighten up your day with this goofy pup trying to protect its home

When one reads the sign 'Beware of the dog' they generally picturise a stern looking Doberman or a German shepherd guarding the gates. In this case, a rather silly looking guard is there to greet you at the gate of this house. Read more

Watch- Covid-19: States eye liquor revenue | What you need to know

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- Senior Labour MP Virendra Sharma, who last week tested positive for coronavirus and was hospitalised when his condition deteriorated, said on Tuesday that he has now been discharged and is "recovering well at home".

Hailing from Jalandhar district, Sharma, 72, is among nearly 30 MPs who have gone into self-isolation with symptoms or tested positive. Senior figures afflicted include Prime Minister Boris Johnson, health secretary Matt Hancock and Scotland secretary Alister Jack.

Sharma, MP from Ealing Southall, said: "At Hillingdon Hospital I tested positive for coronavirus, and had some trouble breathing, and so was hospitalised for a week. My care was exceptional, and I want to pay an enormous tribute to all the staff at the hospital and across the NHS".

"Now I am back home again and self-isolating, and following all the NHS and government advice. I want to urge everyone else to do the same.The amazing men and women of the NHS working in almost impossible situations, with too little kit and too little support deserve our help".

Noting that many Britons, including those of Indian origin, are stranded abroad, Sharma said he and his staff have been liaising with the Foreign Office. There has been "some positive developments" on this, but the issue has not yet been resolved for all, he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- In a diplomatic first, India and Australia are expected to sign an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics facilities and other pacts aimed at developing alternative supply chains when the two sides hold their first virtual summit on June 4.

The summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Australian counterpart Scott Morrison, yet to be formally announced, will be held against the backdrop of heightened friction with China for both countries.

It will be Modi's first virtual bilateral summit and the first time several bilateral agreements will be concluded virtually since the Covid-19 outbreak, two people familiar with the development said.

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), finalised at the "2+2" or combined dialogue of the foreign and defence secretaries in New Delhi last December, was to be signed during Morrison's visit in January, which was called off due to the Australian bushfires.

With joint exercises and defence cooperation between India and Australia on the upswing, MLSA will remove the need for protracted negotiations for reciprocal access to logistics support every time a manoeuvre is organised, the people cited above said on condition of anonymity. It will also improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two sides.

Between 2016 and 2019, India has signed similar logistics exchange agreements with the US, Singapore, France and South Korea.

While the conclusion of MLSA is significant as the two sides have been negotiating it for some time, there is greater buzz about agreements to be signed in science and technology, research, pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, and rare earth metals and critical minerals which are aimed at creating supply chains in strategic areas that are less dependent on China, the people said.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperating on rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves. More than 90% of India's imports of rare earth metals, worth $3.4 million in 2016, come from China.

The two sides will also look at enhancing their partnership in education as part of measures to shift the focus of Australian universities on the Chinese market, the people said. Prior to the Covid-19 crisis, Australia was home to some 90,000 Indian students.

"We're also looking at agreements in the maritime sphere and water resources and negotiations are underway on some other issues. Research and collaboration on Covid-19 will also figure in the discussions," said one of the people cited above.

Morrison has described India as "a natural partner for Australia", and Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell has said the two sides have had regular discussions about how they can shape the post-Covid world order. In this context, O'Farrell said Australia supports India's call for reforming the World Health Organization (WHO) after overcoming the Covid-19 crisis.

While tensions between India and China are at a high following the standoff between their border troops in Ladakh, Australia's relations with China too took a hit after Canberra called for an independent investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nitin Pai, director of the Takshashila Institution, said it made "absolute economic sense" for India and Australia to reduce the risk of their exposure to China even if the two countries weren't grappling with tensions with China and the Covid-19 crisis.

"It makes a lot of sense to find a diversity of suppliers on one hand, and to find a diversity of customers for products on the other," he said, adding the existing geo-political risks, the pandemic and travel restrictions make it vital not to put all eggs in one basket and to build a diversity of economic partnerships.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 5 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 1pm. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

36 British MPs back farmers' protest, want UK to raise issue with India

Thirty-six British MPs from various parties - including some of Indian origin and others representing many constituents with links in Punjab - have written to British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab, asking him to raise the issue of farmers' agitation with the Narendra Modi government. Read More

Haryana health minister Anil Vij tests Covid-19 positive, weeks after first Covaxin dose

Haryana health minister Anil Vij, who was administered a dose of Covaxin last month, said on Saturday he has tested positive for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and has been admitted to a hospital. Read More

All states accept Rs 1.1 lakh crore borrowing option to meet GST shortfall

All states and Union territories have decided to go for the first option given by the Centre to meet the revenue shortfall arising out of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) implementation with Jharkhand becoming the latest state to join the list, the government said on Saturday. Read More

Third aircraft carrier an operational necessity to counter expansionist China

Indian Navy chief Admiral Karambir Singh has pitched for a third aircraft carrier with the Narendra Modi government calling it a necessity in the current security environment in Asia. Read More

Reddit shares picture of 'floating' Christmas tree. Would you try it?

With December having begun, it is safe to say that the festive season is upon us. If you're currently decorating your house with fairy lights and various winter-themed ornaments. Read More

Mank movie review: David Fincher demolishes Hollywood mythmaking in delicious new Netflix film

Alternately hard-nosed and dewy-eyed, Mank is the most fiendishly entertaining movie about movies since Ben Affleck's Argo. It's satirical but sweet, weary but vengeful - it's unlike anything director David Fincher has ever made. Read More

Bhumi Pednekar shows who's the boss in Rs 1 lakh outfit at Durgamati promotions

Channelling her inner girl boss vibe while promoting her upcoming film Durgamati, Bhumi Pednekar recently stunned in a gorgeous power suit and we can't help but take fashion inspiration. Read More

'Govt committed to principle of reform, perform & transform': PM Modi

While delivering a keynote address at IIT 2020 Global Summit via video conference, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asserted that his government is fully committed to the principle of reform, perform and transform. He said that India is witnessing a sea change in the way it works. Watch

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 14 -- Researchers of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) have detected coronaviruses (CoVs) among two species of bats in the country, highlighting the need for continuous active surveillance in the mammal to identify the emerging strains of the viruses that can cause an epidemic.

Bats are considered to be the natural reservoir for many viruses, of which some can potentially infect humans. Many viruses have had their origin in bat species over the last two decades. Bats have been recognised as the natural reservoirs of a variety of pathogenic viruses such as Rabies, Hendra, Marburg, Nipah, and Ebola. Bats are known to harbour CoVs and serve as their reservoirs.

In India, an association of Pteropus medius bats led to the Nipah virus disease outbreak in Kerala a couple of years ago. It is suspected that the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which causes coronavirus disease (Covid-19), can also be traced to bats.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

India has a diverse population of bats. Around 117 species of bats have been recorded in the country, with around 100 sub-species coming under 39 genera belonging to eight families of the mammal.

"To assess the presence of CoVs in bats, we performed identification and characterisation of bat CoV (BtCoV) in P. medius and Rousettus species from representative states in India collected during 2018 and 2019," said the researchers in the paper published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research on April 13.

The specimens were collected from Pteropus spp. bats from Kerala, Karnataka, Chandigarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, and Telangana, and Rousettus spp. bats from Kerala, Karnataka, Chandigarh, Gujarat, Odisha, Punjab, and Telangana between 2018 and 2019.

Rectal swab (RS) and throat swab specimens of Pteropus and Rousettus spp. bats were screened for CoVs using a pan-CoV reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from the seven states in the country, where bats are commonly found. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on a few representative bat specimens that were tested positive to know the whole gene sequence. The match was found with coronaviruses between 93.69 and 96.9%.

The researchers screened 21 of the 508 RSs from Pteropus spp. bats that tested positive for the BtCoV. These positive bats belonged to Kerala (n=12), Himachal Pradesh (n=2), Puducherry (n=6), and Tamil Nadu (n=1), where n stands for the number of the samples tested.

Altogether, 25 bats from both the species were found positive.

The BtCoV causing human infection belongs to ?- and ?-CoV genera of the coronaviridae family, according to the available information.

?-CoV genus has five strains known to infect humans. The two human-infecting strains (NL63 and 229E) from ?-CoV genus, which causes mild-to-moderate respiratory infections, are believed to have originated in bats.

Two members of the ?-CoV genus (HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1) are known to cause the common cold and lower respiratory tract infections. The other three are known to be pathogenic to humans (SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2). The SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 belong to L_B and MERS CoV belongs to L_C of ?-CoV genus.

"This study was a step towards understanding the CoV circulation among Indian bats. Detection of potentially pathogenic CoVs in Indian bats stresses the need for enhanced screening for novel viruses in them.

This would help in the development of diagnostic assays for novel viruses with outbreak potential and be useful in disease interventions. Proactive surveillance remains crucial for identifying the emerging novel viruses with epidemic potential and measures for risk mitigation," the researchers said.

SARS-CoV-2 is reported to be 96% identical to BtCoV at the whole genome level.

Most of the human CoVs are either zoonotic --- a disease that normally exists in animals but that can infect humans --- in origin or circulate in animals. CoVs can cause a wide range of infections, including respiratory tract infections, gastroenteritis, hepatitis, and encephalomyelitis in their respective hosts.

In India, parts of the Western Ghats, particularly in Kerala, are reported to be the habitat of diverse bat populations. The reports of pathogenic human viruses from bat specimens demand enhanced methods to monitor the local population's exposure to various bat species. Investigations in unexplored regions/states should be focused on gaining further insights into CoV diversity within Indian bat populations, according to the researchers.

In the present scenario of changing demography and ecological manipulations, it is challenging to have checks on the encounters of bats with other animals and humans. Active and continuous surveillance remains crucial for outbreak alerts for bat-associated viral agents with epidemic potential, which would be helpful in timely interventions, they added.

Experts said there is a need for proactive surveillance of zoonotic infections in bats. Detection and identifications of such causative agents will provide leads for the development of diagnostic along with preparedness and readiness to deal with such emergent viruses in a bid to quickly contain them from spreading.

"This is something we have been asking for a long time. Bats and rodents harbour a number of pathogens that can cause possible harm to humans, and these also interact the most with humans. Bats, rodents, and primates are key targets for pathogens of human concern," said Dr Abi Tamim Vanak, a wildlife scientist and senior fellow, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment, and fellow, department of biotechnology, Wellcome Trust India Alliance.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- US President Donald Trump on Tuesday threatened to walk out of the World Health Organisation, accusing the Tedros Adhanom-led global health body chief of acting at China's behest and mismanaging the Covid-19 pandemic in the early stages.

"It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China," Trump said in a letter to Tedros Adhanom.

In his four-page letter, Trump detailed every occasion since December last when, according to the US, the WHO did not act on the available information, made misleading claims or gave the world bad advice.

Trump gave Tedros Adhanom 30 days to commit to major substantive improvements, warning that if the WHO doesn't deliver on this, "I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the WHO permanent and reconsider our membership".

Trump's letter was sent hours after the WHO's policy making body began its meeting on Monday. At this meeting, China, which had opposed a probe into the origin of the virus that has killed nearly 3.2 lakh people and infected millions across the world, was forced to back down. The formal resolution is expected to be passed today.

Trump's letter did not spell out the improvements or reforms that he was looking for. "My administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organisation," he wrote.

Diplomats in Washington and Geneva told Hindustan Times that Trump's letter, which had put the WHO chief on notice, appeared to be prepping the ground for a possible exit from the WHO.

It is argued that the WHO could not carry out any substantive reforms in a rush. The WHA, which has representatives of 194-member nations, is meeting over video conference for a truncated session that is to end in a few hours.

"Any major reform, like the one the US President appears to be looking for, can only be made with the approval of the general body, the WHA," a diplomat said.

To be sure, this isn't the first time that the Trump administration has spoken about walking out of the UN's health body. But the letter to the WHO boss makes the threat formal.

Donald Trump does have a track record of pulling the United States out of international agreements and organisations when he doesn't get his way. Trump has already led the US out of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Human Rights Council and last year, came close to backing out of the Universal Postal Union.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 14 -- China has restricted the publication of research papers on the origin of the coronavirus pandemic, CNN reported. It has referred to two notices published by Chinese universities where such restrictions have been mentioned.

The notices quoted by CNN say that the universities have asked teachers to strictly manage the papers related to virus tracing. They also talk about adding an extra layer of vetting by a scientific research team.

The pages carrying the notices have now been deleted, the CNN further reported.

A Chinese reseacher quoted by the CNN said that it is a "coordinated effort" from the Chinese government "to control the narrative, and paint it as if the outbreak did not originate in China". The researcher's identity has not been revealed.

One of the universities quoted by CNN is the Fudan University in Shanghai. The other university is China University of Geoscience in Wuhan, reported CNN.

China is, meanwhile, fighting hard to stop a second wave of coronavirus infections.

Though the northeast border remains China's priority, state media reported late on Monday that more than 100 people had been arrested in March for illegally entering China through its southwestern border in Yunnan province.

Russia has become China's largest source of imported cases, with a total of 409 infections originating in the northern neighbour. Chinese people there should stay put and not return home, the state-owned Global Times said in an editorial Tuesday.

China's northeastern border province of Heilongjiang saw 79 new cases of imported coronavirus cases on Monday, all Chinese citizens travelling home from Russia, state media said. Mainland China reported 89 new cases.

Heilongjiang's provincial authority said on Tuesday that it had established a hotline to reward citizens as much as 5,000 yuan ($710) for handing over or reporting illegal immigrants.

China has reported 82,249 coronavirus cases and 3,341 deaths. It reported no new deaths on Tuesday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 2 -- After the government banned 59 applications, mostly of Chinese origin, electronics and information technology minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said that the move will create an opportunity for Indian entrepreneurs to create and innovate.

"In the wake of the ban that we have imposed, there is a great opportunity for Indian apps," Prasad said on Wednesday. "Let us make this an 'atmanirbhar bharat' ('self-reliant India). There are a large number of technological start-ups and minds that can make good apps. Let us reduce our dependence on their foreign apps that have their own agenda."

The IT ministry issued the ban on 59 applications, including widely used video streaming service TikTok, on Monday due "threats to national security".

Prasad was speaking on the completion of five years of Digital India.

He also urged entrepreneurs such as Nandan Nilenkani and Debjani Ghosh, who were panelists at the event, to focus on three key parameters of digital development in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis. Artificial Intelligence intervention in the sectors of health, education and agriculture, said Prasad, would go a long way to help the country handle the pandemic better.

"(We need to) Explore healthcare, which is a compelling sector in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic," Prasad said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 27 -- Decadent chocolates, chunky brownies and sinful cheesecakes - these are what sweet dreams are made of. Bringing these uber luxurious dreams to life, and your palate, is Crimsyn Patisserie, offering a selection of signature French desserts and indulgent treats. Co-founded by Le Cordon Bleu alumna, chef Salonika Bansal, the bakery is a one-stop destination for Atelier chocolates and artisan breads.

"We use the best ingredients from around the world and single-origin chocolates," says Bansal. Some of their bestsellers include Tiramisu Geateux, Cherry Hazelnut Cheesecake, Caramelo, Gluten-free Brownie and Swiss Roll.

During these Covid-19 times, they are taking every precaution to ensure high standards of safety. "The kitchen is sanitised five times a day. The temperature of the employees is monitored daily and hands are sanitised every 30 minutes," says Bansal. They are also giving hand sanitisers with every order and using sustainable packaging. Enjoy it at home, order on Zomato and Swiggy or Call/Whatsapp on +91 9311591342, or log on to thecrimsyn.com

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 29 -- All schools and anganwadi centres in the country will be connected by tapped water supply within 100 days under Jal Jeevan Mission starting from October 2, announced Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday.

The PM made the announcement while inaugurating six mega projects in Uttarakhand under the Namami Gange Mission through video-conferencing.

"To fight challenges of water scarcity in many parts of the country, Jal Jeevan Mission is working towards giving piped water connectivity to all villages in the country and promoting gram swarajya (village self-sufficiency) and empowering the villages.

"Under Jal Jeevan Mission, a 100-day campaign will start from October 2, under which it will be ensured that all schools and aganwadi centres in the country are connected with tap water supply," said the Prime Minister.

The state governments have been told to take up this project on priority and complete it within 100 days.

"Over 15 crore houses were not connected with water supply till six years ago. Now around 1 lakh houses are being connected with clean piped water supply every day and the Jal Shakti ministry is working at a fast pace to increase this number. In just one year, over 2 crore families in the country have been given piped water connections. The Uttarakhand government is working one step ahead; they are working on giving water connectivity to each and every house at Re 1 only and over 50,000 families have been given water connectivity in Uttarakhand in the past six months, despite the Covid-19 epidemic," said Modi.

Talking about government vision about Ganga, PM Modi said that the government is not just focused on making the river pollution-free but also working on holistic economic development and protecting the ecology of the area along Ganga.

"From its source near Gangotri till Ganga Sagar, river Ganga supports almost 50% of the population of the country. Many projects were taken up in the past to clean Ganga river but it is still polluted. We worked with a new approach and vision which was not only restricted to cleaning the river but took it up as the largest river conservation project in the country."

The PM said that the Namami Gange Mission is being taken to the next step now, where the focus will also be economic development of areas set up along the river.

"The focus will not just be on Swachhta of Ganga river, but on holistic economic and environmental development of all areas set up along river Ganga. The Central government is working to promote organic farming and cultivation of medicinal plants along the river and making an organic corridor," he added.

Listing the four-point approach of the central government towards making Ganga pollution-free, PM Modi said, "We followed a systematic approach towards cleaning Ganga which focused on tapping over 130 drains opening into Ganga and restricting the entry of polluted water into the river."

"Along with this, we made sure that all the STPs being set up for river Ganga have the capacity of working long-term, minimum for the next ten years. Further in these past years, 100 cities and 5,000 villages along Ganga have been declared as open defecation-free, further reducing pollution sources. The fourth approach is to now ensure that tributaries joining Ganga are also made pollution-free," said the Prime Minister.

The PM inaugurated a sewage treatment plant (STP) with capacity of 68 million litres per day (MLD), up-gradation of the existing 27 MLD at Jagjeetpur in Haridwar and a new 18 MLD STP at Sarai in Haridwar. Along with this, a 26 MLD STP was inaugurated at Lakkadghat in Rishikesh, country's first four-storey 7.5 MLD STP at Chandreshwar Nagar in Muni ki Reti town in Tehri Garhwal district, five MLD STP at Chorpani, and two STPs with capacities of 1 MLD and 0.01 MLD at Badrinath.

The Haridwar-Rishikesh zone contributes about 80% wastewater load into the River Ganga. Hence, the inauguration of these STPs will play a significant role in keeping river Ganga clean.

With the inauguration of these STPs, the sewage treatment capacity of Uttarakhand will increase from 61.5 MLD in 2014 to 214.5 MLD in 2020, an increase of almost three and a half times.

The Prime Minister also inaugurated "Ganga Avalokan", the first museum on Ganga at Chandi Ghat Haridwar, dedicated to showcase the culture, biodiversity and rejuvenation activities done in Ganga river. He also launched a book, 'Rowing down the Ganges', co-published by National Mission for Clean Ganga and Wildlife Institute of India, which conceptualises the story of the Ganga as what one would see when one rows down from Gaumukh, its origin, to Ganga Sagar, the last point before entering the sea.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 18 -- The government's decision to open the gates for private facilities to test for the coronavirus infection has the potential to urgently scale up the country's testing capacity that experts say is necessary to effectively fight the deadly disease that has claimed 7,500 lives worldwide.

But experts warn that if diagnosis criteria is not relaxed and more people allowed for testing, the benefits of allowing private labs might be nullified and India left fighting an uphill battle against the infection that can dramatically expand in reach over a few days.

Currently, the Indian authorities limit testing to only government facilities for only people with a history of travel abroad, who have come in close contact with someone testing positive for the virus, or health workers. Only people showing symptoms are tested.

But the strict eligibility criteria and limited number of testing centres - 72 in a country with a population of 1.3 billion people - has ensured that many people are finding it difficult to get tested.

Moreover, the need to rope in more labs and private players is made clear by the problems plaguing government testing and sample collection centres, where experts admit there exists a clear infection risk because of long hours of waiting and overcrowding.

India currently tests the lowest number of people per capita among major countries grappling with the coronavirus outbreak: a mere 8.6 tests per million, compared with 4,831 per million in south Korea, 2,820 in China and 533 in the United Kingdom, which has been criticised for not testing enough and reversed its "herd immunity" policy after grim projections.

"We do need to do more testing. I have made that clear. You don't know what you are dealing with until you test. What is the harm in testing?" asked Dr Gagandeep Kang, director of Translational Health Science and Technology Institute.

A number of experts have called for private players to be roped in, testing eligibility relaxed and more aggressive diagnosis protocols adopted.

"There are enough PCR [polymerase chain reaction] machines and we have the ability to make reagents for testing. Open it up to the Indian companies. They are good at reducing cost. They can develop tests that are cheaper," said Kang.

Even in the national capital, patients have complained of many problems. Overcrowded hospitals have turned away travellers who travelled from affected countries and wanted to get tested on the basis that they didn't show symptoms, even though research has shown that symptoms may take up to 14 days to appear.

"I was impressed by the response of the Indian government, till I reached the sample collection centre. I have been standing here for over two hours and now I just feel like running away," said a 27-year-old Australian national, who was standing outside the sample collection centre at Dr Ram Manohar Lohia hospital. She had travelled to Delhi for work.

On Tuesday morning, the Australian woman called the government helpline number and informed them she was fatigued and had a sore throat. "They came to my hotel and picked me up in an ambulance. All the health care workers were in complete protective gear. It was scary but it was also good. Then, they just dropped me here with my bags and asked me to wait," she said.

For almost an hour, she couldn't figure out what to do because none of the hospital staff posted outside the sample collection centre spoke English. "They took me inside the hospital to find someone who could explain what I needed to do," she said.

If she had the infection, she may have infected people inside the hospital.

And it is not just her. In the corridor outside the two rooms collecting the samples at the collection centre, close to 70 people sat next to each other waiting for up to two hours. Open on all sides, several people passed by this "restricted area" all day round. There was no check on who entered the corridor.

RML hospital collects nearly 70 samples for Covid-19 each day.

But the corridor outside has hundreds of people waiting. Many reached the hospital without checking with a helpline or a doctor and waited in the queue.

Many of them were likely to be turned away after hours of waiting, and potentially exposing themselves to the coronavirus infection.

"The person I brought to the hospital today has been given the token number of 318, I think," said the ambulance driver stationed outside the centre. It will be hours before she gets her turn.

Safdarjung hospital collects samples only for suspected patients admitted to its isolation ward. Sample collection facilities will soon start at 14 Delhi government and corporation hospitals.

"Who has the time to wait for three hours? We have a flight tonight and we just wanted to get tested to get a certificate declaring that we are virus-free. And, we were told to come to this centre but if we sit around here we are more likely to get the virus," said Ravi Shingari, an Australian citizen of Indian origin. He and his wife travelled to London before coming to India.

Another 25-year-old woman, who did not want to be named, filled out the form asking for her contact details, address, symptoms, and travel history. But she did not wait for her turn. "I have been sitting here for a while now. I have to be somewhere now, so I am leaving. I don't think they will even come to know who left," she said.

She had come to the testing centre on her own after meeting up with a friend who had travelled abroad.

Some wait it out, only to be refused at the door. "In the last two hours, I have seen around 10 people being refused the test after they reach to the front of the line. They must have been waiting for a couple of hours. And, what if one of these people actually has the disease? That's why I am waiting my turn here a little farther away," said one of the persons waiting near the sample collection centre.

Getting information on testing is difficult on the helplines as well, with only one of the 30 calls made by the HT reporter to the toll-free number getting through.The government helpline advise people with cough and fever but no travel history to maintain personal hygiene and get in touch with district surveillance officers or a local physician.

Experts say cramped government facilities pose a clear danger.

"This is an infection risk, naturally. We are advocating social distancing and here are people who need to get tested for the disease sitting close to each other. The government has to make arrangements for a large waiting area.. or start more sample collection centres because clearly there is a need," said Dr MC Mishra, former director of the All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.

He added that there was a need to ensure that people who didn't need the tests to not show up because they are at a higher risk of getting the infection. "Someone needs to be stationed outside the centres to ask people who do not need testing to leave rather than them waiting for hours before leaving," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 24 -- Canadian health authorities are considering adding a warning label on vials of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine, cautioning their users in the country about the rare possibility of the jab causing blood clots.

During a media interaction on Tuesday, Health Canada's chief medical adviser Dr Supriya Sharma said the agency is looking at "changes" to the "information that goes with the vaccine to say there have been reports of this type of rare clot".

She, however, said the vaccine is still considered "appropriate" for those above 18 years of age and the recommendation that it should be administered won't change.

Two iterations of the AZ vaccine were given emergency-use authorisation in Canada on February 26. Canada recently received its first batches of the AZ vaccine under the brand name Covishield, manufactured by the Pune-based Serum Institute of India (SII).

Sharma said that "even the most effective vaccine only works if people trust it and agree to receive it". She added, "At this point in time, we, of course, believe that the benefits of the AstraZeneca vaccine continue to outweigh the risks."

Canadian health authorities have warned that the race between Covid-19 vaccines and newly-detected variants of the coronavirus is close, especially with the mutations spreading quickly and affecting younger people.

Canada's chief public health officer, Dr Theresa Tam, pointed to the B117 variant, which appears to have originated in the UK, saying it could increase hospitalisations and provoke severe outcomes within younger demographics.

In a statement released by the Public Health Agency of Canada, Tam noted the country has recorded nearly 5,500 Covid-19 cases caused by variants, with over 90% attributable to the B117 strain.

"As the number of new variant cases continues to increase, they account for a greater proportion of Covid-19 cases across Canada, reminding us of how tight the vaccines-versus-variants race continues to be," Tam said.

Tam also said these variants sprapidly with a higher reproduction rate. Of the infections reported in Canada caused by new strains, 5,117 were caused by the B117 variant, 244 by the South African-origin B1351 one, and 124 by the P1 strain from Brazil.

Over 3,600 new cases related to the pandemic were reported on Tuesday in Canada, an increase of nearly 25% over the daily figure a fortnight back. Canada has so far recorded 942,325 confirmed cases and 22,735 fatalities.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 22 -- The government allowed private laboratories to test for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Saturday as the number of patients soared by 79, its sharpest daily spike yet, to cross 300 and triggered concerns that the disease was entering a deadly third phase of the outbreak.

The Union ministry of health and welfare order opening up testing for Covid-19 to private laboratories - until now, only government facilities were permitted - came after days of appeal by experts to widen testing in order to accurately understand the extent of the outbreak.

The order, signed by health secretary Preeti Sudan, didn't expand the conditions for testing. Only those in contact with a previously confirmed patient, health workers showing symptoms of Covid-19 and patients hospitalised with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness can be tested.

The maximum cost of the test cannot exceed ~4,500 - this includes ~1,500 for a screening test and ~3,000 for a confirmation test. "The ICMR encourages free or subsidized testing in this hour of national public health emergency," the order read.

The facilities need at least biosafety level-2 certification, and are required to share real-time testing data with the government. The facilities will need to collect a government identity card to confirm the current address and phone number of a patient at the time of sample collection.

"Preferably home collection of samples may be done...this will help avoid the contact of people with the suspect case during local travel to the laboratory," the order read.

Testing can be done only after a prescription signed by a qualified physician who has followed criteria laid down by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's top medical research body.

Only laboratories certified by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration are eligible.

"The government has been working on engaging private players in its mission to fight the coronavirus disease outbreak since the beginning. It is one of the preparedness strategies to involve private players in cases numbers rise significantly that would need pooling of all available resources be it testing, isolation, management, etc," said a senior Union health ministry official, requesting anonymity.

The official refused to specify when private laboratories will start testing but added that it was up to the facilities. "The ICMR will start approving the laboratories as soon as the labs approach, assuring all the requirements have been fulfilled," the official added.

The health ministry order said all positive cases of Covid-19 will need to be transported to the National Institute of Virology in Pune, and all negative samples destroyed in a week. "Failure to comply with any of the above guidelines will result in legal action," the order read.

The order came on a day the number of Covid-19 cases in India spiked by the highest quantum since the first case was reported. Over the past 48 hours, the number of cases have jumped by 142, sparking fears of an exponential jump in cases next week.

Also on Saturday, a 41-year-old woman in Pune tested positive for Covid-19, becoming the second patient in India with no history of foreign travel or documented contact with previous cases and fuelling fears that the country had slipped into the deadly third phase of the infection when the contagion spreads rapidly.

At this stage of the outbreak, known as the community transmission phase, the origin of any individual patient's infection cannot be pinpointed to travel to a global hotspot of the disease, or documented contact with a previously infected person. This means that the virus is freely circulating in the community, making it tough for authorities to control its spread or enforce containment measures.

In countries worst-hit by the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19, such as China, Italy, Iran or South Korea, the number of infections and fatalities rose sharply once the country moved into the community transmission phase.

There are four stages of an outbreak. Stage I is when cases are imported by travellers from other countries, Stage II is when these travellers then pass on the infection locally to people living or working around them, Stage III is when community transmission happens and the health care workers are unable to trace the source of infections, and the last Stage IV is when the disease is widespread in a population.

India is currently in the Stage II of the outbreak, according to the health ministry. Four people have died of the disease in the country.

The case of the Pune woman, confirmed by the National Institute of Virology in Pune, came a day after the government admitted that it had yet not traced the origin of the infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who had tested positive in Chennai earlier this week.

The authorities are yet to find out how the Pune woman got the infection. "We are still investigating the case. She must have come in contact with someone who had foreign travel history," Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram said.

Late evening, authorities in West Bengal reported that a 57-year-old man, who had not travelled abroad and had no documented contact with a previous patient, had tested positive for Covid-19 - indicating that more cases of people with no obvious origin of infection were showing up across the country. The case was confirmed by two state government laboratories but not by the NIV, the national nodal authority, at the time of going to print.

On Friday, India expanded its testing protocol for Covid-19 patients. The revised strategy, after the third meeting of ICMR constituted task force on testing on Friday, also included asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case who should be tested between day 5 and day 14 of coming in contact with a laboratory positive case. "Direct and high-risk contact include those who live in the same household with a confirmed case and healthcare workers who examined a confirmed case without adequate protection as per WHO recommendation," the circular read.

The health ministry order came on a day the Empowered Committee for Covid-19 response met for the first time.

The meeting was co-chaired by Dr. Vinod Paul, Member NITI-Aayog and K. Vijay Raghavan, principal scientific advisor to the government .

The Committee was constituted to co-ordinate, amongst science agencies, scientists and regulatory bodies, and take speedy decisions on R&D to implementation related to the SARS-Cov-2 virus and the COVID-19 disease was held on March 21, 2020.

According to an official release, Indian research institutions and organizations are directed for speedy implementation of solutions related to COVID-19.

"National research labs (defined as labs of DBT/DST/CSIR/DRDO/DAE for this directive) are permitted to carry out clinical testing for COVID19 based on self-assessment and willingness to follow established protocols and all applicable reporting regulations as defined by the DHR/ICMR," it said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 23 -- Remittance flows into India may decline by 23% in 2020 to $64 billion, the sharpest fall in recent history, due to declining oil prices and the Covid-19-led global recession, said a World Bank report.

The loss of employment and wages for migrant workers in Gulf countries will contribute significantly to the drop in remittances to India, it added.

In 2019, India recorded a 5.5% growth in remittance receipts to $83 billion.

"Global remittances are projected to decline sharply by about 20% in 2020 due to the economic crisis induced by the Covid-19 pandemic and shutdown. The coronavirus-related global slowdown and travel restrictions will also affect migratory movements, and this is likely to keep remittances subdued even in 2021. The projected remittance growth of 5.8% in 2021 will keep total regional flows at about $115 billion," the World Bank added.

Studies show that remittances alleviate poverty in lower- and middle-income countries, improve nutritional outcomes and are associated with higher spending on education, and reduced child labour in disadvantaged households. A fall in remittances affects the ability of families to spend on these areas, as more funds are allocated for food and immediate livelihood needs.

"Remittances are a vital source of income for developing countries. The ongoing recession caused by Covid-19 is taking a severe toll on the ability to send money home and makes it all the more vital that we shorten the time to recovery for advanced economies," said World Bank group president David Malpass.

Madan Sabnavis, chief economist, Care Ratings, said the forecast is of concern. "The current account deficit (CAD) has been under control mainly due to remittance and software exports. Both of them will be impacted due to Covid-19, which will put pressure on CAD. However, with oil prices crashing, the trade balance will improve and provide some compensation. The balance of payments will definitely be under some pressure as capital flows would be restricted as countries go through a recession. The high quantum of reserves will help tide over this problem."

In other South Asian countries, such as Pakistan, the projected decline in remittances is about 23% to $17 billion in 2020, while for Bangladesh it will fall by 22% to $14 billion. "Before the coronavirus crisis, migrant outflows from the (South Asian) region were robust. The number of recorded, primarily low-skilled emigrants from India and Pakistan rose in 2019 relative to the prior year, but is expected to decline in 2020 due to the pandemic and oil price declines impacting the GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council) countries. In India, the number of low-skilled emigrants seeking mandatory clearance for emigration rose slightly by 8% to 368,048 in 2019."

The World Bank said the coronavirus crisis has affected both international and internal migration in the South Asia region. "The lockdown in India has impacted the livelihoods of a large proportion of the country's nearly 40 million internal migrants. Around 50,000-60,000 moved from urban centres to rural areas of origin in the span of a few days," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- India and Australia are expected to make bilateral diplomatic history by signing an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics facilities and other pacts aimed at developing alternative supply chains when the two sides hold their first "virtual summit" on June 4.

The summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Australian counterpart Scott Morrison, yet to be formally announced, will be held against the backdrop of heightened friction with China for both countries.

It will be Modi's first virtual bilateral summit and the first time several bilateral agreements will be concluded virtually since the Covid-19 outbreak, two people familiar with development said.

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), finalised at the "2+2" or combined dialogue of the foreign and defence secretaries in New Delhi last December, was to be signed during Morrison's visit in January, which was called off due to the Australian bushfires.

With joint exercises and defence cooperation between India and Australia on the upswing, MLSA will remove the need for protracted negotiations for reciprocal access to logistics support every time a manoeuvre is organised, the people cited above said on condition of anonymity. It will also improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two sides.

Between 2016 and 2019, India has signed similar logistics exchange agreements with the US, Singapore, France and South Korea.

While the conclusion of MLSA is significant as the two sides have been negotiating it for some time, there is greater buzz about agreements to be signed in science and technology, research, pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, and rare earth metals and critical minerals which are aimed at creating supply chains in strategic areas that are less dependent on China, the people said.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides were exploring the possibility of cooperating on rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves. More than 90% of India's imports of rare earth metals, worth $3.4 million in 2016, come from China.

The two sides will also look at enhancing their partnership in education as part of measures to shift the focus of Australian universities on the Chinese market, the people said. Prior to the Covid-19 crisis, Australia was home to some 90,000 Indian students.

"We're also looking at agreements in the maritime sphere and water resources and negotiations are underway on some other issues. Research and collaboration on Covid-19 will also figure in the discussions," said one of the people cited above.

Morrison has described India as "a natural partner for Australia", and Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell has said the two sides have had regular discussions about how they can shape the post-Covid world order. In this context, O'Farrell said Australia supports India's call for reforming the World Health Organization (WHO) after overcoming the Covid-19 crisis.

While tensions between India and China are at a high following the standoff between their border troops in Ladakh, Australia's relations with China too took a hit after Canberra called for an independent investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nitin Pai, director of the Takshashila Institution, said it made "absolute economic sense" for India and Australia to reduce the risk of their exposure to China even if the two countries were not grappling with tensions with China and the Covid-19 crisis.

"It makes a lot of sense to find a diversity of suppliers on one hand, and to find a diversity of customers for products on the other," he said, adding the existing geopolitical risks, the pandemic, and travel restrictions make it vital not to put all eggs in one basket and to build a diversity of economic partnerships.

On Tuesday, defence minister Rajnath Singh tweeted that he had spoken on telephone with his Australian counterpart Linda Reynolds and discussed the response of both sides to the Covid-19 pandemic and possible areas of cooperation.

"India-Australia strategic partnership provides a good base for both the countries to work together in dealing with the post COVID challenges. We are committed to take forward the initiatives of bilateral defence and security cooperation under the Strategic Partnership framework," Singh added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, March 27 -- At 2pm on Thursday, eleven researchers from scientific institutes across the country connected on a conference call to discuss ways to bust misinformation and fake news surrounding CoVid-19 outbreak that has pushed India into a 21-day lockdown mode. Over the next 75 minutes, discussions centred round the pandemic and ways to address messages of questionable authenticity and hoaxes doing the rounds on various social media platforms.

With campuses shut and laboratories closed for work, Indian researchers over the last few days have come together and created an informal network to disseminate information on the science of coronavirus and dispel myths on the cure of the disease.

The 'Indian Scientists' Response to CoViD-19 (ISRC) - it is a voluntary group from various parts of the country - will "act as scientific interpreters for the public at large" as the situation rapidly evolves both within and outside India.

"The scientific community has a social and democratic responsibility in the current situation, both in terms of analysing the situation and reaching out to the public. While governmental bodies make their decisions and professional scientific academies take principled stands, there is a need for individuals in the scientific community to also help individually and collectively," reads a statement on their portal https://indscicov.in/.

"ISRC will address different aspects of the epidemic. Myth busting is one aspect. Making sense of the science of it and making it accessible in both layman's language and all regional languages is another aspect," said Dr Reeteka Sud, coordinator for social media ISRC, and neuroscientist at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru.

Sud added, "We are also talking about how scientists will help when India gets hit hard. So there is also a larger framework of scientists connecting with state and local administrations through their home institutions."

In addition to analysing all data available in the public domain and providing scientific resources to activists who are working in the ground, ISRC will make available in all Indian languages curated and verified information to the public. Plans are also afoot to provide a social media platform at a designated time where citizens can pose queries to scientific and health experts and clear doubts.

Aniket Sule, astrophysicist, Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education, who was on the conference call, said a lot of misinformation is floating around, and therefore there was a need for scientists to step up and inform the public on what they should or should not believe.

"We are yet to classify about 40 to 50 different forwards received from various sources. Some claim different cures for coronavirus either from traditional medicine or modern medicines, but none of them are based on sufficient evidence. Some have strange claims on the virus' origin, spread and future movement, while some have connected astrology and numerology to it," said Sule, "We will address each of the claims separately."

Mental health experts said providing accurate information, and dispelling rumours and misinformation on CoVid-18 is vital to reduce anxiety among people. Reason - gadgets are the only connection to the outside world while being confined indoors owing to the lockdown.

The Service for Healthy use of Technology (SHUT) clinic at NIMHANS, which works towards de-addiction of internet-based technology devices, found that the use of technology among their patients increased by least 30% after reports of Indians testing positive for COVID-19.

"The receptivity to rumours is high when anxiety is high, which increases the need to share information irrespective of whether it is true or false," said Dr Manoj Kumar Sharma, coordinator at SHUT, and faculty for clinical psychology, NIMHANS. "People should therefore check for facts and verify information on CoVid-19 that is coming to them via social media platforms."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 14 -- Chinese virologist Dr Li-Meng Yan has claimed that the novel coronavirus was made in a government controlled laboratory in Wuhan and asserted that she has scientific proof to back the claim.

The virologist, who became the whistleblower against the Chinese government over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, was in December last year tasked with looking into a cluster of Sars-like cases coming out of mainland China. The top scientist working in Hong Kong claimed that she discovered a cover-up operation during her investigation and said that the Chinese government knew about the spread of the virus before publicly acknowledging it.

Dr Li-Meng, who specialised in virology and immunology at the Hong Kong School of Public Health, was allegedly forced to flee to the United States over safety concerns.

On September 11, she participated in an interview on British talk show "Loose Women" from a secret location and talked about her research on the coronavirus disease and the challenges she has been facing.

Dr Li-Meng said that she conducted two researches on the "new pneumonia" in China between December and early January and the second one in mid-January, and shared the results with her supervisor, who is a World Health Organisation (WHO) consultant. She expected her supervisor to do the "right thing on behalf of the Chinese government and WHO" but to her surprise she was told to "maintain silence or else she would be made to disappear", which the virologist said was common sense among the Chinese.

"No one responded, people are scared of the government and they are waiting to collaborate with the government and WHO to get more benefits to become safe but this is [was] something urgent," Dr Li-Meng said.

At the time of the Chinese New Year, big transportations take place from China to all over the world. So, she decided against keeping silent as "this is a high [highly] contentious dangerous virus. I mean, this is about human beings and global health."

Dr Li-Meng said that it was scary as she was facing threats but "I knew if I didn't tell the world the truth I would be regretful."

On January 17, she said she contacted a famous Chinese YouTuber in the US. The expose, which was in Chinese, explained that: (1) the Chinese government was just covering the Covid-19 virus, (2) human to human transmission of the disease already existed, (3) Sars-CoV-2 is a "high mutant virus" that will become an outbreak soon, and (4) the Wuhan seafood market and the intermediate hosts for the virus were just a "smokescreen."

And the final thing, the scientist said was that "this virus is not from nature. This is based on the China Military Institute that discovered and owned some bad (maybe it's bat, unable to hear properly) coronavirus named CC45 and ZXC41. Based on that, after lab modification becomes a novel virus."

Dr Li-Meng dismissed reports suggesting the virus originated in wet markets, claiming her intelligence is "from the CDCs in China, from local doctors, doctors and other people around China."

The virologist said she is working on a scientific report since January i.e. before leaving Hong Kong along with a small group of top scientists and will soon publish the findings. "We are going to publish it. There are two reports, the first one will come in several days and it will tell people about the scientific evidence," she said.

Throwing light on the unpublished research, she said, "The genome sequence is like our human fingerprint. So, based on this you can recognise and identify this thing. So, I used the evidence existing in the genome sequence of Sars-CoV-2 to tell people why this came from China, why they are the only one who made it."

She also said that anyone, even those without any knowledge of biology, can read it. "You can check, identify and verify it by yourself. It is the critical thing for us to know the origins of the virus. If not, it will be life threatening for everyone," she added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- China on Thursday reported the first Covid-19-related death in eight months as it logged the highest single-day tally of 138 new infections since March last year for Wednesday.

More than 28 million people are under lockdown in the north of the country and one province has declared an emergency, as daily Covid-19 numbers climb after months of reporting only a handful of cases.

The National Health Commission (NHC) did not share details about the latest death, except to say that it occurred in Hebei province, the worst-hit province in the latest resurgence of cases, where the government has placed several cities under lockdown.

The last death from Covid-19 in China was recorded on May 17 last year.

The Chinese mainland reported 138 new confirmed cases and 78 asymptomatic ones on Thursday for the previous 24 hours.

Of all the confirmed cases, 81 come from Hebei, including 75 in its capital city Shijiazhuang. The province has 16 active severe cases in hospitals.

In a sign of the new wave spreading across the country, northeastern Heilongjiang declared an "emergency state" on Wednesday, telling its 37.5 million residents not to leave the province unless absolutely necessary and saying public gatherings would be cancelled.

The death comes as China readies for the arrival of an expert team of scientists from the World Health Organization (WHO), who will start a politically sensitive investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The team is expected to arrive in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the new coronavirus was first detected in late 2019, directly from Singapore on Thursday.

Peter Ben Embarek, the WHO's top expert on animal diseases that cross to other species who went to China on a preliminary mission last July, is leading the 10 independent experts, a WHO spokesperson said.

Hung Nguyen, a Vietnamese biologist and part of the 10-member team, told Reuters that he did not expect any restrictions on the group's work in China, but cautioned against finding firm answers.

Embarek said the group would start with a two-week quarantine at a hotel due to China's border requirements.

"And then after the two weeks, we would be able to move around and meet our Chinese counterparts in person and go to the different sites that we will want to visit," he said.

"The idea is to advance a number of studies that were already designed and decided upon some months ago to get us a better understanding of what happened," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 30 -- India's development and security cooperation with smaller Indian Ocean states has been a key part of its "neighbourhood first" policy, with work continuing on projects in areas ranging from healthcare to defence amid the Covid-19 pandemic, people familiar with developments said on Wednesday.

Mauritius has benefited from a special economic package of $353 million, with one of the key projects - the new Supreme Court building - set to be inaugurated by the prime ministers of the two countries during a virtual event on Thursday.

The other infrastructure projects that were part of the package are the Metro Express project worth $275 million, the first phase of which has been completed, a $14-million ENT Hospital, which has been completed, and a social housing project with nearly 1,000 units.

India is the largest development partner for Mauritius, for which it has provided lines of credit worth $600 million at concessional terms, with the focus on developmental projects. India is assisting in the building of healthcare facilities such as a renal unit, four medical clinics and two health centres, the people cited above said on condition of anonymity.

Mauritius is also one of the largest beneficiaries of the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme, with 210 civilian and 169 defence training slots being offered to the country during fiscal 2018-19.

India has revitalised its relationship with the Maldives over the past 18 months after President Ibrahim Solih came to power, and the two sides have signed 18 agreements and MoUs, and new areas of cooperation include the judiciary, customs and healthcare, the people said.

A financial aid package of $1.4 billion announced during Solih's visit to India in December 2018 has been fully activated, and includes budgetary support, investment in the Maldives Monetary Authority's treasury bills, a currency swap agreement and a new line of credit for $800 million, they said.

Several big ticket infrastructure projects, such as an international cricket stadium, expansion of Hanimadhoo airport and the Gulhuifalhu port project, are part of this line of credit. India is also assisting in modernising the Maldives' defence sector and gifted a fast interceptor vessel last December, the people said.

India has also undertaken several developmental, connectivity and capacity-building projects in Sri Lanka, where the total development assistance portfolio exceeds $3.45 billion, including $560 million in grant assistance. The Indian Housing Project to build 50,000 houses is the flagship grant assistance project, and more than 48,600 houses have been built so far.

Another 10,000 houses will be built for Indian-origin Tamils in the upcountry region, the people said.

India also played a key role in improving connectivity in Sri Lanka by restoring railway lines that were damaged by the 2004 tsunami and by reconnecting the northern region with the rest of Sri Lanka by establishing railway signalling systems and supplying rolling stocks, the people said.

All three Indian Ocean countries also benefited from India's assistance to counter the Covid-19 pandemic. India was the first country to send a medical consignment to Mauritius, which included hydrocloroquine tablets and other medicines. An Indian medical assistance team was also deployed to Mauritius.

The Maldives was the biggest beneficiary of India's Covid-19-related aid among neighbouring countries, and received two consignments of medicines, 600 tonnes of food supplies and a 14-member medical rapid response team.

Sri Lanka received four consignments of Covid-19-related essential medicines and equipment in April and May, the people said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 26 -- Even as the world grapples with the pandemic unleashed from Wuhan, China is back to the business of great power politics - building military infrastructure, conducting naval exercises and sinking the fishing boats of other nations. While the rest of the world has come to its knees, in no small part due to China's behaviour, Beijing is busy reaping the dividends of this global disorder.

If, at one level, it is using this coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to project itself as a global leader by supplying medical kits and expertise to nations in dire need, thereby trying to distinguish itself from an inward-focused Donald Trump administration, at another level, it is waging an information war in Europe, seeking to create internal rifts within the European Union.

It is extraordinary to witness the full play of great power politics at a time which, according to most liberal institutionalists, should have been a case study of greater global coordination. Global pandemics were widely viewed as non-traditional security threats which would lead to greater cooperation among major powers, and not as arenas of contestation among major powers for relative gains. And international institutions were supposed to help the international community navigate these security challenges.

But the state of the world today should disabuse us of all these fallacies. If anything, the fault lines between the United States (US) and China have been accentuated because of the crisis. Historically, China and the US have tried to work together to manage various global crises in the past. But not this time. Trump's "America First" approach has meant antagonising even close allies by diverting medical supplies, outbidding the original buyers, or forcing American companies to stop exporting hospital-grade N95 masks.

The lack of leadership shown by Washington has made China a necessity for many nations even in the West which had to import faulty Chinese medical kits for lack of any alternative. While a large part of the world remains furious with China for its initial concealment of adequate information, they are forced to take Chinese help. This has allowed China to expand its influence under the garb of helping the world during this pandemic, a crisis which would have been much less severe had the country behaved responsibly initially. Europe is now pushing back strongly with French President Emmanuel Macron questioning China's handling of the outbreak, saying things "happened that we don't know about" and British foreign secretary Dominic Raab suggesting that "hard questions" would have to be asked about how the outbreak started "and how it couldn't have been stopped earlier." Yet, the ability of these nations to take on China directly remains severely limited.

As a result, the world will continue to transition to a phase where the jostling between China and the US will get exacerbated and the biggest loser will be global governance. The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) held its first session on the pandemic, some four months after the deadly contagion emerged as the biggest security challenge since World War II. After assuming the presidency of the UNSC last month, China's Ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, made it clear that Beijing does not plan to discuss the pandemic situation in the Council during its presidency as there was no need to panic, even adding that the world is not far from the defeat of Covid-19 "with the coming of spring." Washington and Beijing remain divided on the scope of the joint resolution with the US insisting that the UNSC resolution should be explicit about the origin of the virus in Wuhan, China, much to Beijing's annoyance.

But more serious has been how the World Health Organization (WHO) has dealt with this once-in-a-lifetime crisis. Far from being the nodal agency to coordinate a global response to this pandemic, it seems to have made itself subservient to Chinese interests, losing credibility in the eyes of its other stakeholders. WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus was forced to declare an international public health emergency only at the end of January after calling it off just a week earlier under Chinese pressure. Tedros repeatedly defended China's handling of the crisis with the WHO even tweeting in mid-January that "preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission".

Tedros suggested at the end of January that "WHO doesn't recommend limiting trade and movement". This has generated an intense backlash in Washington which is WHO's largest single funder with President Trump not only accusing the UN agency of being "very China-centric" but also following it up by halting US funding "while a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization's role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus." Though Trump's move to cut funding has led to political bickering in the US, senior members of the US Congress have also called for a Congressional investigation into the WHO's handling of the crisis, ostensibly in cahoots with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

Great power politics has continued unabated even when many expected greater global solidarity. The international order was getting fragmented and major power rivalry was beginning to shape the global contours before the present crisis. That process has been galvanised by the Covid-19 crisis. Where on the one hand, the CCP stands exposed for its shenanigans during the pandemic, the vulnerabilities of the US and the West in general too are out in the open.

Nations like India should be prepared to navigate the externalities of this challenging environment.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- Indian-origin actor Indira Varma has become the second Game of Thrones star to test positive for the coronavirus. Varma on Wednesday shared a picture from the stage production The Seagull, in which she is starring with fellow GoT actor Emilia Clarke at the Playhouse Theatre in London. She revealed her diagnosis in a caption.

"So sad our and so many other shows around the world have gone dark affected by the Covid-19 pandemic," she wrote under the post. "I'm in bed with it and it's not nice." The British actor played the role of Ellaria Sand in the HBO series.

Norwegian actor Kristofer Hivju, who played the role of Tormund Giantsbane in the series, tested positive on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Bhopal/Chandigarh, April 13 -- More regions were forced to reintroduce curbs on social movement due to a sharp rise in coronavirus disease cases, as India recorded a daily surge in infections with 160,676 new cases on Monday.

While a complete week-long lockdown was announced in Madhya Pradesh capital Bhopal, the Haryana government decided to impose night curfew across the state.

These are the latest in a string of regions across the country that have again started enforcing curbs ranging from night curfews to limits on public assembly as they struggle to reel from the second wave of Covid-19.

On Monday, Bhopal district collector said Avinash Lavaniya said a lockdown has been imposed from 9pm on Monday till 6am on April 19. "The emergency services including medical and health, transportation of goods, movement of students for examination, construction work, vegetable and fruit vendors will be allowed during the curfew," Lavaniya said.

The state recorded 6,489 new cases on Monday, taking the state's tally to 344,634, according to HT's dashboard. Till Sunday, there were 5,234 active Covid-19 cases in Bhopal. "Despite all efforts, the Covid 19 cases are not coming down. To contain the spread, Corona curfew has become important," the Bhopal collector said. State medical education minister Vishwas Sarang said that anyone found violating the lockdown norms would be booked under Section 144 of the CrPC.

In Haryana, the state government clamped a night curfew with immediate effect on a day that the state recorded 3,818 new cases. The state has recorded more than 21,000 infections in the last nine weeks. "Night curfew between 9 pm and 5 am will be imposed from tonight and will remain in force till further orders," state home and health minister Anil Vij told PTI.

Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management, Sanjeev Kaushal, in an order, said that it is imperative to put in place strict measures for social distancing to contain the spread of the virus.

"A lot of non-essential movement of people and vehicles has been reported during night hours,'' the order said. "No person shall leave their home or move on foot or by vehicle or travel or stand or roam around on any road or public places during the above said hours."

Emergency services like hospitals, pharmacies and ATMs will be allowed to function round the clock, the order said. The order further states that there are no curbs on interstate and intrastate movement of essential and non-essential goods. "All vehicle and persons in bona fide transit shall be allowed to pass, but only after verification of point of origin and destination," the order said.

Meanwhile, Karnataka chief minister BS Yediyurappa said his government would impose a lockdown, if the necessity arises. The state recorded 9,579 new cases on Monday, taking its total tally to 1,074,869.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 21 -- A day before conditional relaxations came into place on Monday, the Centre warned states against diluting guidelines for the national lockdown announced to halt the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Even as India stepped up efforts to fight the pandemic, a stocktaking exercise showed the country has at least 3 million medical professionals and roughly 8 million others who can be drafted for disease containment work such as contact tracing.

Don't dilute curbs: Centre to states

The Centre has termed the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) situation "especially serious" in Mumbai, Pune, Indore, Jaipur, Kolkata and a few other areas while forming six ground teams to assess the situation and issue directions, even as it warned all states against diluting national lockdown rules, weakening India's response to the crisis, and compromising the country's public health. Read more

India has 11 million coronavirus warriors: Govt database

India has at least 3 million medical professionals and roughly 8 million others who can be drafted for disease containment work such as contact tracing, according to the Union government's stocktaking of human resources that can be deployed if the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak grows. Read more

16 contenders shortlisted for India's corona vaccine effort

The Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (Birac) and the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) announced on Monday that they have selected 16 projects -- spanning vaccines, drugs and technologies -- for funding under the Covid-19 research consortium. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

This is the story of seven states: Delhi, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar Pradesh. It is a dated story, but not too old - dated midnight Sunday, April 19, just before parts of India opened up for some business activities. Read more

'Few tested positive... does that make us responsible for Covid?': Tablighi Jamaat chief

The chief the Tablighi Jamaat, Maulana Saad, tells Hindustan Times in an interview through his lawyer that he is willing to cooperate with the police, and that no illegal activity took place at the Markaz building, which is the biggest Covid-19 hot spot in India. Read more

Industries open on tepid note as states continue with curbs

On Monday, the first day of the easing of Covid-19 lockdown norms, factories in most states did not resume work, with some deciding to continue with a hard lockdown until its designated deadline of May 3 and companies claiming that the requirements for reopening were far too stringent. Read more

Covid-19 cases doubling in 7.5 days now: Govt

The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases in India is doubling every 7.5 days (based on analysis till April 19), with that in 18 states doubling even slower, the health ministry said in a briefing on Monday. Read more

Aggressive testing must to prevent 2nd wave of Covid

A working paper by a team of researchers at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) and Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) suggests that there will be a second wave of ,Covid-19 infection unless new cases are aggressively traced, localised and isolated. Read more

China urges India to review FDI move

China on Monday asked India to revise what it described as a "discriminatory" change in foreign direct investment (FDI) regulations aimed at preventing opportunistic takeovers of Indian firms amid the Covid-19 crisis. Read more

Covid-19: India inks deal with South Korean firm for 500,000 testing kits

The Indian government signed an agreement with a South Korean company on Monday for acquiring 500,000 testing kits to prevent and control the spread of Covid-19, with the first lot expected to be delivered on April 30. Read more

Donald Trump eyes probe on Covid-19 outbreak origin in China, wants to send a team

President Donald Trump on Sunday said he has wanted to send a team to China to investigate the start of the coronavirus outbreak that had killed more that 40,000 Americans till Monday and shut down the country with increasingly unpopular stay-at-home orders, but without any success yet. Read more

AC air flow spread Covid-19 in China restaurant

On January 24, nine people from three families contracted Covid-19 while having lunch at a restaurant in Guangzhou, China. Another 81 who were in the eatery did not. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 17 -- The Congress has launched an outreach campaign to boost its image among non-resident Indians (NRIs) and the persons of Indian origin (PIOs) globally, functionaries familiar with the matter said. The party's unit in poll-bound Kerala has enlisted 1,000 volunteers as part of the campaign in West Asia, where millions of people from the state work and live, they added. The volunteers include professionals who work from one to eight hours daily to create digital outreach tools and improve the party's messaging abroad.

The push comes ahead of polls in Kerala next month and the 2022 elections in Punjab and Gujarat, which are among other states with a large number of expatriates abroad.

The party's Punjab and Gujarat units have held meetings to discuss ways for outreach in countries such as Canada, which has a significant Punjabi diaspora population. "The hope [is] that it will help us gain financial contributions and increase the party's social capital," said a functionary said, requesting anonymity.

According to the external affairs ministry, 32 million NRIs and PIOs live around the world. Congress's arch-rival, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), has chapters across the world, and supporters in 20 countries helped the party in the 2019 national election campaign.

A Congress leader said their campaign was part of a larger initiative to help improve the party's image abroad and make the party's presence felt among the diasporas. "The exercise is not just constrained to the elections. Prime Minister Narendra Modi goes abroad regularly, and BJP has its own outreach model. Congress also wants to ensure that it makes its message heard. "

A second functionary said the party is also working out strategies to reach out to the diaspora in the European Union (EU) and that it has an active chapter in Germany. Around 2.5 to 3 million Indians live in West Asia alone and the party is extremely active there, the functionary added. "After the Covid-19 pandemic... Zoom calls and online meetings became the norm. This has helped us reach out to more and more Indians overseas. We have a few hundred volunteers in the European Union as well."

The Congress has been particularly focused on its social media outreach, with the party launching a campaign with over 50,00,00 volunteers. It is also working to change its style of messaging by roping in social media influencers, especially in the poll-bound states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, and by live streaming Rahul Gandhi's events.

The second functionary said the volunteers they have overseas are professionals like engineers and doctors. "These are essentially task forces that help us mine data, edit videos..."

Bobbin Philip, 41, who started working for the Congress in 2019, said the social media campaign has also been strengthened in the UK. "Our initiative Empower Congress, a Facebook page, has gained 25,000 followers within a year," Phillip said. "We also do studies and have sent these to All India Congress Committee secretaries in India. This includes creating a better, more comprehensive communication system."

Phillip said better communication can help bring back the voters the Congress has lost. "Rigorous communication from Rahul Gandhi also makes a significant impact," he said. Philip said the UK chapter of the Indian Overseas Congress is focusing on the Kerala elections. "We are trying to get the associations to donate as well. We are trying to reach out to people from across the world."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 1 -- The Indian government has decided to accept contributions from abroad for the PM-CARES Fund created to fight the Covid-19 outbreak, marking a shift from its earlier position of refusing foreign donations during crises.

People familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity the decision was in line with the unprecedented situation created by the coronavirus outbreak that has resulted in more than 850,000 infections and around 42,000 deaths globally.

"The pandemic is unprecedented and when the prime minister spoke to envoys [via video conference on Monday], he asked them to make efforts for contributions towards this fund. A decision has been taken to accept contributions from abroad in the PM-CARES Fund," said a person who declined to be named.

The Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations (PM-CARES) Fund was set up in view of several spontaneous requests from India and abroad for making contributions to support the government's fight against Covid-19, the people said.

Contributions to the fund can be made by individuals and organisations, both in India and abroad, in view of the expressed interest to contribute to the government's efforts and keeping in mind the "unprecedented nature" of the pandemic, the people said.

In 2018, the government refused all foreign aid, including a reported offer of $100 million from the United Arab Emirates, for disaster relief following floods in Kerala that displaced millions of people. Offers of help from Thailand, Qatar and the Maldives too were declined.

This was in line with a long-standing policy put in place after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, and at the time, the external affairs ministry had said in a statement that the "government is committed to meeting the requirements for relief and rehabilitation through domestic efforts".

The people cited above pointed out that no foreign governments had so far come forward to donate to the PM-CARES Fund, which has largely attracted pledges from NRIs and people of Indian origin based in several countries.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has directed the heads of Indian missions around the world to explore the possibility of sourcing medical equipment needed to fight Covid-19 - especially personal protective equipment (PPE) kits, ventilators, and three-ply, surgical and N95 masks - as there is a huge shortage in the country, the people cited above said.

In the case of China, some relief materials were coming to India from independent sources as donations while the mission in Beijing is looking at procuring available equipment on a commercial basis, the people said.

"The embassy in Beijing is working on this and we are looking at various options and sources," said a second person. "There is a huge shortage and we will source materials from wherever they are available."

At the same time, domestic companies are being encouraged by the health and textile ministries to ramp up production of PPE and medical equipment, the people said

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 9 -- Immediately after being declared the 46th President-elect of the US, Joe Biden said he will get to work.

Making the Covid-19 pandemic his first priority, Biden on Monday will announce a 12-member task force to deal with the virus.

Reports said Vivek Murthy, the Indian-origin former US Surgeon General in the Barack Obama administration, will co-chair the team. It will provide a blueprint for implementation on January 20, 2021, when Biden will be sworn in.

"That plan will be built on a bedrock of science. It will be constructed out of compassion, empathy, and concern," Biden said in his victory speech on Saturday in Delaware.

Murthy will co-chair the task force with David Kessler, a former Food and Drug Administration commissioner and Dr Marcella Nunez-Smith, a Yale University professor. The team will have 12 members.

The task force announcement will kick off a busy week that will see Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris moving forward with the presidential transition on a number of fronts, with Biden turning to the task of building his administration before the inauguration.

On Sunday, his transition team launched a new website, BuildBackBetter.com, and a new social media handle, @transition46, to provide the public with information on the handover. It lists four priorities for a Biden-Harris administration: Covid-19, economic recovery, racial equity and climate change.

"The team being assembled will meet these challenges on Day One," it said.

Biden spent much of his election campaign criticising President Donald Trump's handling of the pandemic. The US is seeing record daily infections.

Biden is also expected to issue a clutch of executive orders reversing some of Trump's controversial measures, such as returning to the Paris Accord on climate change, resume funding of World Health Organization, rescinding the travel ban on people from certain Muslim-majority countries and reinstating protections for undocumented immigrants brought as children, according to the Washington Post.

With inputs from Agenceis

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 23 -- India on Monday briefed the envoys of a select group of countries, including the US and Russia, on the Pakistani origins of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who attempted to carry out an attack in Jammu and Kashmir last week.

The group of envoys, which also included the heads of mission of France and Japan, were provided a "detailed information docket" with details of the planned attack and a list of items and ammunition recovered from the terrorists that "clearly indicated their Pakistani origins", said a person familiar with developments who spoke on condition of anonymity.

The envoys were briefed on how the terrorists sneaked into India through an underground tunnel in Samba sector, and how preliminary investigations by police and intelligence agencies and markings on AK-47 rifles and other items have led India to conclude the terrorists belonged to Pakistan-based JeM.

ALSO READ | Nagrota encounter: India pulls up Pakistan envoy on J&K plot

The briefing by foreign secretary Harsh Shringla on the attempted attack at Nagrota in Jammu and Kashmir that was foiled on November 19 also focused on the "implications of the incident on security, diplomacy and the battle against terrorism", the person said.

While the envoys of at least three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council were invited for the briefing, the Chinese ambassador was not among those present, people familiar with developments said.

On November 20, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said security forces in Jammu and Kashmir had foiled a plan by JeM to "wreak major havoc and destruction" by killing four members of the group and seizing a large cache of weapons and explosives. The four terrorists were gunned down during a gun battle on the Jammu-Srinagar highway a day earlier.

India had summoned Pakistan's charge d'affaires Aftab Hassan Khan on November 21 and warned New Delhi is "committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard its national security". India also demanded that Pakistan should desist from its policy of supporting terrorists and dismantle the terror infrastructure on its territory.

ALSO READ | Nagrota attack: MEA expresses 'serious concern', says attempt to derail DDC election

Monday's briefing was the first of several to be conducted by the external affairs ministry for small groups of envoys in view of the Covid-19 situation. Several secretaries in the ministry will brief heads of missions from countries in their areas of jurisdiction.

"The idea is to share information on the attempted attack as widely as possible with the international community," said a second person.

The envoys were told during the briefing that the incident of November 19 was part of Pakistan's ongoing terror campaign in Jammu and Kashmir and that in 2020 itself, there were some 200 incidents of terrorist violence while 199 terrorists had been neutralised.

Details of JeM's involvement in similar incidents in the past were also shared with the envoys.

"In terms of the bigger picture, it is clear the terrorists were planning the biggest terror attack in India since the Pulwama suicide bombing of February 2019 and the implications can be guessed," said the first person.

"This is part of ongoing efforts to sabotage the district development council elections in Jammu and Kashmir and carry out a terror attack aimed to coincide with the anniversary of the 2008 Mumbai terror strikes," the person added.

The envoys were also sensitised to India's concerns regarding Pakistan's sustained efforts to destabilise the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and to subvert local elections and democracy, the people said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 3 -- From agitated Hong Kongers and members of the Tibetan diaspora to angry Indians after the Galwan Valley face-off and even progressive Iranians, an unusual coalition is taking shape in Canada to collectively protest against the Chinese government in cities across the country.

A series of such protests have taken place since late June when the Regional Tibetan Youth Congress in Toronto staged a protest near the Chinese Consulate in solidarity with India and against China's actions in Ladakh. Since then, protests have occurred in Vancouver, more in Toronto and Montreal.

On Saturday, a rally was organized in downtown Toronto and among those who participated was Gloria Fung, president of Canada-Hong Kong Link - a platform for 15 groups countering China's moves in Hong Kong including a recent national security law.

Also read: Finger Area in focus as India, China hold talks

"I do not support China's move towards India, that's the reason why I participated in this rally. I would like us to show our solidarity to each other because we are facing a common threat," she said of her presence at the Toronto rally.

The Hong Kongers have been agitating against China for the past couple of years and held a major rally in Toronto last August, as did Tibetan immigrants to Canada. Sunny Sonam, vice-president of RTYC in Toronto, said they had to take advantage of the reality that the world was "right now focused on China" partly due to the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic and because of its actions in Hong Kong and the Galwan Valley. And while the Tibetan community has held many protests over the years against the Chinese occupation of the plateau, their cause is getting a lift because of the current circumstances, as he said, "Because of that, Tibetan people are getting more attention."

Other disparate groups have also joined in these marches and demonstrations against China in Canada, including Taiwanese and Vietnamese-origin Canadians, even Bangladeshi minorities. Toronto-based Salman Sina of the International Human Rights Centre in Canada helmed protests in July in the city and this Sunday in Montreal. A refugee from Iran, Sina said of his motivation, "As human rights defenders, we are seeing what's going on with the Uighurs, Tibetans and Hong Kong because of China. I decided to unite people suffering because of the Chinese regime. Unity is better than division. We have a common cause."

Such protests also have resonance in Canada because two citizens, including a former diplomat, have spent more than 600 days in prison in China in what Ottawa has described as "hostage diplomacy" by Beijing in retaliation against the detention of a senior executive of the Chinese telecommunications firm Huawei in Vancouver in late 2018.

As Fung prepares for a large protest in August in Toronto, she is hopeful there will be greater cooperation and collaboration between these groups going ahead, as she said, "We hope to invite other communities and civil society organisations to come together for a unified voice."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 15 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 9 PM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Telangana rules out lockdown reimposition, caps Covid-19 treatment cost at private hospitals

The Telangana government on Monday capped the cost of Covid-19 tests and treatment at private labs and hospitals across the state and said there were no plans to reimpose lockdown restrictions in the state. Read more

Amid surge in Covid-19 cases in India, recoveries rise to 51%

A total of 1,69,797 Covid-19 patients have so far been cured in the country according to the Union ministry of health and family welfare. The maximum recoveries are from Maharashtra where 50, 978 have been declared cured. Maharashtra is also the sate with the highest Covid-19 tally at over 1.07 lakh.Read more

Mumbai airport to handle 100 domestic flights from Tuesday

Mumbai's Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA) will be handling 50 more flights from Tuesday taking the total number of flights operating in and out of the airport to 100. The airport commenced its domestic flight operations from May 25, with restrictions from the state government to handle 25 departures and 25 arrivals. Read more

Elephant playfully kicks buffalo in the head and it retaliates. Tusker's reaction is hilarious

Elephants are known to be playful. However, their mischief can be seen as a tad daunting given their huge size. That maybe why it didn't go down well with this buffalo when an elephant playfully kicked it. This video captures the moment and makes for an entertaining watch. Read more

These apps became obsolete overnight during lockdown in India

Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced a nationwide lockdown in India on March 24 in a bid to tackle the spread of Covid-19 in the country. The lockdown, which was later extended to May 31 in stages, brought the pace of life in the country to a standstill. Right from hotel reservations and flight bookings made via various travel apps to movie bookings to orders placed on various e-commerce sites for home appliances, books or fashion accessories, everything became irrelevant. Read more

'MS Dhoni very morose after Sushant Singh Rajput's passing': Manager Arun Pandey

MS Dhoni's business manager Arun Pandey has informed that the former India captain is gutted to have heard the news of Sushant Singh Rajput's passing. Rajput, who portrayed the role of Dhoni in his biopic, 'MS Dhoni: The Untold Story', was found dead in his apartment in Bandra on Sunday, sending shockwaves across the country. Read more

There are many Sushant Singh Rajputs in the industry, Karan Johar doesn't decide their success or failure: Koena Mitra

Actor Koena Mitra, in a statement slamming producer Karan Johar, has said that his opinion can't define whether a person is successful or not. She was referring to the criticism Karan has drawn for his comments on actor Sushant Singh Rajput's death, where he'd admitted to not being there for the actor, who died by suicide on Sunday after a battle with depression. Read more

US Supreme Court rules gay and lesbian people can sue for workplace bias

The US Supreme Court rules gay and lesbian people can sue for workplace bias under landmark civil rights law.

In a 6-3 decision, the court ruled Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, saying that federal law prohibited discrimination based on sex as well as race, colour, national origin and religion, also applies to gay and trans people. Read more

'Been through depression': Deepika Padukone on fight with mental health issues

As part of HT City Spotlight, actor Deepika Padukone spoke to us and opened up on her fight with mental health issues. The actor also talked about coping with stress and anxiety in the times of Covid-19 crisis. Watch the full video for more. Watch more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 30 -- Italy wants an independent inquiry into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic in China and backs India's calls for reform of multilateral bodies such as WHO that didn't perform as expected during the current crisis, the country's minister for European affairs Vincenzo Amendola has said.

With Italy and India set to take on the presidency of the G20 in 2021 and 2022, Amendola said the two countries would also play a key role in helping shape the post-Covid-19 world order, including global supply and value chains and ways to recover from the economic crisis created by Covid.

In an interview with HT over Skype, he said Italy backs Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call, made during the G20 virtual summit on March 26, for reforms of international bodies such as the World Health Organization to meet needs of a changing world.

"WHO for this crisis didn't perform according to some criteria and...it's necessary...to open an independent inquiry on what happened in China that was the starting place of this crisis," he said. "Your PM was right as multilateral aspect of global order is not updated [with] risks and opportunity of current period. WHO, I don't think, it performed in a correct way, there were many delays and problems," he added.

Describing Europe and India as "sisters", he spoke of the need for closer cooperation between Italy and India both to shape the agenda of the G20 and to help fashion a new world order.

"If I look where we are going to invest, I see that you [India] are the actor relevant for our common future," he said, referring to possibility of working together on green technologies.

With Italy set to become G20 president in 2021 and India taking on in 2022, he said: "We are going to be the two countries that will bring G20 out of the recession."

Covid-19 had emerged as a "big test for multilateral cooperation", he said. "A few months ago, there were many people who wanted to participate in the funeral of multilateralism but nowadays it is clear multilateralism is necessary to strengthen resilience of global economy."

He was also critical of China's Belt and Road Initiative. "There should be not just one way of distributing, producing and giving the ownership of this trade track. There should be...different options and the EU is...devoted to diversification of rules of trade and creation of value chains."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, April 22 -- US President Donald Trump said that he will sign an executive order "to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States" because of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic, suggesting it would prevent the contagion from spreading from overseas travellers while saving American jobs.

The US President, however, offered no details about which immigration programmes might be affected by the order; new immigrants are mostly those applying for Green Cards on professional and family visas, refugees and asylum seekers.

"In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" Trump tweeted late on Monday night, in a move that was widely criticised by Democrats as an opportunity to further his "anti-immigration" stand.

The President's announcement was made after figures released by the administration earlier this month showed that at least 22 million jobs have been lost in the country since sweeping lockdowns were implemented to slow the spread of the virus.

His administration has also sought to reopen parts of the US from the crippling lockdowns, which have prompted protests - encouraged by the President himself -- against the stay-at-home orders even as the virus has infected 803,018 and killed 43,558 in the country worst-hit by the pandemic.

The move drew sharp criticism from Democrats, with Indian-origin Senator Kamala Harris accusing the President of taking advantage of the situation to push his immigration policies. "Trump failed to take this crisis seriously from day 1. His abandonment of his role as president has cost lives. And now, he's shamelessly politicising this pandemic to double down on his anti-immigrant agenda," Harris tweeted.

More than 1 million new immigrants are admitted to the United States every year and in 2017, Indians accounted for the most immigrants (126,000) that year, according to a Pew study.

It is also not clear if immigration applications already in the system will be frozen due to the suspension, and if that could happen to Green Card applications as well. While Trump has previously spoken about introducing a merit-based H1-B visa, the programme -- popularly utilised by Indian IT professionals in the US -- is a non-immigrant visa.

On Tuesday, national security adviser Robert O'Brien cast the President's announcement as a move to protect the American people's health, saying the temporary move won't be "dissimilar" to restrictions announced in January on the entry of travellers from China, the ground zero of the pandemic.

Asked about Trump's reference to jobs, O'Brien said, "There's been an economic cost here, too."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 5 -- Minister of state for external affairs (MEA) and parliamentary affairs, V Muraleedharan, spoke to Smriti Kak Ramachandranabout bringing Indians back from abroad, foreigners stranded in India, and relief being sent by India to other countries, among other issues. Edited excerpts:

MEA had a daunting task of evacuating Indians from overseas. How did you go about it?

A lot of Indians who were abroad have been brought home; the last such flight came from Iran. We have been carrying out evacuations, but since international travel has stalled, and there is a lockdown in India, we have through our high commissions and embassies ensured that food and other necessities of people of Indian origin are taken care of. In fact there are between 700-800 Indians abroad who are infected by the virus, even their needs are being taken care of.

We get a lot of emails and requests from people who want to come home, some are unwell, some have bereavements, but since international travel is affected so we cannot do selective evacuation. Embassies and high commissions have been asked to step up; they have also been helping people whose visas have expired...

How is India helping in the relocation of foreign nationals stranded across the country?

For foreign nationals who are in India, we have already started a portal where they can register and we can plan for their evacuation. A lot of people from countries such as Germany, the UK and the US have already been evacuated. Governments of some countries sought our help in getting their nationals who were stuck in distant places to reach the airports in Mumbai, Delhi or Kochi; that assistance we could provide after coordinating with the home ministry and the local police...

How exactly is India helping other countries?

PM Narendra Modi has been in discussion with heads of states; he had a meeting with the members of the Saarc nations and G20; he also spoke to French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday (expert teams of the two countries will actively share information on measures to prevent the spread of coronavirus as well as about ongoing research on treatment and vaccines).

Union minister for external affairs S Jaishankar has also spoken to his US counterpart Mike Pompeo (on how to combat the international crisis). The PM also addressed the heads of 130 missions.

What is the status of relief efforts by India to the neighbouring countries?

Being a member of Saarc, PM Modi has already announced the setting up of a Covid-19 emergency fund with India making an initial contribution of $10 million. Countries such as Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives have already made the contributions.

What is the initial assessment of the lockdown?

The overall impact has been good because people have appreciated the decisive action of the PM. Because of his address on TV, a lot of people understood the seriousness of the situation.His word carries weight and people have faith in him.

The economic impact is an important issue, and the second is the migration of workers. The government will have to work on these. Some groups [of exporters] have had a discussion with the commerce minister pointing out how India could lose markets if restricted resumption of services export services is not started... However, some international financial agencies have said that except China, India and Indonesia, which will have growth in the whole financial year, other nations will be in recession.

The challenges now are to ensure that the delivery of essential goods is carried without any hiccups. The railways, for instance, is transporting all essential goods, but the workers to carry the load may not be permitted by the police to leave their homes...those in the government and in the police will have to be a bit more discerning and understand the nuances of the lockdown.

There was criticism from the Opposition that Parliament should have been adjourned earlier?

Parliament was on because at that moment there was a sense that adjourning the House will create a situation of panic. The PM had said 'no' to panic and 'yes' to precautions. We had already taken steps such as banning visitors from Parliament. The message was that life has to go on but with precautions... After the finance Bill was passed on March 23, a lockdown was announced on the 24th...the timing was perfect.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 17 -- The Narendra Modi government has given iron clad assurances to Nepal that it will be among the first countries to receive India developed twin Covid-19 vaccines, supply schedule of which will be announced in the coming week. This assurance was conveyed to Nepalese foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali during his visit to New Delhi for the Joint Commission Meeting with external affairs minister Subramanyam Jaishankar.

While the political detractors of Nepal Prime Minister Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli has portrayed Gyawali's visit as a damp squib, fact is that interlocutors of Nepalese foreign minister in New Delhi were impressed by his professionalism and sobriety with which he approached the bilateral relationship. Gyawali could not meet PM Modi as the Indian PM was totally involved in the launch of Covid-19 vaccines on January 16, according to top government sources. It was only due to PM's prior commitments that Gyawali was received by defence minister Rajnath Singh, who is number two in the Modi government.

It is understood that India will be taking care of emergency requirements of its friends by supply vaccines for restricted use to priority neighbourhood countries like Bhutan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Maldives apart from Nepal with supply schedule being worked out now.

According to government interlocutors, Gyawali briefed EAM Jaishankar about the preparedness in Nepal to receive the Indian vaccine with Nepal regulator granting approval during the foreign dignitary visit. The two countries are now on way to discuss training of medical modules, who will vaccinate Nepalese front line workers during the restricted use period. Nepal has a total of 2,67,056 Covid-19 cases with as many as 1,954 persons losing their lives to the pandemic, which had origins in China.

During Gyawali's visit the two sides agreed to gradually open the air and land route connectivity, which had been hit by the pandemic. The two countries agreed to expedite the field location survey related to the Raxaul-Kathmandu railway line.

While India-Nepal decided to deepen defence cooperation by closer military to military cooperation, Rajnath Singh also offered to provide humanitarian assistance and disaster relief training and capacity building to the Oli Government.

"There were no acrimonious notes during Gyawali's visit with the visitor taking a very responsible view of the bilateral relationship," said one of the officials present in the bilateral meetings.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- The Union health ministry clarified on Monday that community transmission of Covid-19 hadn't yet begun in India, a day after signalling the onset of "limited community transmission" of the disease. The ministry said limited community transmission isn's the same as community transmission -- Stage 3 of infectious diseases such as the one caused by the SARS-Cov-2 virus.

"Limited community transmission means where a more than one person has acquired, directly or indirectly, infection from the same source. Community transmission of alarming proportions has not been seen in India yet. There is nothing to hide...if we get evidence of large-scale community transmission, where the source of transmission is not known, we will declare it. As of now there's no community transmission in India," said Lav Aggarwal, joint secretary in the health ministry.

Later, India's health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan tweeted: "Today, related to #CoronaVirus, the @MoHFW_India (ministry of health and family welfare) made it clear that its spread has not reached the community transmission level yet and its transmission is still in the local phase. "

In Stage 3, the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated.

India has reported 1,308 cases and 32 deaths due to Covid-19. On Monday, 25 new cases were identified in Delhi, of which 18 cases were in one cluster, Nizamuddin.

There are four main stages of the disease outbreak. Stage 1 is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage 2 is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage 3 is community transmission. Stage 4 is an epidemic.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the pandemic, has maintained that India is still in Stage 2, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact with an infected person or travel history rising over the past week.

Community transmission happens when the source of infection is untraced and the patient has no travel history or known contact with a confirmed Covid-19 case. It indicates that undiagnosed cases are infecting others, which is when infection clusters spiral out of control and turn into epidemics.

A senior public health expert, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said: "We've had pockets of community transmission in several locations in half-a-dozen states, but now the number of people with untraceable infection is increasing, which is a sign that community transmission has begun."

According to T Jacob John, head of the department of clinical virology and microbiology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, community transmission in India began in mid-February.

"Instead of splitting hairs, the focus should be on preparing to be three steps ahead of the virus. It's not a cops and robbers game, we should not be fooled into reacting to the virus but should be fooling the virus by anticipating the curve and proactively deciding what we need to do stop the spread," said John, emeritus medical scientist, ICMR.

The US Centers for Disease Control (USCDC) declared its first case of a person in California with no relevant travel history or exposure to another known patient asa "possible instance of community spread of Covid-19 in the United States" on February 26.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 21 -- India's battle to effectively contain the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) continued on Friday as the number of infections doubled in just four days to 236, even as experts reiterated that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

On Friday, India reported 63 fresh cases, taking the tally up from 173 a day earlier. Several states across the country have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission, a point when a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Experts said that a sudden and sharp spike in cases could hinder efforts to prevent the outbreak from taking hold if more aggressive and random testing is not carried out across India. Some even believe that community transmission has already begun silently and that it can be tackled only if many more people are tested at random.

As of Friday morning, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had conducted 14,376 tests - one of the lowest diagnostic rates in the world. India currently has the capacity to test 10,000 samples per day.

South Korea, which has been able to slow the advance of the disease despite reporting about 8,500 cases, has tested about 274,000 people since February. Though the US has tested 82,000 people, Covid-19 cases have raced to alarming levels in the country, leading to widespread criticism of its authorities for intractable delays in making tests available.

On Friday, Delhi reported five fresh cases of the disease, which originated in China's Wuhan last December and has killed at least 10,000 people. The national capital has so far reported 17 confirmed cases, which include one foreigner. With 52 cases, Maharashtra remains the worst affected state, triggering calls for a complete lockdown to halt the advance of the disease.

While Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal ordered that all malls, except grocery stores and pharmacies, be shut down immediately, Maharashtra put in place similar measures by announcing that all non-essential businesses in Mumbai and across the state were shutting down from midnight through the end of March.

Public health experts warned that despite the intensifying efforts across states, the disease could spiral out of control if Indians showed callous disregard to guidelines and precautions in the fight against Covid-19.

Among the fresh cases reported on Friday was singer Kanika Kapoor, whose announcement of having contracted the disease sent alarm bells ringing in several quarters -- from Parliament house to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje, her MP son Dushyant Singh, and parliamentarians Derek O'Brien and Anupriya Patel began self-quarantines after coming into direct or indirect contact with Kapoor.

Uttar Pradesh health minister Jai Pratap Singh underwent a test for Covid-19 as it emerged that he was at a party thrown by the celebrity singer after her return from London recently. Three BJP MLAs who met him on Thursday also went into self-isolation.

Reacting to a question on Kapoor's movements across Lucknow and Kanpur, health ministry joint secretary Lav Aggarwal said contact tracing was the immediate protocol that was initiated and all action for containment of the disease began at the same time.

He urged people to follow Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call to observe the "Janta Curfew" and stay at home on March 22 from 7am to 9pm, while emphasising that social distancing was primary to curb the spread of COVID-19 infection. "One day's cooperation will help break the chain of transmission," he added.

"The Centre has asked the states to take strict action as per the appropriate law against people who are not following the social distancing directive. The state governments have the inherent power under the Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act to take action against anyone who does not follow the government directive and risks lives of people," he added.

In his first address to the nation on the crisis, the Prime Minister on Thursday appealed to citizens to display commitment and called for a "people's curfew" on Sunday, March 22, where citizens would stay home as both a symbolic message of India's determination and a test-case to prepare for future challenges.

In line with the announcement, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said on its Twitter handle: "DMRC has decided to keep its services closed (on Sunday). The move is aimed at encouraging the public to stay indoors and maintain social distancing, which is essential in the fight against COVID-19."

No passenger train, mail express train or intercity train will operate till 10pm on Sunday following the PM's call. Operations of suburban rail services in all cities will also reduce to a "bare minimum".

India also expanded universal screening at airports for all passengers coming from Australia, the US and UK. "In view of local transmission of the disease, and increase in number of cases and deaths being reported in Australia, UK and USA, it has now been decided to expand the universal screening for all passengers coming from these places, and risk profiling them for either quarantine or isolation based on risk assessment," a document prepared by the health ministry said.

The Covid-19 pandemic has killed more than 10,000 people, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, and the World Health Organization said the disease is now infecting people at a faster pace. It took three months for the first 100,000 cases, but only 12 days for the next 100,000.

Italy is set to reinforce and extend the near-total lockdown after fatalities surpassed those in China, which again reported no new cases in the outbreak's initial hub. Britain will set out a package to help save millions of jobs and Germany is considering emergency spending measures.

California announced a statewide stay-in-place order, the most stringent US effort yet to curb the spread of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 17 -- The United States will airlift 200 mobile ventilators to help Indians combat Covid-19, people familiar with the developments said on Saturday, hours after US president Donald Trump made the announcement on Twitter.

Trump also said the two countries were cooperating to develop a vaccine for the disease that has claimed more than 310,000 lives globally and infected 4.6 million people.

"We stand with India and @narendramodi during this pandemic. We're also cooperating on vaccine development. Together we will beat the invisible enemy!" Trump tweeted.

Trump reiterated the point at his press conference later, referring to his India visit in February, the role played by Indian expatriates in the US and describing Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a "good friend of mine".

"We are working closely with India," he told reporters.

Modi thanked him in a tweet and highlighted the India-US relationship. "In such times, it's always important for nations to work together and do as much as possible to make our world healthier and free from Covid-19," he said.

Trump did not mention details of the ventilators but a senior Indian government official said the consignment may "arrive by the end of this month or latest, early June".

Each of these mobile ventilators is estimated to cost $ 13,000 (Rs 9.6 lakh at current exchange rates) without accounting for the transportation costs. In all, the ventilators will cost about $ 2.6 million (or Rs 192 million) plus freight charges.

The US move comes weeks after Modi acted on Trump's request to reverse a ban on the export of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug that was championed by the US President as a "game changer" in the fight against Covid-19.

Trump has often said the United States is the "king" of ventilators - a respiratory aid needed for severely ill hospitalized Covid-19 patients - as a result of an extraordinary push from his administration in response to early fears of an impending shortage. He has since said the United States has more ventilators than its needs and it will be willing to share them with allies and partners.

In a separate tweet hours later, the president's National Security Council followed up with a full-bore acknowledgement of the vaccine projects. "The US and India are working together to fight #COVID19 and find a vaccine," it said, adding, "the US-India Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership has never been stronger." There was no mention of the ventilators.

Three vaccine candidates are in various stages of development in separate bilateral projects involving two of India's leading pharmaceutical companies with robust portfolios of vaccines. Their US counterparts are research units of two universities and the third is a biotechnology company.

Diplomats in Washington and New Delhi said Trump's offer to send the ventilators and his public statements were an indicator of the deepening ties between the two countries and close contact between the two countries at different levels.

It also comes against the backdrop of growing congruence of views between the two countries on accountability and transparency on the origin of the coronavirus, reforms in the World Health Organisation (WHO) and even strategic issues such as terrorism and the situation in the Indo Pacific.

For weeks, Trump has criticised the WHO for allegedly allowing itself to be led by China's assessment of the virus when the disease was detected in central China's Wuhan city last year. There have also been allegations from Washington that the Sars-CoV-2 virus may not be natural and may have been created in a laboratory.

That the two sides are on the same page on China and WHO also came across at a seven-nation video conference initiated by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. There was broad agreement on the need to stress on transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease. The emphasis on transparency and accountability at this meeting attended by Foreign Minister S Jaishankar is seen to be aimed at China and the WHO that is due to hold its annual meet on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, July 1 -- Bipartisan support for India has been growing among the US lawmakers amid its military standoff with China. Mitch McConnell, the leader of the Republican-dominated US Senate, kicked off a floor debate on next year's defense budget on Monday by slamming China for "picking deadly fights" with India.

McConnell appealed for the chamber's bipartisan support to pass the National Defense Authorization Act, 2021, with remarks highlighting recent threats from China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran. "China has resumed its submarine intrusions into Japanese contiguous zones and picked deadly fights with India at high altitude," McConnell said.

In a floor speech on June 18, McConnell said the Chinese military appeared to have "instigated the worst violent clash between China and India since those nations went to war way back in 1962." The clash left 20 Indian soldiers dead on June 15.

Also on Monday, another Republican senator, Marco Rubio, supported India. "Today I spoke to @SandhuTaranjitS to express our solidarity with the people of #India as they firmly confront unwarranted & lawless armed aggression by the Communist Party of #China." He was referring to a conversation with Taranjit S Sandhu, the Indian ambassador to the US.

"India has made it clear, they will not be bullied by Beijing," added Rubio, who is a member of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a congressional panel with oversight of the State Department and the country's foreign policy.

The State Department has also held Chinese aggression responsible for the borer clashes. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has referred to the clashes several times. "The [Chinese] PLA [People's Liberation Army] has escalated border tensions--we see it today in India, the world's most popular, populous democracy," he said on June 18. He also conveyed his condolences over the killing of the Indian soldiers.

President Donald Trump offered to mediate in May, but the offer was turned down by both countries.

In a TV interview on Sunday, Tom Cotton, a Republican senator, who is a close ally of Trump, denounced China's aggression on the border with India to illustrate the growing threat Beijing poses to the US and its allies. "The Chinese Communist Party is certainly using the [Covid-19] pandemic to try to assert claims and take very aggressive action against almost all of its neighbours," he said. "...China has essentially invaded India, an ally of ours. And they have killed 20 Indian soldiers."

The Democratic-led House Foreign Affairs Committee chairman Eliot Engel denounced the Chinese aggression early June before the deadly border clash. "I am extremely concerned by the ongoing Chinese aggression along the Line of Actual Control on the India-China border," Engel said. "China is demonstrating once again that it is willing to bully its neighbours rather than resolve conflicts according to international law."

"I am concerned by continued Chinese aggression along its border with India," Ami Bera, Indian-origin chair of the Asia subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, tweeted.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, July 19 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculationamongofficialsofthe Trump administration that the Covid-19 outbreak might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan.

Officials of the US embassy in China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the Wuhan facility, had raised concerns in the state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained techniciansandinvestigatorsneededto safelyoperatethis high-containment laboratory".

Though the lab in Wuhan couldstudySARS-likecoronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strainsthatcouldinfecthumans, officialswroteinthecable,whose release was secured by The Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

The cable, however, did not prove if the new coronavirus indeed came from the Wuhan facility."Idon'tseeanyevidence to support the idea that this was releaseddeliberatelyorinadvertently," IanLipkin,thedirectorof ColumbiaUniversity'sCenterfor InfectionandImmunity,toldThe Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable. "You can't just say someoneisguiltyofaccidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it." In recent days, the Trump administrationhasn'tpushedthe Wuhan lab origin theory much, but it has continued to blame Chinaforthepandemic.BothUS PresidentDonaldTrumpandsecretaryofstateMikePompeohave called the pathogen "Chinese virus" and "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new casesreportedinthelast24hours and 843 new deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit. ICUs are runningtofullcapacityinsomeof the worst affected counties, and, inarepeatofthegrimsituationin NewYorksomeweeksago,refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Americans debated mask mandates and the reopening of schoolsasthecountry'stopinfectious disease expert Anthony Fauci and Trump yet again sparred,thistimeovertheneedto use masks.

While Fauci urged political leadersto"beasforcefulaspossible in getting your citizenry to wear masks", Trump said he didn'tbelieveinissuinganationwide mask mandate.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, May 23 -- Only two-fifths of all Olive Ridley turtle hatchlings made their way to the sea in Maharashtra between 2019 and 2020.

According to data collated from different forest ranges by the state mangrove cell and Maharashtra Mangrove Foundation on World Turtle Day (May 23), 12,149 hatchlings survived from 27,254 eggs during 2019-20, accounting for a survival rate of 44.5%.

In 2018-19, the survival rate was 54.4%, with 12,601 hatchlings that made it to sea from 23,131 eggs.

Sporadic nesting of turtles is reported from an average of 33 sandy beaches across three districts in Konkan - Raigad, Ratnagiri, and Sindhudurg. While Sindhudurg witnessed a marked improvement in survival rate, from 47.3% in 2018-19 to 74.3% in 2019-20, Ratnagiri observed a decline to 34% in 2019-20 against 57.4% in 2018-19. Raigad also witnessed a drop from 65.4% to 52.2% over two years.

"We must realise that this is preliminary information, and there might be several data gaps since this annual statistical collation from three districts is a relatively new process. We need to study the pattern for at least 10 years to come up with exact trends," said Virendra Tiwari, additional principal chief conservator of forest (mangrove cell).

Olive Ridley sea turtles are found in warm tropical currents of the Indian and Pacific oceans. A schedule I species under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, they travel thousands of kilometres in the ocean, with only the females returning to their original nesting sites within a minimum of two years, to lay eggs. After a 50 to 60-day incubation period, juvenile turtles break the eggshell, dig through the sand, and crawl to the sea. While females return to their place of birth, males never return to land.

"Female turtles use geomagnetic imprinting [navigating to their geographic area of origin using magnetic field] and olfactory [relating to the sense of smell] cues to find their natal areas," said Harshal Karve, marine biologist, Mangrove Foundation.

Changes in weather patterns are the main reason for the fall in survival rate, said Mohan Upadhyay, livelihood assistant, Mangrove Foundation. "Firstly, nesting was delayed due to a series of extreme weather events including heavy rain coupled with cyclones in the Arabian Sea, last monsoon. Then the winter season was much warmer than previous years even for coastal districts. Following this, there was a spike in maximum temperatures this year from late February. When temperatures rise, it affects the incubation period, resulting in a lower survival rate," said Upadhyay.

Independent experts, however, said the survival rate does not depend completely on extreme weather factors. "Hatchling survival is affected by rising beach temperature and prolonged rainy days can damage some nests. But proper management and protection for natural nests can address these issues. However, even a 44% survival rate for natural in-situ nests is not bad. Focused conservation can help improve this," said Basudev Tripathi, senior scientist, Zoological Survey of India and member of International Union for Conservation of Nature.

Meanwhile, the Mangrove Foundation has commissioned a research study to assess the incubation temperature of nests along the Maharashtra coast. The project is being undertaken by a PhD scholar from the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun.

"Atmospheric temperature plays a major role in developing and determining the sex of baby turtles. Temperature data loggers have been deployed at various turtle nesting sites in Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg, and the results will help us understand the nesting ecology," said Karve.

A similar study undertaken by the Mangrove Foundation - comparing nesting data from 2002 to 2006 and 2014 to 2019 - has shown that the peak nesting period had shifted from winter months (December) to early summer months (February-March). "Many nests which are now being laid along the Maharashtra coast during the February-March period hatch out in the summer months of April-May when the ambient and sand temperatures tend to be on the higher side [above 32 degrees Celsius], which may lead most of the turtle hatchling to be females. Also, higher nest temperature data suggests a lower survival rate for hatchlings," said Tiwari. "We are therefore developing solutions to ensure that the hatchlings are protected from higher temperatures through the use of sheds, regular monitoring, and litter-free turtle nesting habitats."

Using some of the results, this year green sheds were installed to cover nesting sites from direct sunlight and high temperatures. "However, the Covid-19 lockdown made material transport difficult," said Upadhyay.

The state forest department, with local NGO Sahayadri Nisarg Mitra, has been educating local communities on sea turtle conservation. "From locating nesting sites, excavation, relocation of eggs, fencing nets, and preventing poaching and flooding, around two persons per nesting site have been trained by us. Now, using a format provided by us, the volunteers have begun collating all information about the entire process from nesting to hatching," said Karve.

To further boost turtle conservation, earlier this month the forest department introduced an honourarium of Rs.15.63 lakh to locals in Ratnagiri, while the Sindhudurg district administration provided Rs.6lakh to Rs.8 lakh annually under its conservation management plan.

The Union environment ministry is also in the process of finalising the National Marine Turtle Conservation Policy soon, said officials. "It is in the final stages. State-specific models like Odisha and Maharashtra will help achieve a long-term conservation protocol that can be replicated across other states," said a senior ministry official.

15 CASES OF MARINE ANIMAL STRANDING INCIDENTS ALONG MUMBAI COAST IN 2019

On World Turtle Day, the state mangrove cell released data on marine mammal stranding incidents in 2019 along the Mumbai coast. While 10 Olive Ridley turtles and one Hawksbill turtle were stranded, two were treated and released back to the sea with the others succumbing to their injuries and infections. Cases of cetacean stranding included two baleen whales, an Indian Ocean humpback dolphin, and a striped dolphin (all mammals had washed ashore dead). The Maharashtra coastline has witnessed 143 cases of marine mammal deaths and stranding incidents between 2016 and 2019.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 14 -- 'Corona, Corona, Coronaaaaa'. Imagine Abhijeet Bhattacharya crooning this song as we wait for the lockdown to end. Well, he did not, but someone sure did and got famous for it, too. From puppies singing online to living room concerts by celebrities, music is coming to the aid of all who are stuck in isolation because of the Covid-19 pandemic. And some have taken it a notch up to lend a corona twist to a classic song! With changes in the lyrics, ranging from mild to rather loud, corona parodies are tickling funny bones across the world.

What could be better than dogs in a video? Dogs singing a coronavirus parody! Canandian comedian Chantal Desjardins posted a video of her little 'pandemic' pup Cooper, singing a version of Gloria Gaynor's iconic song I Will Survive but with a Covid twist. "At first I was afraid, I was petrified," Cooper sings. "I didn't get why mom was suddenly always inside. There's no more barking at the mailman, what's a dog supposed to do for fun?" The Pets Will Thrive song went viral and has been shared almost 40,000 times with over 15 million views. Desjardins says, "I was sitting in self-isolation with my fiance and our new puppy, Cooper, when I thought to myself... he sure is cute. Why not make him sing? I had no idea it would go viral. I was just trying to make people smile during these difficult times.''

Actor Johnny Lever's daughter, comedienne Jamie Lever has recreated Dhanush's popular Kolaveri Di number into Why This Corona Disease?. Through the song, she traces the origin of the disease from China's Wuhan and ends with an emphasis on washing hands and wearing masks.

Jamie says her intent was to give people something entertaining and informative at this time. Her comic set ups have always included music elements, so recording the song was no different. "My friend Rohan Malode, who is part of my group that jams together regularly, rang and asked me if we can do a song about Covid-19 and I agreed. I chose Kolaveri because it was the first song that explained to the industry what going viral meant. I wrote the lyrics the same night, and the next day, we got together and shot this song. I was very excited about it and was amazed to see that it spread like wildfire within minutes," she says.

Talent flows in this family. Her father Johnny Lever has also released his own corona parody of the classic Chhodo Kal Ki Baatein, which has also gone viral on Instagram.

The Ministry of Railways also threw its towel in the game as it released an anthem titled Corona Won't Have a Chance, Bro to spread awareness about the virus. The two-minute-long video, set to the tune of hit number I Am A Disco Dancer, was released by the Railway Ministry on their official Twitter handle.

Even the police have joined in on the parody bandwagon. Goa Police PSI, Diogo Gracias, made a corona parody of the Konkani Song, Mog Tuzo Kithlo Ashelom, where he asks locals to not to go out of their homes. Chhattisgarh cop Abhinav Upadhyay also made news by performing a rendition of Shor movie's Ek Pyaar Ka Nagma Hai; tweaking the song to turn it into a guide against coronavirus.

Upadhyay sing: "Ghar main hi rehna hai. Bahar nahi jaana hai. Khud ki raksha karte hue auro ko bachana hai. Sanitiser lagana hai, haath dhoke hi jaana hai, milke ab humko, corona ko harana hai (We need to stay home. We shouldn't go out. We must save others as well as ourselves. We have to use a sanitizer and wash hands. Together, we have to beat coronavirus)." His viral clip crooning this has appreciated by Bollywood filmmaker-music composer Vishal Bhardwaj on the microblogging site, among many others.

Hollywood isn't immune to the parody bug either. Several YouTubers have realised the Bee Gees' iconic Stayin' Alive could be turned into Stayin' Inside. One of the best versions has been sung by Brent McCollough and friends with the video raking in 1.16 million views and counting.

American singer-songwriter Chris Mann used all the free time on his hands to do some popular coronavirus parodies, including the iconic song Hello by Adele (Hello / How are you? / Do your fingers hurt from scrolling through / The cat memes on your iPhone?), which soon hit 5 million views.

While locked up inside, watch 'em all and enjoy!

Author tweets @bhagat_mallika

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 17 -- Large-scale conversion of tracts of land for agriculture; trade and consumption of high-risk wild species are the two main drivers of zoonotic diseases, according to a report by Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) released on Wednesday.

Zoonotic diseases are viral infections that are transmissible from vertebrate animals to humans.

The report, a compilation of existing evidence on SARS-CoV-2, which causes the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), and other zoonotic diseases, said the frequency of zoonotic disease outbreaks caused by a spillover of pathogens from animals to humans might have more than tripled in the last decade.

The diversity of these pathogens has also increased with the number of new zoonotic diseases infecting people quadrupling in the last 10 years, the WWF report titled, "Covid 19-Urgent Call to Protect People and Nature" said, referring to a 2008 paper published in the Nature journal on emerging infectious diseases.

"These increases are driven by more frequent contact between humans and dangerous animal pathogens, as well as by contact with a wider variety of species, resulting in the emergence of new forms of diseases in humans. These new zoonotic diseases have posed a grave threat to human health around the world, causing global pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Swine Flu, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), Ebola and currently Covid-19," the report said.

Every year three to four zoonotic diseases are emerging.

The increase in zoonotic outbreaks is a symptom of a broken relationship between humans and nature and is likely to worsen, the report said warning that ecological conditions are rife for another pandemic unless strong actions are taken such as a complete halt of wildlife trade, enforcing legislation to stop deforestation, a new deal for nature and people that safeguard biodiversity and halves consumption. It also called for the incorporation of a One Health Approach, which has shared policies for humans, animals, and the environment.

The report underlined that though questions remain about the exact origin of Covid-19 by keeping different wild and livestock species in cramped conditions, the risk of genetic recombination between different viruses and transmission to new species, including humans, has increased.

Improper handling of live domestic animals and their meat can also drive potential disease exposure, particularly, when these animals are slaughtered or kept along with other wildlife species. The initial Covid-19 disease outbreak is likely to have been attributed to human contact with infected palm civets and raccoon dogs at a wildlife market in China's Guangdong province.

This was substantiated by the discovery of SARS-like viruses in these animals in Chinese wildlife markets after the initial outbreak.

Researchers have also found that several of the early SARS patients in Guangdong province were involved in selling or preparing wildlife for consumption, the report said.

Globally between 1945 and 2005 land-use change has contributed to almost half of zoonotic disease events, WWF said, referring to findings of another scientific paper published in 2010 in the Nature journal.

Extensive deforestation and fragmentation of land in West and Central Africa are linked to several Ebola outbreaks in these regions, according to WWF.

Most habitat loss associated with agriculture is owing to only three commodities such as beef, soy, and palm oil.

"As a result of extensive land conversion, about 70% of forests globally are now within one kilometre (km) of a forest edge and are exposed to further fragmentation. Not only forests are at risk - over half of the original Cerrado and North American grassland prairies have also been lost," the report said calling for laws to stop the fragmentation of forests.

Experts said India, which has its own rich biodiversity, also needs a One Health policy.

"In a country like India, where people live cheek-by-jowl, not just with each other, but also with among the highest numbers of livestock, including both four-legged and two-legged, as well as in areas of high biodiversity. Such close proximity means that the diversity of pathogens that humans are potentially exposed to is very high. To understand the risks from these pathogens, it's necessary for us to adopt a One Health approach, where we have to work in large interdisciplinary teams that can investigate not only human and animal health, but also the linkages with changes in the natural environment," said Abi Tamim Vanak, fellow, Wellcome Trust and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment.

"It's hard to think beyond the tragic impacts of the ongoing Covid-19 healthcare crisis. But, it's also an opportune moment for us to act if we are to deliver a recovery that benefits both humans and nature. The challenge and opportunity before us are to begin to think of development through the lens of environmental health," said Ravi Singh, secretary-general, WWF India.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
VARANASI:, March 27 -- In normal times, the mythologically renowned Manikarnika and Harishchandra Ghat cremation grounds here function almost 24X7, with many bringing bodies even from neighbouring districts. Hindus believe cremation here assures salvation (moksha) to the dead.

But the spread of Covid-19 has led to an abrupt decline in the number of cremations. Post the lock-down to check spread of the disease, people from neighbouring districts and states like Bihar and Madhya Pradesh are avoiding bringing bodies here.

To note, though the boundaries of the districts and states are sealed, there is no restriction on taking bodies for cremation.

Gulshan Kapoor, managing trustee, Baba Mahashamshan Nath Mandir, Manikarnika Ghat said, "Earlier, on an average 80 to 100 bodies reached the ghat daily for the last rites. Ever since the lock-down has been enforced, the number has gone down to 15 -20."

Jagdish Chaudhary, senior member of Dom Raja's descendants' family, also confirmed the figure. He expressed concern over the outbreak of and wished that the pandemic would to an end soon.

To note, the honorific Dom Raja traces its origin to the first undertaker of Kashi cremation ghats who had made legendary king Harishchandra his apprentice.

The livelihood of those who make a living among the dead has also been impacted following the corona scare.

Saran Chaudhary, a descendant of the Dom Raja family, helps perform the cremation at Manikarnika Ghat. He helps make the pyre and light it. In lieu, he receives some money from the kin of the deceased.

He said in normal days, people from Jaunpur, Ghazipur, Mau, Bhadohi, Ballia several other areas in eastern UP brought bodies to Manikarnika Ghat for cremation. Bodies from Bihar's Bhabhua and other districts also arrived here. But due to the lock-down, people from the adjoining districts and states were not bringing bodies. Hence there had been a decline in the number of cremations.

The sale of wood had also gone down at the ghats due to fewer cremations, said Suresh Prasad Yadav, who sells wood at the ghat.

Bahadur Chaudhary, a member of the Dom Raja family at Harishchandra Ghat who looks after last rites, said that on an average, 15 to 20 or more bodies arrived at the ghat. But now only a few cremations were taking place as people were reluctant to come due to the lock-down, though there was no restriction on bringing bodies here.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Agarwal said, "There is no restriction on bringing bodies from adjoining districts for cremation at Manikarnika Ghat and Harishanchandra Ghat. However, less than 20 people should accompany the body. Everyone should follow the measures to keep Sars-Cov-2 infection away."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 22 -- India will reopen air travel on 383 routes across the country after a two-month gap, the government announced on Thursday, but allowed one-third of the operations beginning May 25 and set limits on fares that airlines can charge in the initial phase of this critical unlocking of swift long-distance travel.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said the government has identified seven bands based on flight durations, while announcing a set of norms for airlines and guidelines for passengers that outline how air travel is set to change in India in the aftermath of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

The fares - consistent for each band - will be capped till at least August 24.

"[Because of the lockdown] we have been able to escape the situation other countries have found themselves in. [But] it is equally important that at some stage you will have to open up. Two months is a very long time...you have to balance between lives and livelihood; it is time to now open up," Puri said at a press conference in New Delhi, a day after announcing the resumption of domestic flights.

According to data by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), flights in the first phase will operate on all routes, taking off from a total of 35 origin cities and landing in 39 destination airports.

"The central government hereby directs that domestic civil flight operations are permitted from 25 May, 2020 to a limited extent... For operations from Metro to Metro cities, One-Third capacity of the approved Summer Schedule...," the civil aviation ministry said in an order on Thursday.

The metro cities were identified as Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The rule will be applicable for metro to non-metro operations as well.

Though there are several guidelines for social distancing in airports and at embarkation and disembarkation points, the middle seat will not be kept vacant in the aircraft.

Lancelot Pinto, an epidemiologist at Mumbai's Hinduja Hospital, said social distancing should be a priority. "Even though the government is saying they will scan each passengers, many of the travellers will not show any symptoms as almost 80% people (Covid-19 patients) are asymptomatic."

Puri, however, said it was not possible to keep the middle seat vacant. "This is not an option being followed by any other country as well. We will keep our fingers crossed," he said.

The seven bands identified by the government are: flights with duration of less than 40 minutes (Sector A), those with journey time of 40-60 minutes (Sector B), 60-90 minutes (Sector C), 90-120 minutes (Sector D), 120-150 minutes (Sector E), 150-180 minutes (Sector F) and 180-210 minutes (Sector G).

A Delhi-Mumbai air travel takes around two hours, putting it in the category of Sector D.

"Earlier, air carriers could put their range (minimum to maximum) on their websites...We want air travel to become affordable. We have set a minimum fare and a maximum fare. For Delhi to Mumbai, the minimum fare will be ~3,500 and maximum ~10,000," Puri said at the media briefing.

The government said 40% of the tickets in all bands will be sold at a price less than the mid-point (of the lower and upper limits). In case of a Delhi-Mumbai journey, these tickets will be priced at around ~6,700.

The move to set fare limits will ensure there is no overcharging by airlines in view of an expected rush of passengers and heightened demand for tickets, Puri said. At the same time, the move to set lower limits is expected to protect carriers from extremely low fares set by competitors.

Domestic flights with less than 40-minute duration, like the ones from Delhi to Chandigarh, will have lower and upper limits of ~2,000 and ~6,000, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) announced later in the day. For flights with duration between 40 and 60 minutes, such as Delhi to Lucknow, the lower and upper fare limits are ~2,500 and ~7,500.

In the next band (60-90 minutes for journeys like the ones between Bengaluru and Mumbai), the lower fare limit is ~3,000 and the upper limit is ~9,000, the aviation regulator said. Flights between 120 and 150 minutes, including those on major routes such as Delhi-Bengaluru, will have lower and upper limits of ~4,500 and ~13,000.

Those with duration between 150 and 180 minutes (such as Delhi to Imphal), the lower and upper limits are set at ~5,500 and ~15,700. And finally, for flights with duration between 180 and 210 minutes - like the ones on Delhi-Coimbatore route - the range will be ~6,500 and ~18,600.

Vistara welcomed the moved to resume domestic flights, which were grounded on March 25, the day restrictions were first imposed in the country.

"Aviation is a growth engine for the economy and resumption of air travel will give great impetus to the government's overall efforts in helping the country eventually return to normalcy," Vistara CEO Leslie Thng said.

Global airlines' body International Air Transport Association (IATA), a grouping of 290 airlines, said the decision to regulate airfares is a "step back". Private carriers such as Air India, Vistara, IndiGo and SpiceJet are its members.

"Airlines need to have the freedom to make their commercial decisions, including the pricing of airfares. Hence, we recognise and hope that this is a one-time measure as a result of Covid-19 and will be discontinued on August 24," IATA assistant director (corporate communications - Asia Pacific) Albert Tjoeng told news agency PTI.

Ravi Kini, managing partner at law firm MV Kini & Co, said: "Fares are published by airlines in the regular course. The range normally published is very wide for allowing flexibility for the airlines to respond to the market demand in free market situation. In the current situation, free market play has been curbed due to Covid-19...This is a good move by the government to balance the consumer interests with airline profitability."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 28 -- China has reported 42 new cases of Covid-19 including 22 local transmissions, recording the sharpest increase in several weeks, national health authorities said on Wednesday.

Tuesday's tally was sharply up from 16 on Monday, with all the 22 new local cases reported in the past 24 hours from the remote Xinjiang region's Kashgar prefecture.

The national health commission (NHC) and Xinjiang health authorities said the local infections were asymptomatic cases that were re-categorised as confirmed ones.

All were reported in Shufu county of Kashgar, the Xinjiang health commission said, adding that 19 new asymptomatic cases were also reported on Tuesday.

By Tuesday night, the autonomous region had completed Covid-19 testing for all 4.75 million people in Kashgar following the recent local cases, state media reported.

Apart from the confirmed and asymptomatic cases, the remaining population had tested negative for the disease, Li Linyu from the Kashgar prefectural health commission told a press conference.

Li said investigations have shown the new cases have no relation to the cluster in the regional capital of Urumqi in July and source tracing for the new cases in Shufu was underway.

Experts have told Chinese state media that the origin of the latest flare-up in Kashgar remains to be determined.

An official from the prefecture told the tabloid Global Times that none of the asymptomatic patients had any contact with cold-chain products or with wild animals.

A virologist told the tabloid that it is not certain if the virus that caused the Kashgar outbreak was local or imported.

"More epidemiological surveys need to be done to find out, such as contact with people from other countries, or international flights," the tabloid reported.

As of Tuesday, the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases on the mainland had reached 85,868. Of them, 298 patients were still being treated, including four in severe condition.

Altogether 80,936 patients had been discharged after recovery, and 4,634 had died of the disease on the mainland, the NHC said in its daily report on Wednesday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 20 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infecting human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has, until Tuesday, killed over 318,000 people and sickened more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated "...SARSCoV2 [the virus that causes Covid-19] is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

The four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus's "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

The research is plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin,Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University, told HT.

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with COVID is we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow in the past been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

Not everyone, like Ebright,is fully convinced.

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper. "It is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence... or whether COVID-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- The UK's planned "Indo-Pacific tilt" is as much about managing the challenges and pressures arising from China's assertive actions as it is about taking advantage of opportunities across the region, British foreign secretary Dominic Raab said on Wednesday.

Raab, who held talks with his Indian counterpart S Jaishankar on Tuesday on a 10-year road map for bilateral ties and a free trade deal, also said he raised the farmers' protest in Delhi in view of the strong connect between the politics of the two countries given the Indian diaspora in Britain.

In an interaction with a small group of Indian reporters, Raab said the UK was acting to address "as swiftly as possible" the outstanding legal issues that have held up the extradition of fugitive businessman Vijay Mallya.

The UK's integrated defence and foreign policy review, set to be published in early 2021, is expected to outline the "Indo-Pacific tilt", and Raab said the rise of China juxtaposed with the growth of economies in Southeast Asia and the Far East present both challenges and opportunities.

"Actually, that's all part of the Indo-Pacific tilt, which is to be more engaged in grasping the opportunities but also more engaged in managing some of the challenges and the pressures," he said in response to a question on China's belligerent actions, including the miliary standoff with India along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).

"Obviously, there is the rise of China and the position of China, and the opportunities but also the risks it presents," he said.

India and the UK, Raab said, can cooperate on issues such as cyber-security and countering disinformation. The UK has also inked free trade deals with Japan, Vietnam and South Korea and applied to join the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as a dialogue partner as part of its wider trade and investment engagement with the Indo-Pacific.

Against the backdrop of Indian-origin British MPs asking the UK government to raise the farmers' protest with New Delhi, Raab said he had discussed the issue with Jaishankar.

"Obviously, we respect the fact that the reforms going through your system here are domestic reforms. Of course, they've elicited the protests that you refer to, and your politics, in some sense because of the Indian diaspora in Britain, is our politics," he said.

"But I think India, as well as having a market-driven economy, also has a vibrant heritage of peaceful protests and vigorous debate and we watch that with interest and we respect it."

Asked about the delay in the extradition of Mallya, Raab declined to specify whether the matter had figured during his meetings in New Delhi but said the two sides always had discussions on "issues of concern". He added: "We've made it clear that in those cases, there's still some legal issues outstanding. Obviously, they're independent from politics or political intervention, but we would like to see those expedited as swiftly as possible."

The UK earlier said a "confidential" legal issue was holding up Mallya's extradition. Britain's stance gave rise to speculation tht the 64-year-old businessman, wanted in India to face charges of financial irregularities, could have applied for asylum in the UK.

Raab also said Prime Minister Boris Johnson's visit in January to join the Republic Day celebrations as chief guest will help drive cooperation on the Covid-19 crisis, trade, maritime issues and climate change. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be invited to both the G7 leaders' summit and the United Nations Climate Change Conference to be hosted by the UK in 2021, he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 15 -- New Delhi

Two dogs who were reported to have contracted the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) recently likely got the infection from their owners, according to a new research paper that analysed cases in animals in Hong Kong.

"An analysis of viral genetic sequences from the dogs showed them to be identical to those in the infected people," an article on the findings in Nature said.

While the paper didn't study if animal-to-animal transmission could occur, the authors recommended that for precaution, pets belonging to Covid-19 patients be isolated and tested, as is already being done in Hong Kong.

The paper, published in Nature journal on Thursday, found that two of 15 dogs from households with confirmed human cases of Covid-19 in Hong Kong were found to be infected. These two were a 17-year-old neutered Pomeranian and a 2.5-year-old German Shepherd. They were tested using Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) kits and the virus was later isolated and sequenced.

Canine ACE-2 (an enzyme the Sars-CoV-2 virus uses to enter the body) is similar to the enzyme found in humans. Of 18 amino acids that are known to be involved in interaction between ACE-2 and the spike receptor binding domain of Sars-CoV-2 (which Sars-CoV-2 uses to bind to its host's cells), there are five that differ between humans and dogs, the study led by Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department of Hong Kong said.

"The evidence suggests that human-to-animal transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur. We do not have information on whether this virus can cause illness in dogs but no specific signs were seen in either of the infected dogs during the time they were shedding virus," the paper said. The Pomeranian died two days after release from isolation but very likely due to other underlying diseases. The German Shepherd was kept with a second cross-breed dog but the second dog didn't get infected.

"The limited implications of these findings are that there is now increasing evidence for human to animal transmission, especially to pet animals that are in close contact with infected humans. There is as yet no evidence for any subsequent animal to animal transmission," said Abi Tamim Vanak, Fellow, DBT India Alliance Program and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE).

"However, given that high viral loads were found in nasal swabs of infected animals, as well as in rectal swabs, there is a possibility of onward transmission to other animals, especially if an infected pet is free-ranging and regularly comes in to contact with other animals or humans. Again, this is only speculative, and it would require experimental challenge studies to determine if animal to animal transmission is a viable route of spread for this virus. If such evidence is found, then it will make the control of this disease much harder, because many regions of the world have fairly large populations of free-ranging domestic animals (e.g. India has ~60 million dogs), which do not receive even the most basic healthcare, such as anti-rabies vaccinations," he added.

The findings also have implications for future zoonotic transmission events. Dogs, other canids and felids can be sold in or found near wild-game animal markets like in Wuhan from where Sars-CoV-2 is understood to have transmitted to humans. These domestic animals should also be tested during investigations into the origin of the virus to determine if they play any role in spillover events, the authors concluded.

Earlier, a study by Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and National High Containment Laboratory for Animal Diseases Control and Prevention in China had suggested that cats are highly susceptible to contracting Sars-CoV-2 but dogs, ducks, chickens and pigs were not as susceptible. The study was based on lab experiments and not real-life cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- The government on Thursday banned all international commercial flights from landing in India for a week starting March 22 and instructed states to enforce a work-from-home protocol for all private sector employees, except essential services, as part of a raft of measures aimed at staving off the coronavirus epidemic that has claimed four lives in the country.

In an advisory, the Centre also advised children below 10 and citizens above 65 - except government servants, medical professionals and public representatives - to stay at home and not "venture out".

"States are being requested to enforce work from home for private sector employees except for those working in emergency/essential services," the statement read. The statement came hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed the nation on Thursday evening.

The decision was taken after a meeting of the group of ministers (GOM) formed to monitor the outbreak, which included civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri, health minister Harsh Vardhan and external affairs minister S Jaishankar. Officials at the national aviation regulator, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), said about 300 incoming flights will be affected.

The government also suspended all concessional travel on trains and flights, except for students, patients and the disabled. The national transporter at present provides a total of 53 categories of concessions of which only 15 categories can be availed of as per the new order.

All group B and C central government employees have been asked to attend office on alternate weeks, with staggered timings.

The DGCA had earlier prohibited travel of passengers from the European Union, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, and United Kingdom from March 18 till March 31. India also issued an order expanding compulsory quarantine for a minimum period of 14 days for passengers coming from or transiting through the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman and Kuwait.

"Amid the worldwide outbreak of Covid-19 virus and increasing number of cases in India, it has become imperative to curtail its spread and protect the most vulnerable groups, i.e people with chronic illness and senior citizens. Withdrawal of such concessions is also a part of a wider plan to discourage unnecessary travel by all concerned and hence concessional booking of tickets have been withdrawn except for patients, students and the disabled, for both unreserved and reserved segments," the railway ministry said.

The Railways have seen a decline of Rs 454 crore in its earnings over the last week as at least 164 trains were cancelled in the wake of the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. India is currently grappling with stage 2 of the virus outbreak, with 169 cases and four deaths due to local transmission. The Indian Council of Medical Research has ruled out community transmission, or stage 3 - where the origin of the infection is not known - as of Thursday morning.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Also Read: Nizamuddin markaz trail widens; coronavirus cases in India hit 2,000

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy.

Union home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled.

The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the six-storey building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups of people.

Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors."

Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe.

In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and also cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, Nov. 30 -- The ongoing stir by thousands of farmers on the borders of the national capital echoed in foreign countries even as the Union government attempted to initiate talks with the protesters and the Opposition criticised the Centre for not defusing the crisis that saw a pitched battle on highways last week.

In Delhi, Union home minister Amit Shah defended the Centre's recently enacted farm laws and said they were meant for the welfare of agriculture. "After a long time the farmer is going to come out of a locked system. Whoever wants to oppose it politically let them do it. I have never said the farmers protest is political and would never say," he said.

Union agriculture minister Narendra Singh Tomar said the Centre was ready to hold talks. "The government has proposed to meet on December 3 for the fourth time...but farmers' unions should create an atmosphere for it. They should leave the route of agitation and choose a way of talks," Tomar told ANI.

On Sunday, the protests were mentioned by Canadian politician Jagmeet Singh, who criticised the Indian government's use of force against the farmers. His brother Gurratan Singh, an MLA in the Ontario assembly also joined in, tweeting he felt the "pain and struggle of farmers protesting laws that threaten their livelihoods."

In the United Kingdom, Labour MPs of Indian origin criticised the police measures against the farmers, while many Sikhs held a car rally in Southall. Preet Kaur Gill, Labour MP from Birmingham Edgbaston and chair of the All Party Parliamentary Party for British Sikhs, saidm "This is no way to treat citizens who are peacefully protesting over the controversial farmers bill in India".

Four days ago, farmers from Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh and other neighbouring states set off on their "Dilli chalo" campaign to protest a set of laws to liberalise farm trade and open up agricultural markets in the country.

The protesters want the Centre to revoke three laws approved by Parliament in September that did away with a network of government-controlled agricultural markets.

The protests triggered a bitter war-of-words between Punjab and Haryana chief ministers.

Punjab CM Captain Amarinder Singh flayed Khattar for his allegations that the former did not attend to the latter's calls to discuss the farm issues. "If at all someone from his office called my residence...Why were official channels not used to get in touch with me?" a statement from the Punjab government quoted him.

This came after Khattar alleged that he made efforts to get in touch with Singh but could not get hold of him.

Khattar hit back, saying he will hold his Punjab counterpart responsible if farmers' gathering led to a worsening of the Covid-19 pandemic in the state. "...when protestors tried to move forward, we decided not to use force. I don't consider tear gas and water cannon as a way of force. It is a means of restricting people," Khattar told ANI.

Senior Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda also hit out at Khattar and warned that if farmers' problems are not resolved, a "bigger movement" will be undertaken. "Until the farmers win this battle, we stand firmly with the demands of the farmers...," he said.

Other opposition parties also attacked the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) for not resolving the farmers' issues.

"The government does not have any sympathy for the farmers. It is only worried about the corporate houses and how to fill their coffers and hold hostage the resources of the state," Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav said.

Delhi home minister and Aam Aadmi Party leader Satyendar Jain said the Centre should not set any conditions to hold talks with the agitating farmers. "Central government should talk to farmers immediately and unconditionally," Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal tweeted.

The Shiv Sena expressed sympathy with the farmers. "It is sad they are not being allowed to come to Delhi and are being treated as if they are terrorists and have come from outside the country. The government should consider the demands of farmers sympathetically," Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Raut said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 4 -- Minister of state for external affairs (MEA) and parliamentary affairs, V Muraleedharan, spoke to Smriti Kak Ramachandran about brings Indians back from abroad, foreigners stranded in India, and relief being sent by India to other countries, among other issues. Edited excerpts:

MEA had a daunting task of evacuating Indian citizens from overseas. How did you go about it?A lot of Indians who were abroad have been brought home; the last such flight came from Iran. We have been carrying out evacuations, but since international travel has stalled, and there is a lockdown in India, we have through our high commissions and embassies ensured that food and other necessities of people of Indian origin are taken care of. In fact there are between 700-800 Indians abroad who are infected by the virus, even their needs are being taken care of.

We get a lot of emails and requests from people who want to come home, some are unwell, some have bereavements in their families, but since international travel is affected so we cannot do selective evacuation. Embassies and high commissions have been asked to step up; they have also been helping people whose visas have expired. It is not their job, but they are helping people renew their visas as well.

How is India helping in the relocation of foreign nationals stranded across the country?For foreign nationals who are in India, we have already started a portal where they can register and we can plan for their evacuation. A lot of people from countries such as Germany, the UK and the US have already been evacuated. Governments of some countries sought our help in getting their nationals who were stuck in distant places to reach the airports in Mumbai, Delhi or Kochi; that assistance we could provide after coordinating with the home ministry and the local police - we helped them reach the airport from where they could then be evacuated to their respective countries.

How exactly is India helping other countries? We've sent help to Maldives.Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been in discussion with heads of states; he had a meeting with the members of the Saarc nations and G20; he also spoke to French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday (expert teams of the two countries will actively share information on measures to prevent the spread of coronavirus as well as about ongoing research on treatment and vaccines.) Union Minister for external affairs S Jaishankar has also spoken to his US counterpart Mike Pompeo (on how to combat the international crisis, including strengthening global pharmaceutical and healthcare manufacturing and supply chains). The PM also addressed the heads of 130 missions. Wherever we can offer help and provide assistance, we're going to do that.

What is the status of relief efforts by India to the neighbouring countries?

Being a member of Saarc, PM Modi has already announced the setting up of a Covid-19 emergency fund with India making an initial contribution of $10 million. Countries such as Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives have already made the contributions. These countries are again collaborating in whatever ways to fight the pandemic.

What is the initial assessment of the lockdown?The overall impact has been good because people have appreciated the decisive action of the PM. Because of his address on TV, a lot of people understood the seriousness of the situation. His word carries weight and people have faith in him.

The economic impact is an important issue, and the second is the migration of workers. The government will have to work on these. Some groups [of exporters] have had a discussion with the commerce minister pointing out how India could lose markets if restricted resumption of services export services is not started. But we will all have to bear the impact of the pandemic. However, some international financial agencies have said that except China, India and Indonesia, which will have growth in the whole financial year, other countries will be in recession.

The challenges now are to ensure that the delivery of essential goods is carried without any hiccups. The railways,for instance, is transporting all essential goods, but the workers to carry the load may not be permitted by the police to leave their homes. We will have to find a way out; those in the government and in the police, particularly at the lower levels, will have to be a bit more discerning and understand the nuances of the lockdown.

There was criticism from the Opposition that Parliament should have been adjourned earlier?Parliament was on because at that moment there was a sense that adjourning the House will create a situation of panic. The Prime Minister had said 'no' to panic and 'yes' to precautions. We had already taken steps such as banning visitors from Parliament. The message was that life has to go on but with precautions. After the "Janta curfew" on Marcch 22, and when an escalation of cases began, it was decided that there will be a locked down. After the Lok Sabha passed the finance Bill on March 23, a lockdown was announced on the 24th, in that way the timing was perfect; it was neither too late nor too early.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 12 -- The Uttar Pradesh government has begun work to restore the Kalyani river in the Barabanki district with the aim to provide employment to around 300 people including migrant workers during the Covid-19 lockdown.

The work, to be covered under the MNREG scheme, is being done on a 2.6 kilometre stretch in the Mavaiya area of Barabanki in an attempt to restore the river that is turning into a 'nullah'.

Deputy commissioner, MNREGA-Barabanki, ND Dwivedi said, "Yes, we have begun work on a stretch of 2.6 km from Mavaiya to Holi Purwa in Barabanki for restoration of the Kalyan river. A budget of about Rs 59 lakh has been earmarked under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS) for the river restoration project. We propose to create work for about 30,000 mandays by making the river 1.5 metre deep and 25 metre wide. We hope to complete the work on the present stretch by June 30."

The source of the 170 km long river is Dhannag lake, a pilgrimage centre on the Barabanki-Sitapur border. Authorities hope the restoration work will help in ensuring smooth flow of the river which ultimately merges with the Gomti river in Ayodhya.

The restoration work on the river will likely continue in other parts of the state as well, creating more jobs including for migrant workers.

"This is a small stretch of the river. If the work being carried out under MNREGA is found satisfactory, more such stretches will be undertaken to restore the river all along its course," said a district functionary associated with the MNREGS.

A campaign demanding restoration of the Kalyani was launched in 2013. But it drew the attention of district administration only recently.

"The Kalyani loses all signs of being a river right from the Dhannag lake (a large part of which is in Sitapur), the point of its origin where a fair is also organised on Kartik Purnima every year. A dried up stretch of about two kilometres is the only sign of the river's origin from the lake. About a 30 km stretch of the river from Khujji to Nigoha is being illegally used for farming. Later, water seepage from the Sharada canal reaches the Kalyani and it takes the shape of a river in some parts," said Ram Lakhan Shukla, convenor of the Save River Campaign launched in 2013.

"The district administration's decision to launch the restoration drive is a welcome move and will ensure flow of water in the river," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 30 -- The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is focusing on booth-level training and orientation programme for its grassroots-level workers in Uttarakhand in a bid to prepare them for the next assembly elections slated to be held in the hill state in 2022.

The party seeks to have an edge over its rival and as and when the poll bugle is blown.

Bansidhar Bhagat, president of the BJP's Uttarakhand unit, is on a whirlwind tour of all the 13 districts in both Garhwal and Kumaon divisions.

He is not only addressing the party office-bearers, but also meeting the supporters separately.

Also read | BJP preps for Uttarakhand polls, asks ministers to spend time in their areas

Special training is being given to all the divisional block office-bearers, youth wing, panchayat and civic body representatives by senior members of the organisation in the state.

The training programme for 20,000 BJP workers is being carried out in two phases.

The first phase, which is being carried out at the divisional block level, has started from October 28 and will continue till November 12. The second phase will be held from November 6 to 12.

The programme includes making the workers aware of the BJP's history, the party's achievements, its governance model both in states and at the Centre and also apprising them of the several schemes launched by it such as Ujjwala, Jan Dhan, their intended beneficiaries and other development initiatives.

Bhagat spoke at a divisional orientation camp at Haridwar on Friday and stressed on the need to make the workers aware about the BJP's history, which traces its origin to the Bharatiya Jana Sangh that was established in 1951. The BJP was formed on April 6, 1980.

"In all the 252 divisional blocks of the state, our party is holding training camps for a month. The exercise is receiving an overwhelming response and the results can be seen in the near future. Interaction and regular training of the party workers are imperative. We want our party office- bearers, cabinet ministers and legislators to have first-hand knowledge of our cadres' viewpoints. Our target is to ensure maximum workers undergo training and they become aware about the party's policies, achievements and social welfare schemes. They will also be made aware of the poor governance by governments of opposition parties," Bhagat said.

Jay Pal Chauhan, BJP's Haridwar president, said over 2,000 party workers are undergoing training in the district alone.

The main opposition, the Congress, was quick to find faults with the BJP's divisional-level training programme and alleged that "all is not well with the government and party workers".

Dhirendra Pratap, vice-president of the Congress's Uttarakhand unit, alleged that the BJP government has failed to live up to the voters' expectations because of a growing rift among Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat, his cabinet colleagues and the party's lawmakers.

"The BJP knows it is an uphill task to retain power in 2022 assembly polls. It is trying to gloss over the differences among its leaders and also its poor governance, which got exposed following the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak. Training modules for its workers will not come to the party's rescue. The ongoing Bihar assembly polls are a perfect example of a purported BJP wave, which was created through a carefully orchestrated media narrative, is on the wane," Pratap alleged.

Hema Bhandari, the state spokesperson for the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), alleged that Uttarakhand high court (HC) took suo motu (on its own) cognisance of the corruption charges against CM Rawat and state forest minister Harak Singh Rawat. Besides, there is growing dissidence among ex-Congress legislators, who had joined the BJP in 2017 following a revolt.

These incidents have exposed the BJP, which is reportedly known as the party with a difference, she further alleged.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 8 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday condoled the death of senior Indian-American journalist, Brahm Kanchibhotla, who died in a hospital in New York hospital late on Monday.

"Deeply anguished by the passing away of Indian-American journalist Mr. Brahm Kanchibotla. He will be remembered for his fine work and efforts to bring India and USA closer. Condolences to his family and friends. Om Shanti," the Prime Minister tweeted.

Brahm Kuchibhotla was a former contributor to United News of India news agency.

Also read| Covid-19: What you need to know today

Reports have said scores of Indian Americans have tested positive for the coronavirus in the US and several of them have died.

Houston-based IT professional Rohan Bavadekar is battling for his life on ventilator support. His wife and three children have also tested positive for Covid-19. Indian Americans have raised $204,000 in support of Bavadekar.

Another Indian American software engineer has tested positive along with his immediate family members in Silicon Valley.

Follow latest update on coronavirus here

Dr Mukul S Chandra, medical director of the Cardiac Preventive Care and Research at Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton, Ohio is on a ventilator fighting Covid-19.

Federation of Kerala Associations in North America has said that it has lost four of its community members due to the coronavirus disease.

Reports said a number of Indian Americans infected with the coronavirus in the US are in New York and New Jersey, the worst hit by the coronavirus in the country.

Also read:Govt looks at ways?to restart business ops post lockdown

Some of them, including a former president of the American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI) have been admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).

Several community leaders both in the New York metropolitan area and Greater Washington Area of Maryland and Virginia have tested positive.

According to Johns Hopkins University, there are 398,809 confirmed coronavirus cases in the US and more than 12,000 people have died.

(With agency inputs)

Click here for complete coronavirus coverage

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 20 -- When will the coronavirus pandemic peak in India? That's the question confronting India after China, for the first time in two-and-half months, reported on Thursday that it had detected no local infections the previous day, indicating perhaps that the pandemic has peaked in the country of its origin. To be sure, China faces the risk of a second wave of infections as the government eases restrictions put in place to contain the outbreak and people gradually resume normal lives.

India, according to the government, is still in the local transmission phase of the pandemic wherein the disease is restricted to people who have come in contact with infected foreigners or returning Indians who have been abroad and caught it in the places they travelled to.

There has been no community transmission and the hope is that it will hit the peak in the next two weeks and start to gradually taper; even so, it will linger on as an endemic virus, which could challenge the health-care system by resurging in the future. The less optimistic scenario is that India has to batten down for a long fight.

On whether the disease has peaked in China, in whose Wuhan city it originated at the end of 2019, scientists are divided. The optimistic view is that the infections have already peaked in China; a less rosy scenario is that it will only do so in May with 550-600 million people in the world's most populated country infected by the virus.

An analysis by David Cyranoski of the science journal Nature quoted Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese physician leading a committee on the outbreak, as saying on February 11 that the coronavirus would peak in China by the end of February.

Zhong, who is famous for discovering the virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars), said the situation had improved because of interventions such as travel restrictions. But other research suggests infections may rise again with the lifting of the restrictions.

People in Chinese cities started returning to work last week which could lead to new chains of transmission according to Hiroshi Nishiura, an epidemiologist at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan. Infections could peak between late March and late May, he said, and estimated that between 550 million and 650 million people across China are at risk of being infected, roughly 40% of the country's population.

Gabriel Leung, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, says the community has no immunity to Sars-CoV-2 and hence it will sweep through.

Epidemiologists fear that India is in for the long haul with a brief peaking in places where cases have been recorded and then spreading across the country.

"We have data only from China, Italy, Spain and Germany. In the beginning infection spread was slow in these countries. There was a slight increase in cases when infected travellers came in contact with local people. In Italy, cases jumped from a few hundreds to several thousands of cases within about a fortnight. That was the jump from local to community transmission. Whether there is community transmission in India, there is no evidence yet. But we have to take it with a pinch of salt because we are not doing widespread testing," said Amit Singh, associate professor, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

"We have to go into surveillance mode to understand that. In South Korea they went into the community and did extensive testing. But do we have enough testing kits to do that right now? Do we have reagents to do such large-scale testing. We are such a dense country and for a certain section, people live so close to each other. We have to prepare aggressively to contain this before it becomes uncontainable," warned Singh.

Dr T Jacob John, veteran virologist, emeritus professor at the Christian Medical College, Vellore and former head of the Indian Council for Medical Research's Centre for Advanced Research in Virology, echoes the concern.

"This is a new virus, so prediction may not be correct. I can tell you how microbes behave. It's a respiratory transmitted virus which catches with social contact. So we anticipate that it will spread widely which means it could range from 10% to even 40% of the population. We should expect the worst-case scenario and be happy later that it didn't turn out to be so. With time, the rising curve will be steeper."

"Don't expect a tsunami but expect an avalanche. We should make use of every single day right now," he cautioned. "I was expecting [that] from February 1, we would have a systematic building up of ICUs [intensive care units], ventilators, protective gear infrastructure and training of doctors. I was expecting a unified policy statement but we haven't heard that from the Centre."

Another public health expert, who is associated with a prominent research organisation, said on condition of anonymity: "Everything depends on how well we are able to contain community transmission. You have read so much,seen so much on social media about the flattening of the curve. So we have to see how much we can flatten that curve with interventions like social distancing."

"We are not like a small European country. Chikungunya lingered almost for a year. In some parts it spread only in the next season. The H1N1 [swine flu] outbreak became endemic after two to three seasons but the tail lingered. So this virus too may become endemic. But some habits have to change permanently like personal hygiene, washing hands, no spitting etc."

Severe cases of respiratory infection need to be tracked and documented now to ascertain community transmission, the expert suggested.

"...are we testing suspected cases? How many of them are there? Do we know if there is an increase in severe acute respiratory infections (SARI). If those numbers are going up there may be community transmission already. Our surveillance has to be strengthened and admissions with SARI will have to be notified," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 24 -- India on Monday briefed the envoys of a select group of countries, including the US and Russia, on the Pakistani origins of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who attempted to carry out an attack in Jammu and Kashmir last week.

The group of envoys, which also included the heads of mission of France and Japan, were provided a "detailed information docket" with details of the planned attack and a list of items and munitions recovered from the terrorists that "clearly indicated their Pakistani origins", said a person familiar with the development who spoke on condition of anonymity.

The envoys were briefed on how the terrorists sneaked into India through an underground tunnel in the Samba sector, and how preliminary investigations by police and intelligence agencies and markings on AK-47 rifles and other items have led India to conclude the terrorists belonged to Pakistan-based JeM.

The briefing by foreign secretary Harsh Shringla on the attempted attack at Nagrota in Jammu and Kashmir that was foiled on November 19 also focused on the "implications of the incident on security, diplomacy and the battle against terrorism", the person said.

While the envoys of at least three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council were invited for the briefing, the Chinese ambassador was not among those present, people familiar with the development said.

On November 20, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said security forces in Jammu and Kashmir had foiled a plan by JeM to "wreak major havoc and destruction" by killing four members of the group and seizing a large cache of weapons and explosives. The four terrorists were gunned down during a gun battle on the Jammu-Srinagar highway a day earlier.

India had summoned Pakistan's charge d'affaires Aftab Hassan Khan on November 21 and warned that New Delhi is "committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard its national security". India also demanded that Pakistan should desist from its policy of supporting terrorists and dismantle the terror infrastructure on its territory.

Monday's briefing was the first of several to be conducted by the external affairs ministry for small groups of envoys in view of the Covid-19 situation. Several secretaries in the ministry will brief heads of missions from countries in their areas of jurisdiction.

"The idea is to share information on the attempted attack as widely as possible with the international community," said a second person.

The envoys were told during the briefing that the incident of November 19 was part of Pakistan's ongoing terror campaign in Jammu and Kashmir and that in 2020 itself, there were some 200 incidents of terrorist violence while 199 terrorists had been neutralised.

Details of JeM's involvement in similar incidents in the past were also shared with the envoys.

"In terms of the bigger picture, it is clear the terrorists were planning the biggest terror attack in India since the Pulwama suicide bombing of February 2019 and the implications can be guessed," said the first person.

Forty Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers were killed in the Pulwama attack.

"This is part of ongoing efforts to sabotage the district development council elections in Jammu and Kashmir and carry out a terror attack aimed to coincide with the anniversary of the 2008 Mumbai terror strikes," the first person added.

The envoys were also sensitised to India's concerns regarding Pakistan's sustained efforts to destabilise the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and to subvert local elections and democracy, the people said.

...

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 21 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Assam flood situation continues to remain grim, over 24 lakh people still affected

Assam's flood situation continued to remain grim on Tuesday, as over 24 lakh people are still hit hard across the north-eastern state, which keeps a date with monsoon fury every year. Read More

Amarnath Yatra cancelled due to Covid-19, aarti to be broadcast live

The annual Amarnnath yatra has been cancelled due to the continuous rise in Covid 19 cases across Jammu and Kashmir. Shri Amarnathji Shrine Board on Tuesday said the virtual darshan of one of the holiest Hindu pilgrimages devoted to lord Shiva will continue to be telecast live during the morning and evening prayers, which will continue at the shrine. Read More

Govt asks 59 Chinese apps to ensure strict compliance to ban order

After banning 59 apps of Chinese origin, the government on Tuesday directed them to ensure strict compliance to its orders, and warned of serious action in case of any violation, according to an official source. Read More

Kangana Ranaut's team says 'don't misguide' after Swara Bhasker shares old video

Kangana Ranaut's team accused Swara Bhasker of misguiding people, when she shared an old video of the Queen actor dismissing the insider-outsider divide. Read More

It will be a full-fledged IPL most likely in the UAE: Brijesh Patel

Brijesh Patel, chairman of the IPL Governing Council, has confirmed that the BCCI has picked the United Arab Emirates as the venue for the 13th edition of the Indian Premier League and that plans are in motion to ensure a full-fledged tournament is hosted and not just a truncated one. Read More

OnePlus Nord with six cameras launched: Price, specs and availability

OnePlus has finally lifted the lid off from its much-anticipated and 'affordable' smartphone, the OnePlus Nord. The smartphone has launched in India and will be made available soon. Read More

Masked Mona Lisa, Frida Kahlo: Artist recreates famous paintings with coronavirus era twist

Canada-based photo artist Genevieve Blais' work is all about historical and theoretical narratives. And in light of the coronavirus pandemic, the artist took to Instagram and started the page, Plague History, to recreate iconic classic artworks in the age of the coronavirus pandemic. Read More

LED mask takes the spotlight after gold and silver versions

After it was announced that masks are among the essential ways to prevent the spread of the virus, people around the country have taken some rather unique and quirky steps. Another addition in that list is this mask laced with LED lights. Read More

VIDEO: Athlete forced to sell fruits on cart, another struggles for job

One of the biggest casualties of the Covid-19 pandemic and the consequent lockdown seem to be India's sportspersons. Ali Ansari, a Delhi resident and a decathlete, has been forced to sell fruits from a cart due to financial woes. Watch the video for full story.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Aug. 31 -- Metro stations in containment zones and a few other places may not immediately open when the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) restarts train operations from September 7, according to Unlock 4.0 guidelines issued by the Union home ministry, Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot said on Sunday.

The minister said tokens might not be issued initially, and only those with smart cards could be allowed. He also said that to manage footfall and enforce social distancing and other measures to curb the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), the Delhi government will deploy home guards outside the stations.

"We have discussed the opening of Delhi Metro and based on that, it has been decided that no tokens will be issued in Delhi Metro from September 7 until further orders. Also, not all Metro stations will open at once. Those in containment zones and a few others will not be opened immediately from the first day. The DMRC is currently preparing a list of stations, which will be opened based on footfall and other parameters. A list of stations where travel services are being restored will be made public soon," Gahlot said.

While DMRC and CISF Have prepared draft standard operating procedures, a final list of protocols for Metro travel will be issued by the Union ministry of housing and urban affairs (Mohua). Soon after the Centre announced that Metro operations will be allowed in a graded manner under Unlock 4.0, the ministry said a meeting of all metro rail bodies in the country will be held on September 1.

"All MDs have been asked to look into SOPs prepared by Mohua earlier in view of the current realities. All suggestions will be considered in the meeting and accordingly, SOPs will be finalised," Mohua spokesperson Rajiv Jain said on Saturday.

Gahlot said based on the SOPs issued by the ministry, the Delhi government will issue a formal order after careful consultations with Metro officials and the Delhi Disaster Management Authority (DDMA).

He explained that other than containment zones, "only a few other metro stations will not operate". "In our discussions with DMRC, it was found that ensuring social distancing and managing crowd will need a lot of manpower, which is not possible if each and every station is opened at once," he said.

When asked about the deliberations with the Delhi government, the DMRC did not offer a comment.

There are 264 Metro stations in Delhi and as on Sunday, there were 820 containment zones. The relaxations being announced by the Centre under unlock guidelines to gradually ease restrictions do not apply in containment zones.

"Inside the Metro stations, CISF and Metro security staff will ensure social distancing and face masks. Outside the stations, the Delhi government will deploy civil defence volunteers. Anyone found without a mask will be fined. Inside the Metro, a distance of 1 metre will have to be maintained between people and seats will be marked accordingly," the minister said.

DMRC officials said the focus of the SOPs will be to effectively regulate crowd so as to ensure that only 50% of a station's commuter footfall capacity is allowed at a given time.

To be sure, before the Covid-19 lockdown, Rajiv Chowk Metro station witnessed a daily footfall of nearly 5 lakh passengers, which means that at any given hour around 20,000 to 21,000 passengers were on the station premises. Now, to provide ample space for passengers to maintain social distancing, only 8,000 to 10,000 passengers will be allowed inside the station at any given hour.

For enforcing the rule, DMRC will assign supervisors who will keep a tab on the footfall and help regulate entry.

Anuj Dayal, executive director, DMRC, said, "In the coming days, we shall focus on the preparations for the eventual resumption of services. Aspects such as the implementation of hygiene-related protocols, sensitisation of staff and other functional requirements, etc., will be looked into as per the detailed SOPs that will be issued in consultation with the ministry. We shall try to provide the best possible services to our valued commuters."

A Metro official said regulation of crowd will be imperative, especially on the first 10 stations from the train's point of origin. This is primarily because passengers usually do not alight immediately after boarding from a terminal, and it is only after the first 10 stations that the entry-exit balance is attained, the official said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 11 -- The government announced on Sunday the gradual resumption of passenger train services from this week even as authorities laid down guidelines for factories that are reopening with the easing of lockdown norms in certain areas. Meanwhile, a new study suggested that the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, might have originated from a recombination of coronaviruses in bats and pangolins.

Trains to restart tomorrow, bookings open online today

The Indian Railways will resume passenger services gradually with trains to 15 destinations from May 12, the government announced on Sunday, green-lighting the operations close to two months after it stopped them as part of a strategy to slow the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Read more

India sees biggest jump in new coronavirus cases but recoveries hit 20,000

The number of people who have so far recovered after contracting the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in the country crossed 20,000 on Sunday, with a recuperating rate of 31.2%, or about one in every three patients, even as the number of infections of Sars-CoV-2 crossed 67,000. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is meeting chief ministers of states for the fifth time in 51 days on Monday. There's exactly a week to May 17, a date that can be called either the end of the first phase of India's graded exit from the lockdown, or the extension of the second phase of the lockdown but with the easing of some restrictions. Read more

Guidelines for factories to resume operations safely

The first week in which factories reopen after the national lockdown must be used as a trial period in which safety protocols are ensured and high production targets are not set, the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) said in detailed guidelines issued on Sunday. Read more

Ensure adherence to guidelines: Govt to states ahead of PM meet

The Centre told states on Sunday to ensure strict adherence of containment zone guidelines and clear demarcation of the areas with coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases, adding that they should not let any relaxation of the national lockdown lead to chaos, a development that came a day ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's meet with chief ministers. Read more

CBSE charts plan to hold remaining exams

The logistics seem daunting. Hundreds of thousands of students appearing for a test, the need to make sure social distancing norms are observed in these days of the coronavirus disease and students and invigilators get safely to the examination centres. Read more

Central teams chart Covid plan with states, flag gaps

The Centre has sent at least 50 health and disaster response teams to various states since March when cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) started rising to assist state governments in managing cases and containing the spread of infection. Read more

Migrant workers battle stigma, bias back home

Migrant workers returning from India's industrial states are battling stigma and bias in their home villages in some parts of Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha because local residents suspect that the labourers are potential carriers of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19 . Read more

Govt sends aid to Indian Ocean states

India has despatched a warship with two medical teams and medical supplies to help authorities in the Maldives, Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros and Seychelles combat Covid-19, symbolising the importance attached by New Delhi to its maritime neighbourhood. Read more

25 Chinese items may face extension of dumping duty

India may extend anti-dumping duties and safeguards on more than two dozen Chinese goods ranging from calculators and USB drives to steel, solar cells and Vitamin E amid concern that a flood of imports would kill domestic manufacturers who will lose duty protection soon against such products , two officials aware of the development said. Read more

One man, 8 profiles and an elaborate hoax

Sameer Chaturvedi woke up on April 1 to a raft of WhatsApp messages. His college friends were discussing the paucity of ventilators to treat Covid-19. On his extended family group, relatives were blaming people who attended a religious congregation in New Delhi for the outbreak. Read more

Regulator approves first trial of lab-grown antibody drug

The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) on Sunday approved the first multi-centric trial of Tocilizumab in India after the second-line drug to treat rheumatoid arthritis emerged as a treatment option for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Read more

ICMR develops test kit to detect Covid antibodies

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has developed 'Covid Kavach ELISA', a test kit for detection of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) antibodies, Union health minister Harsh Vardhan announced on Sunday. Read more

Covid may have originated from recombined bat, pangolin coronaviruses

A new study has suggested that the Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, might have originated from a recombination of coronaviruses in a bat and pangolin. The findings strengthen the theory that pangolins could be the intermediate host for transmission of Sars-CoV-2 to humans. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Kolkata, March 24 -- A 57-year-old man, who contracted the coronavirus disease or Covid-19 without any foreign travel or contact history with another patient, died on Monday afternoon at a private hospital in Kolkata, fuelling fears that the infection had entered a community transmission stage.

The man was a resident of Dum Dum in the North 24 Parganas district. His wife and five other family members are in isolation at a state-run hospital. Health department officials said the victim went to Bilaspur in Uttar Pradesh in the last week of February and returned on March 2 by train.

This was the first Covid-19 death in the state. "The 57-year-old male patient, who was admitted in the Salt Lake unit on March 16 with high fever and cough, expired at 3.35 pm. Our critical care team tried their best...but he could not be revived," the hospital said in a statement.

"All necessary steps have been taken to ensure the critical care team is safe. The state health department has been notified and all formalities will be followed as per norms," the statement added.

The case has triggered fears of community transmission because there was no recorded history of travelling abroad or contact with any Covid-19 patient. The Union health ministry has denied possibility of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case.

Director of West Bengal health services Ajay Chakraborty said, "On the night of March 1, he travelled in Azad Hind Express which came from Pune which is one of the hotspots."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 31 -- : The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday when officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,400 people who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several foreign nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of the country such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz -- which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters -- such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practiced here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors, with the basement and the ground housing a kitchen and a communal dining area. Officials fear that such a nature of the facility may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on Feb 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others. The six who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- The Delhi government has deployed school teachers besides civil defence volunteers at various borders to check and report any illegal transportation of poultry or live birds into Delhi. Teachers, however, urged deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia on Wednesday to withdraw the order.

In a state revenue department order on Tuesday, the government constituted five surveillance teams - each led by a government school teacher and accompanied by two civil defence volunteers - to check the spread of bird flu in Delhi.

The viral infection was confirmed in the city on Monday after more than 150 while birds were found dead in various parts of the capital, prompting the Delhi government to shut the Ghazipur poultry market for 10 days and ban the import of live birds without a valid health certificate and the sale of packaged or processed chicken.

The teams have been asked to stay put at the borders from 8 pm to 6 am, something that has not gone down well with teachers. These teams have been deployed at Auchandi Border, Saboli border, Safiabad border, Lampur border and Muneerpur border - entry points from where most of the poultry or live birds arrive in Delhi.

The government order states that the teams have to ensure that no vehicle carrying live poultry birds in Delhi is allowed to enter without a valid veterinary health certificate from an authorised veterinarian of the concerned state government, declaring the farm of origin of birds as free from any infection and contagious disease of birds. They were also asked to prevent the entry or sale of dressed, processed or canned chicken and its products in the Capital.

The government school teachers' association, (GSTA), Delhi, on Wednesday wrote to Sisodia, who is both education and development minister, to repeal the order and put their teachers back on school duty.

"The revenue department has deputed government school teachers on Delhi borders to check for and to prevent the spread of bird flu under day/night duty. Moreover, teachers have been mostly assigned midnight hours of this duty," read the letter signed by Ajay Veer Yadav, general secretary, GSTA.

"Sir, the teaching community selflessly served when the government and the citizens needed them for Covid-19 prevention. But the revenue department is now taking advantage of the situation and just harassing teachers into unjustified duties... I request you to intervene and stop such deputation of teaching community...," it stated.

The Delhi government did not respond to queries regarding the teachers' demand.

A teacher deputed at the borders said there was no detailed brief on what is allowed.

"As of now the order has not been taken back, so I have to report at the border and perform my duty. But I am not sure what exactly we are supposed to do. Will the vehicles even stop on our insistence? We as school teachers know nothing about a health certificate issued by a veterinarian," the teacher said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 25 -- As India goes into a 21-day lockdown to keep around 1.3 billion people at home, it's important to note that not even China where the novel coronavirus first emerged in late December and then rapidly spread tried to put all of its 1.4 billion people behind locked doors.

It locked down one province, Hubei, with around 60 million people, and implemented tough restrictions on movement and banned mass gatherings and closed down schools and tourist spots in the rest of the country.

Beijing, the sprawling capital of more than 21 million, for example, was never under a lockdown - it put in place restrictions on residential communities including not allowing outsiders from coming into apartment complexes, made wearing masks mandatory and urged people not to mingle.

(Those restrictions are still in place as of Wednesday though signs of normalcy are now more evident on the streets of Beijing.)

Beijingers, and the residents of other regions and cities in China were not stopped from stepping out, buying essentials, and returning home.

Follow coronavirus live updates here.

Public transport including the subways and buses and taxis operated.

The delivery systems including couriers operated unhindered too - only residents had to step out of their homes to pick up delivery as courier personnel were not allowed inside apartment complexes or homes.

But in Wuhan, a city of 11 million, it was a different story.

In that city, where the virus first emerged last year, communities were sealed off, internal transport was suspended and people were not allowed outside their homes.

How did Wuhan sustain the lockdown for weeks?

Thousands of volunteers who signed up to help communities were deployed.

At the peak of the lockdown, one member of each family was allowed to step out of their homes to pick up the deliveries of essentials, which were brought to the gate of the community by registered volunteers.

According to official statistics quoted by news agency Xinhua, the city has 1.5 million registered volunteers.

"From medical aid, food, and goods assistance and psychological support to transport and community services, thousands of volunteers responded quickly after the city was locked down to curb the spread of the deadly virus," Xinhua reported earlier this month.

Until the first week of March, the Communist Party of China's (CPC) Youth League had trained thousands of volunteers to ".serve as deliverymen, drivers, coordinators and community workers in grocery stores, neighborhoods, designated hospitals and makeshift hospitals to receive infected patients".

By that week, 7148 communities in Wuhan had implemented "closed-door management".

Clothed in protective clothing and armed with loudspeakers, community workers were deployed daily across Wuhan to publicly announce new information about the rapidly evolving epidemic situation.

Besides volunteers, a developed online system in China helped locked up residents in Wuhan - and the not-so-locked up all over China - to buy what they wanted on the internet.

However, the system of deploying community workers and volunteers at a short notice will be difficult to emulate in India as it is, maybe uniquely, a Chinese phenomenon - drawing its origins and nourishment from the authoritarian nature of the Chinese system.

"As the coronavirus spreads around the world, other countries must be careful about looking to China for examples of how to manage it. Cities in other countries do not have a political culture that would allow them to replicate what China has done, or the same governance structures," Toby Lincoln, an expert on Chinese urban history with the University of Leicester recently wrote for the London-based New Statesman.

Lincoln wrote that Chinese urban governance - and the current coronavirus lockdown - is overseen by local residents' committees.

"These have their origins in the 1950s, when the CPC established control over cities. Urban districts were sub-divided into residents' committees, made up of several hundred households, and residents' small groups, composed of fewer still. They were staffed by CPC officials and local volunteers, and were responsible for keeping order, putting up propaganda posters, and running political campaigns," wrote Lincoln.

The implementation of that tried - and now seriously tested -- granular tradition was aided in China, and especially in Wuhan, by the seriousness of the epidemic situation.

"At the individual level, the Chinese people have reacted to this outbreak with courage and conviction. They have accepted and adhered to the starkest of containment measures - whether the suspension of public gatherings, the month-long 'stay at home' advisories or prohibitions on travel," the WHO-China Joint Mission report said after completing its two-week mission in February.

It's important to remember that Wuhan has reported more than 50000 cases and over 2500 deaths - by far the most in China - until now.

The residents knew they were up against a deadly outbreak which had not only severely disrupted their lives but had the potential to ravage it further.

There was no other option for Wuhan but to be locked down.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 28 -- As the 13-member WHO team stepped out of their two-week quarantine in the central Chinese city of Wuhan on Thursday to begin probing the origin of the Covid-19 virus, a motley group of Chinese citizens will be tracking their activities and statements.

They want answers - primarily, why was there a delay last January in making the information public that a contagious virus was spreading in Wuhan?

Zhang Hai, 51, thinks he lost his father to the deadly infection because that critical piece of information was missing when he brought the senior citizen for a leg surgery from Shenzhen city to Wuhan last January.

Though not very optimistic, Zhang hopes that he would get an opportunity to talk to the WHO team - a prospect which is increasingly looking bleak after he and other disgruntled family members of victims were blocked out of Chinese social media to begin with.

The itinerary of the 13 WHO experts, expected to be here for two weeks under global glare, wasn't revealed by the Chinese foreign ministry on Thursday.

It is expected that they will interact with Chinese scientists and experts, visit the seafood market linked to the first cases and interact with doctors at hospitals that dealt with the deluge of Covid-19 patients in Wuhan.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian said on Thursday that all activities of the group should comply with the principles of scientific traceability of the virus and should be used to prevent future risks and protect the safety and health of the people's lives are the highest goals.

"Highest goals". That's the phrase Zhang did not agree with during the interview with the Hindustan Times.

Zhang said when he reached and admitted his father to a hospital on January 17, nobody told him about the coronavirus - by January 17 at least one person had already died of the virus.

Zhang's father died of the infection on January 30 after slipping into a coma.

Since then, he has been trying to get some answers.

"I openly advocated to pursue the responsibility of Wuhan authorities on Weibo (China's Twitter-like service). But my Weibo account was censored. Wuhan authorities covered up the epidemic.The cover-up was deliberate murder, I think," he said.

"My six Weibo accounts were deleted".

The family's lawsuits were not accepted by the court, Zhang said.

"Our WeChat group was blocked when the WHO team came to Wuhan. This means that Wuhan authorities are afraid of the families contacting the WHO experts. I think authorities here have a guilty conscience."

Zhang hopes that the WHO team could meet the families of the victims and hear their experience.

There seems to be little chance of that happening though with Washington and Beijing already involved in a war of words over the team's visit.

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, new White House spokesperson Jen Psaki said it was "imperative we get to the bottom" of how the virus appeared and spread worldwide.

A "robust and clear" probe is required, Psaki said.

Beijing expectedly snapped back on Thursday, warning the US to "respect facts and science, respect the hard work" of the WHO experts.

They must be allowed to work "free from political interference", Zhao said.

For people like Zhang, the geopolitics involving the deadly virus is meaningless.

"I believe if they did not cover up and took measures earlier, the virus could be controlled. I am not afraid because I am telling the truth. I want to tell the authorities that I will continue to talk until they. meet our demands. I did not frame the story. Everything I said just now is true."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 15 -- On Human Rights day, every person is reminded of the basic rights, everyone is inherently entitled to as a human being irrespective of race, colour, religion, sex, language, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. This year, Vartika Nanda organised the Tinka Tinka India Awards- 2020 on Human Rights Day, awards aimed at the contribution of jail inmates and staff. She says, "Due to the pandemic, everything was virtual. This is the first time that inmates joined live and shared their thoughts in the presence of senior jail officials."

This year, the theme was the one thing that has hijacked imaginations all over the world, 'Corona in Jail.' Vartika says, " There were 3 categories this year, namely Painting, Special Mention and Prison Administration. 7 inmates received awards in the Painting category while 6 were chosen for their special contribution to prison life. Prison staff was awarded too."

40-year-old Amitabh Bachchan incarcerated in District Jail, Firozabad was chosen for his extraordinary work as a Health Warrior. He has been sanitizing the jail since the onset of Covid-19. And on the other hand, 53-year-old Ajay Chauhan from District Jail Mainpuri was chosen for his extraordinary work in Prison Jail radio, helping inmates fight depression during the pandemic. Ashok Kumar, logged in Model Jail, Chandigarh made the maximum number of masks during Covid-19. Vartika says,"Their hard work and efforts need to be respected and brought to light and these inmates received a special mention through the Tinka Tinka awards."

The prison officials were given the honour for their performance in reformative and rehabilitative activities being run for the welfare of inmates.

The award was dedicated to Late Raj Kumar Tripathi who lost his life while doing his duty as Deputy Superintendent in District Jail, Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh. Aniraj Tripathi, his son, says, "Tinka Tinka is a novel initiative to value the sacrifice of prison staff, an area which is usually ignored. My dad is a corona warrior in the real sense. In such professions, interaction with the public is more and that is when he contracted the virus."

In a time like this, when the world needs to come together, more than ever before, this initiative brings together the wholesome efforts carried out for the sake of humanity and is a tribute to inmates and the jail staff.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 14 -- An air bubble between India and Canada will become operational on August 15, with national carriers of both nations aiming to restore commercial passenger services to pre-pandemic level.

This air bubble for India will be the fifth of its kind, as the country has similar arrangements in place with the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and France.

Air Canada will start operating flights between Toronto and New Delhi on Saturday, with the first flight returning on Tuesday.

Also read: Air bubbles only way forward for international travel during pandemic, says Hardeep Puri

Till date, over 50 flights operated by Air India under the Vande Bharat Mission have repatriated Indians from Canada. These flights have connected several cities in India with the Canadian cities of Toronto and Vancouver. They have so far ferried nearly 9,000 persons back to India, and with 20 more such flights scheduled for this month, that number is expected to cross 10,000.

Meanwhile, the Canadian Government, through its High Commission in Delhi and its Consulates in India, has also operated 41 repatriation flights, but those were chartered. Air Canada will return to India after nearly five months. Though the current arrangement of three-flights-a-week between Delhi and Toronto is only listed till the end of August, it is expected to be extended.

The two countries were prompt in establishing the air bubble, with the Canadian Government seeking permission to this effect last week. "It adds to the convenience of Indian and Canadian citizens," India's High Commissioner to Ottawa Ajay Bisaria said.

The Indian Government is also working at synchronizing sharing of data with Air Canada for smooth implementation of restrictions and precautions related to the Covid-19 pandemic.

Canadians of Indian origin holding Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) cards will be able to travel on these flights to India. This underscores the importance of these cards, since those who do not have it will have to apply for an emergency visa to travel, Bisaria said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 17 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on late Tuesday night wished United States President-elect Joe Biden and congratulated him on his victory in the recently concluded Presidential polls, underlining increased focus on Indo-US ties.

"Spoke to US President-elect @JoeBiden on phone to congratulate him. We reiterated our firm commitment to the Indo-US strategic partnership and discussed our shared priorities and concerns - Covid-19 pandemic, climate change, and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific Region," PM Modi said in a tweet on Tuesday.

The prime minister also wished Indian-origin US Vice President-elect Kamala Harris on her election to the US White House and country's second highest office. "I also conveyed warm congratulations for VP-elect @KamalaHarris. Her success is a matter of great pride and inspiration for members of the vibrant Indian-American community, who are a tremendous source of strength for Indo-US relations."

Also read: Indo-US ties will pick up, Joe Biden no stranger to India, says S Jaishankar

PM Modi's call to Biden and Harris comes almost ten days after both the newly elected Democrat officials won in a tightly fought Presidential race with Republican nominee President Donald Trump.

Earlier in the day, external affairs minister S Jaishankar had indicated swift action in strengthening ties with the US administration and established old ties the country has with Biden. Jaishankar said that the President-elect Biden is "not a stranger to India or to the relationship" and India has dealt with him in his former roles as vice president in the Barack Obama administration.

The Indian government will face no problems in taking forward ties with the US under the Joe Biden administration because of the strong element of bipartisan support for the bilateral relationship, external affairs minister S Jaishankar had said.

"I am very confident that we will pick up where we left off (with the Donald Trump administration), we have done that over the last four administrations," Jaishankar said while participating in an online discussion organised by the think tanks Centre for International Governance Innovation and Gateway House.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- An explosive device went off on Thursday a short distance from the site in Kabul where the cremation of the 25 Sikhs killed in a terror attack was underway, though there were no casualties, according to media reports.

The device exploded in a house in Qalacha area, not far from where members of the Sikh minority were cremating those killed in the attack on a Sikh place of worship at Shor Bazar on Wednesday. A second explosive device was defused by Afghan security forces in the same area, the media reports said.

People familiar with developments confirmed on Thursday that an Indian national named Tian Singh, a resident of New Delhi, was among the 25 people killed in the attack. Singh's wife, in a letter sent to the Prime Minister, requested the repatriation of his body.

External affairs minister S Jaishankar tweeted: "Deeply concerned at the blasts reported near the cremation site of those killed during the attack on Gurudwara Sahib in Kabul." He added the Indian embassy was in touch with Afghan authorities to "ensure adequate security onsite as well as safe return of families to their homes".

Jaishankar also said the Indian embassy was working to repatriate the body of Tian Singh. Though Singh's wife, in her letter, also called for those wounded in Wednesday's attack to be shifted to New Delhi, Jaishankar said medical opinion was "against moving [the] injured at this stage".

The external affairs minister said there was "understandable grief and anger" over the terror attack and the Indian embassy was in touch with the families of those killed and injured.

Indian ambassador Vinay Kumar visited the Sikh place of worship and met community leaders and families of the victims on Thursday. He was told the injured were receiving satisfactory treatment.

The Islamic State claimed the attack, though Afghan officials said the Pakistan-based Haqqani Network was behind it. In a statement issued late on Wednesday, the Islamic State claimed the attack was "revenge" for developments in Kashmir and that it was carried out by an attacker using the "kunya" or assumed name of "Abu Khalid al Hindi", suggesting that he was of Indian origin.

The Islamic State provided no other information about the attacker or his origin. Afghan officials have said four suicide attackers were involved in the incident and that they were all killed.

The suicide attackers targeted a "dharamshala" in Kabul's Shor Bazar, which has a sizeable population of the Hindu and Sikh minorities. Reports said the attack began at 7.45am Afghan time.

Images of the shrine posted on social media showed bloodstains on its floor. Other photos showed security forces and local residents evacuating the injured in ambulances. Witnesses said they heard several explosions during the gun battle.

On Wednesday, India condemned the attack and commended the Afhgan security forces. "Such cowardly attacks on the places of religious worship of the minority community, especially at this time of Covid-19 pandemic, are reflective of the diabolical mindset of the perpetrators and their backers," the external affairs ministry said in a statement, in which it hailed the "valorous response to the attack and exemplary courage and dedication" of the Afghan forces.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 20 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order? That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "premeditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyberattack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure, and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack.

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef.

South China Sea

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China.

Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea.

Senkaku Islands

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation. Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral security dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Hong Kong

China has never been happy with the "one country, two systems" principle put in place for governing the special administrative region of Hong Kong when it was returned by the UK in 1997. After Hong Kong was roiled by protracted and widespread protests last year over the administration's efforts to push a bill that would allow people to be extradited to mainland China for trial, Beijing moved amid the Covid-19 crisis to draft a national security law for the region that analysts say will undermine the semi-autonomous region's systems. The draft law, submitted to a standing committee of the National People's Congress this week, covers secession, subversion of state power, terror activities, and foreign interference.

India, in line with its policy of not speaking on the domestic and internal politics of China, has not publicly commented on the protests or the new draft law.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 27 -- A war of words between the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress over the Sino-India border dispute and alleged links between China and the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation (RGF), a trust chaired by Congress president Sonia Gandhi, intensified on Saturday with allegations and counter-allegations flying thick and fast on both sides.

BJP president JP Nadda asked the principal opposition party a series of questions, reiterated allegations that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) was in power at the Centre, said his party will leave no stone unturned in "exposing double-faced politicians", and alleged that fugitive economic offender Mehul Choksi gave donations to the trust.

The BJP says both the Chinese government and the Chinese embassy in India have contributed to RGF, and even the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund (PMNRF) donated money to the trust when the Congress-led UPA was in power.

"I want to tell Sonia Gandhi that under the garb of China and Covid-19 crisis, one should not shy away from answering the questions the nation wants to know... It's a shame. It's a sacrifice of national interest by accepting money from foreign powers in personal trusts," Nadda said in a statement.

He alleged that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy between 2005 and 2009 and from "tax havens" such as Luxembourg between 2006 and 2009. NGOs and companies with "deep commercial interests" also donated to the foundation, he said.

"Congress and corruption are synonymous," Nadda said, asking the opposition party to come clean on its "links" with China and the details of its MoU (memorandum of understanding) with the Communist Party of China. He said India's trade deficit with China soared to $36.2 billion in 2013-14 from $1.1 billion in 2003-2004, and asked if it was a "quid pro quo". The Congress-led UPA was in power between 2004 and 2014.

Nadda also targeted former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, accusing him of allocating Rs 100 crore to the foundation as the finance minister in 1991, when India was going through its "worst financial crisis".

Singh and Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi and P Chidambaram are trustees of RGF, which was set up in June 1991.

"RGF not only takes money from scams but also gives dodgy donations to their own organisations. Why did it turn donate money to Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust controlled by the family and Christian Missionary organisations like World Vision?" Nadda asked, referring to the Nehru-Gandhi family.

He alleged that RGF worked with the China Association for Internationally Friendly Contact, "which is just a vehicle of the Central Military Commission of China to infiltrate and influence top voices in other countries".

He said the UPA government forced multiple ministries, including the home ministry and the health ministry, and public sector units such as SAIL, SBI, GAIL, and ONGC to donate to RGF. He also wondered how RGF, a private charitable trust, could function from Jawahar Bhawan, a prime location in the heart of Delhi.

"Why was a Congress man's company auditing PMNRF? PMNRF auditor's name is Thakur, Vaidyanathan and Aiyyar Co, founded by Mr Rameshwar Thakur (who was a Rajya Sabha MP for two terms, former MoS finance, and the governor of four states)," Nadda said.

In its reply, the Congress dared the ruling party to ask the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) - the BJP's ideological mentor - and think-tanks Vivekananda International Foundation and India Foundation -considered pro-BJP - to disclose their source of funding and donors.

"Will the BJP disclose the source of funding, amounts received, name of donors [including of Chinese origin] for "Overseas Friends of BJP [OF-BJP]"?" Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala asked. "...What is the connection of Shri Rajkumar Naraindas Sabnani alias Raju Sabnani to OF-BJP?" he added. Sabnani is a businessman based in Hong Kong.

Surjewala said neither did RGF receive any donation from Choksi, wanted in the Punjab National Bank fraud case, and nor did it give him any loan to him. But the foundation received "a modest donation of Rs. 10 lakh from Naviraj Estates Pvt. Ltd. in 2013, of which Shri Choksi was one of the Directors".

S Gurumurthy, the chairman of Vivekananda International Foundation (VIF), said on Twitter its trust deed prohibits receipt of foreign donations. "...It permits donations from people of Indian origin associated with VIF. As yet no one has got associated and no donations have been received," he said.

Earlier on Saturday, former Union minister P Chidambaram targeted Nadda in a series of tweets, a day after the BJP chief accused the Congress of committing a "brazen fraud" by diverting public money in PMNRF to a "family-run foundation".

PMNRF was set up in 1948 by India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, entirely with public contributions. It does not get any budgetary support. PMNRF resources are utilised primarily to give relief to families of those killed in natural calamities, and to victims of major accidents and riots, according to its website.

Chidambaram said Nadda "specialises in half-truths", and pointed out that Surjewala "exposed his half-truths".

In his rebuttal on Friday, Surjewala issued a statement saying the BJP and the central government "keep referring to a 2005 grant of Rs 1.45 crores" from the Chinese embassy to RGF for a disabled persons' welfare programme and research on Sino-India relations. The statement also said after the 2004 tsunami, RGF received Rs 20 lakh from PMNRF for relief activities in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

"What has the grant to RGF 15 years ago got to do with China's intrusion into Indian territory in 2020 under the watch of the Modi government?

"Suppose RGF returns the Rs 20 lakh, will PM Modi assure the country that China will vacate its transgression and restore status quo ante?" Chidambaram asked.

The allegations and counter-allegations come against the backdrop of a face-off between India and China along the contested border. Twenty Indian Army soldiers and an undisclosed number of Chinese troops died in a brawl in eastern Ladakh's Galwan Valley on June 15, ratcheting up tensions between the neighbours amidst a military build-up on both sides of the disputed border. While the Congress accuses the government of ceding ground to the Chinese, the ruling BJP says the opposition party is playing with issues of national security. The Congress also says the BJP is raking up the RGF donation issue to divert attention.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 1 -- On March 25 as Indians woke up to the first day of a three-week lockdown to stave off the Covid-19 epidemic, disease surveillance officials in the national capital had just begun uncovering a problem that would soon turn into an epidemiological headache spanning 19 states: hundreds of members of a religious sect may have already taken the infection to far reaches of the country, sharing flights, buses, trains and community events even before the country could be shut down.

Tips about an infection hotspot at the Tablighi Jamaat's Nizamuddin headquarters began trickling in to the Delhi Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) office that week, leading the district surveillance officer (DSO) to dispatch a team on March 26. Six people were found with symptoms at the building, isolated and sent for testing.

On March 29, the six were confirmed as having Covid-19. A day later, the number grew to 24. The reports of the 441 people from the Markaz suspected to have the disease are still awaited.

IMPORTED INFECTION?

The origin of the infection in the sect possibly goes back to February 27, when 16,000 members began a congregation at the Sri Petaling mosque in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Over four days, hundreds of worshippers prayed shoulder-to-shoulder inside a mosque complex similar to the one in Nizamuddin, while some guests posted selfies as they shared food, social posts from the event would later show.

Among the attendees were those from China and South Korea -- two countries with high rates of coronavirus infections at the time.

Two weeks later, Malaysia's cases grew to nearly 670 -- 500 of these had been at the congregation, known as an Ijtema. As the foreign attendees headed back home, Brunei confirmed 50 cases linked to the gathering, Singapore identified five, Cambodia 13 and Thailand at least two.

Around the same time, in mid-March, Indonesia cancelled a Tablighi Jamaat Ijtema, but not before thousands had already gathered on the Sulawei islands.

In India, officials are now drawing connections to cases in these countries. According to immigration data accessed by HT, at least 227 foreigners were among the estimated 8,000 who had been at the Nizamuddin headquarters in March - overlapping with other visitors in the six-storey, hostel-like facility with common cooking and dining facilities. The foreigners included people from Malaysia and Indonesia (where large crowds had already gathered) and China, where infections had by then been widespread.

A significant number of the international arrivals took place around March 10, according to officials in the Delhi Police. It wasn't until later that the Indian government made quarantine mandatory for arrivals from China (March 13) and banned flights from Malaysia (March 17).

Some of the people who arrived, either with the infection or were subsequently infected at the building in Nizamuddin, began travelling before the outbreak turned into a serious crisis for India. It is these people whose illness would later connect back to the building in Nizamuddin as disease surveillance officers in several states started separately sounding out their Delhi counterparts.

THE INDONESIAN GROUP

The most important alert came from Telangana, where officials found 10 Indonesians who boarded the Andhra Pradesh Sampark Kranti in Delhi on March 13 to arrive at Ramagundam in Telangana the next day.

From there, they group went to Karimnagar in autorickshaws, took part in an Ijtema a day later and spent nights at a local madarsa. Around March 16, some of their local associates noticed their symptoms - bringing to light what would be the earliest confirmed case linked to the Tablighi Jamaat's Delhi centre.

According to a health official aware of the contact tracing, the alerts were sent to the Delhi IDSP between March 20 and 24.

"Our surveillance officers went to the Nizamuddin area last week to investigate after we received reports from several states that the people who tested positive there had a history of travel to the area. That's when we discovered that there were so many people living in the compound and started screening them for symptoms," said an official from Delhi IDSP cell.

Another alert was sent from neighbouring Andhra Pradesh around the same time when a 52-year-old man tested positive; he had been at the Delhi building.

In all, six of the approximately 12 people linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have succumbed to the infection in Hyderabad.

"It was rigorous contact tracing exercise conducted by the Telangana government for a section of cases reported in their state that led to the zeroing-in on the infection source in Delhi. It was followed up here and the cluster was discovered," said the official cited above, asking not to be named.

KASHMIRI PREACHER

The second alert came from Kashmir. On March 25, a 65-year-old preacher who tested positive for Covid-19 succumbed to his illness in Srinagar. When health department officials worked back his travel history, they found that he had left the Tablighi building on March 9 after staying there for two days.

The man then went to Deoband (March 9-11) - a town considered as being historically linked to the Jamaat - before travelling to Samba (March 12-16) and finally reaching Srinagar, where he was based and was known as a prominent Islamic preacher.

According to officials, it was his reputation as a prominent preacher that came to attention when he died, triggering alerts that were sent to Delhi as well as Uttar Pradesh.

ANDAMAN ISLANDS

On March 24, a day before the domestic flight ban kicked in, a man in his late 20s reached Port Blair and started showing symptoms for the disease. He tested positive on Sunday, triggering the contact-tracing exercise that placed him at the building in Nizamuddin a week ago.

Routinely, officials alert their counterparts in other states if the contact-tracing determines that a Covid-19 patient was in close vicinity to others.

According to disease surveillance official, he took a flight with a stopover at Kolkata. At least one other person who was with him on the flight has also tested positive.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- The annual Rath Yatra scheduled to be held on June 23 at the Jagannath Temple in Odisha's Puri district will not take place this year in view of the Covid -19 pandemic, the Supreme Court ordered on Thursday.

The order was passed after a plea by an NGO, Odisha Vikas Parishad, pointed out the public health risk involved if more than one million devotees congregate for the event at a time when Covid-19 cases are rising.

"Having regard to the danger presented by such a large gathering of people for the Rath Yatra, we consider it appropriate in the interests of public health and safety of citizens who are devotees to restrain the respondents (state and district authorities and managing committee of Jagannath temple) from holding the Rath Yatra this year", the bench headed by Chief Justice of India (CJI) SA Bobde ordered.

The court also directed that no such Rath Yatra should be allowed in any other part of Odisha.

"We direct that there shall be no Rath Yatra anywhere in the temple town (Puri) of Odisha or in any other part of the state this year. We further direct that there shall be no activities secular or religious associated with the Rath Yatra during this period", the order read.

The Rath Yatra lasts for 10 to 12 days and involves a procession of chariots containing the deities Lord Jagannath, his brother Lord Balabhadra, and sister Devi Subhadra.

On May 7, the Union home ministry granted permission to the Odisha government to carry out the construction of chariots for conducting Rath Yatra subject to the condition that no religious congregation takes place while it is constructed.

The central government had also left it to the discretion of the Odisha government to decide whether or not to hold the Rath Yatra based on the conditions prevailing at the relevant point of time.

The Odisha government, on June 1, issued guidelines extending the lockdown in all Covid-19 containment zones in the state until midnight of June 30. It allowed reopening of prohibited activities in a phased manner in areas outside containment zones, though religious places continue to remain closed for the public till June 30. Even in areas which are not containment zones, social, political, sports, entertainment, academic, cultural and religious functions and other large congregations remain closed.

All the temples, including the Jagannath temple in Puri, are closed across the state for devotees since March 22 in view of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The petitioner pointed out that despite the restrictions, all the rituals leading to the Rath Yatra, such as Askhay Trutiya (the day on which the construction of the chariots start) and Snana Purnima were allowed to be performed by the state government, leading to the conclusion that the government may allow the Rath Yatra on June 23.

When the case came up for hearing on Thursday, the bench, which also comprised justices Dinesh Maheshwari and AS Bopanna, made it clear at the outset that it was inclined to stay the festivities.

Solicitor general Tushar Mehta, representing the central government, said that the issue was sensitive and sought a day's time so that government could study the issue and get back to the court with a response but the bench disagreed.

"This is a very serious matter. We will pass an order today. Lord Jagannath will forgive us," CJI Bobde remarked.

The petitioner also referred to the Tablighi Jamaat Muslim congregation in mid-March at the Nizamuddin area in Delhi that led to a spurt in Covid-19 cases across the country.

The Odisha government, represented by senior counsel Harish Salve, did not oppose the prayer in the petition but requested the court that whatever order it passes should be clear and precise leaving no room for any confusion.

As the hearing drew to a close, the CJI, on a lighter note, alluded to the origins of the English word juggernaut. "It is derived from Jagannath and it means something which cannot be stopped," he said.

"But the court has stopped it today," Mehta responded.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 12 -- The coronavirus pandemic is reshaping how the government is interacting with businesses and its citizens.

With the pandemic-related disruptions upending processes that need physical inspections and lengthy paper trails, the government is shedding its rigid ways to adopt new systems, including digitisation, to eliminate hurdles for businesses.

For instance, when finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman met businesses in mid-February when the outbreak was raging in China, the biggest fear conveyed by executives was a shortage of raw materials from India's northern neighbour, with supplies barely lasting two to three weeks.

That set off a series of steps to overhaul India's handling of cross-border trade. And, on June 8, a critical experiment in customs reforms-faceless assessment-went live. Such assessments have now been rolled out at Chennai and Bengaluru, starting with mechanical, electrical and electronic machinery, and will be gradually scaled up across the country by the end of the year.

The idea is to eliminate discretion in decision-making, ensure physical distancing and fast-track clearance of goods, saving time and costs for importers.

M Ajit Kumar, chairman of Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs, earlier this week told field officials to "leave no stone unturned" in rolling out and scaling up faceless assessment to make it uniform and speedy. "Faceless assessment would be a complete departure from existing manner of customs assessment," Kumar told officials in a June 8 letter reviewed by Mint.

Industry executives said that the move will particularly benefit small businesses.

"It will help in avoiding delays even if officials are not able to be physically present at workplace during the pandemic," said Chandrakant Salunkhe, founder and president of SME Chamber of India and SME Importers Association of India.

In its ease of doing business reports, the World Bank had flagged cross-border trade as a key area that needed reforms. In its 2020 report, India was among the top 10 countries that made progress in ease of doing business, including in cross-border trade.

The disruptions caused by the pandemic gave it momentum, with the government announcing round-the-clock clearance of goods at all customs facilities on February 20, followed by a series of steps to simplify procedures.

That included setting up a single-window Covid-19 helpdesk, automated release of consignments all over the country from March 5, provisional clearance of goods with preferential treatment without original certificate of origin, personal hearing through videoconferencing, a drive to clear pending refunds and exemption of demurrage charges during the lockdown.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Kishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu.

Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials? For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world. There is no second and third in the world on influenza, if you ask me. Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast. It will take at least three months to do animal trials to establish the safety properly. Then Phase 1 is only a one dose vaccine with 30 days' trial. Phase 2 we don't have to do because the same platform (nasal route) has already established the concentration required already in humans - so it can be minimised. Then for Phase 3, we need to have 1,000 people, and that is going to be another 45 days of trial in India. Human trial is going to be very short; the worry is only the animal trials as we want to establish the safety and efficacy, which is extremely critical.

Why a nasal vaccine?We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead, but if there is an animal problem then we may not even pursue the product further because the safety of people is most important.

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying, what is the capacity, when is the launch, what is the price etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups in India; what do we need for all these biological scientific companies to sustain themselves; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up.

We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country first or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do in vaccines? It is very tough. So what we did in this case is that we funded the animal trials at the University of Wisconsin. We need to build small islets of infrastructure in this country, which is what China did. They created infrastructure first, here we create institutes first.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 22 -- India cannot depend on rapid antibody tests of unproven quality for coronavirus disease (Covid-19) diagnosis and molecular tests remain the gold standard, says Dr Soumya Swaminathan, chief scientist at the Geneva-based World Health Organisation (WHO) who is leading the global partnerships on scientific research on a vaccine and drug therapies for the infection. In a phone interview, Swaminathan said India, for now, is doing enough testing, but will have to scale it up as the numbers rise. Edited excerpts:

Is India testing enough people?

Data from India shows that 4-5% people, mostly at-risk populations (symptomatics, contacts, healthworkers or people in containment zones), who have been tested in India are positive for Covid-19, compared to 30-40% in other countries. This indicates testing is appropriate to the situation, but it will have to be scaled up as numbers increase.

India has suspended rapid antibody tests because of quality issues. How reliable are rapid tests?

Quality serological tests take around six months to be developed with ample data and validation. There's a flood of tests with unproven quality, which cannot be depended on for diagnosis.

Molecular (polymerase chain reaction, or PCR) tests are the gold standard for diagnosis because they reveal current infection. This result is actionable, as it can be followed by isolation and treatment for the patient, and quarantine and testing for close contacts. Rapid antibody tests show past infection, and are useful as an epidemiological tool to map community infection and study Sars-Cov2 transmission.

Are high summer temperatures expected to slow Sars-CoV2 transmission?

We don't know if temperature will have an effect. From what we know, it may reduce transmission by 10%-20%, but we can't depend on it to stop transmission.

Only 2-8% people in affected populations have antibodies against Covid-19, indicates early data. How many does herd immunity offer protection to?

We are very far away from herd immunity. For diseases with high rates of transmission, a higher number of people need to be infected for herd immunity. This virus has an R0 of 2-3, so at least 80% people need to have antibodies against the virus for herd protection. (RO, or R-nought, is the basic reproduction ratio that gives the number of people infected by one case).

South Korea has reported reinfection or reactivation in recovered patients. Will reinfection affect global efforts to develop a vaccine against Covid-19?

There is no evidence reinfection can happen. Molecular tests often detect fragments of the virus RNA that is not viable (cannot cause infection) several days after patients have clinically recovered. Diagnostic results depend on several factors, on how samples are collected, how procedures are followed, and depending on which tests are used, can show false positives or false negatives. We need more studies of the natural history of this infection and what kind of immunity is generated by people.

CEPI (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) has identified several promising candidates, including some that are already in clinical and pre-clinical trials. How soon can a vaccine be ready?

Our goal is a vaccine before 18 months. Normally, it takes about a decade to develop a vaccine, but global partnerships (between health agencies, academics, donors, industry, nations and philanthropies) have helped hasten development of vaccines against emerging public health threats. A vaccine against Ebola took five years, the one against zika took less than two years. The global effort to develop a Covid-19 vaccine in less than 18 months is unprecedented and would be an amazing achievement.

How has the virus evolved? Is the new vaccine expected to offer long-term protection?

Over 10,000 viral genome sequences of Sars-Cov-2 have been shared by 70-80 countries with GISAID , which is a global initiative to share influenza data. Since the start of the pandemic, laboratories in countries across the world have generated viral genome sequence data with GISAID, which has enabled real-time progress in the research and development of vaccines and drug therapies.

Some evolution in the virus is bound to happen, but the rate of mutations is lower than the influenza viruses. Scientists have identified three different closely related lineages, which give valuable insights into the origin of the virus and epidemiological data on how it is spreading across the world.

None of the changes are on any important sites - the spike protein, polymerase or protease -- which are being targeted by potential vaccines and drug therapies. These sites have no major mutations, so an effective and long-lasting vaccine appears possible.

What is the progress on WHO's Solidarity Trial for Covid-19 treatment? Which are the most promising therapies?

It's too early for results. India is part of this trial, with 1,200 patients enrolled so far globally. The approvals have been obtained by the National AIDS Research Organisation in Pune, which will coordinate the study.

How do you rate India's Covid-19 response?

India's containment response was very prompt and robust and was rolled out very early, much before cases started rising. It's exemplary, and the doubling rate of Covid-19 is now eight days. The challenge for India now will be to sustain the gains when the lockdown lifts and to ensure infection rates stay low across all states.

New infection rate has dropped in some states like Kerala.

Kerala has done a great job. Several things contribute to its success, such as a strong primary health system, a good panchayati raj system and local governance, high education levels and public participation. This was also evident during the containment of Nipah virus disease outbreak, when robust public health measures ensured infection did not spread to other states.

Do you think Covid-19 has ushered in a new social reality for the world?

I believe it will, at least for the next two to three years before we get a vaccine to the majority of the susceptible population. Social distancing will become the norm, which will change the way we work and socialise, with fewer conferences, events and large gatherings.

The WHO warned of a second wave of infection on Monday. How high is the threat of resurgence after lockdowns lift?

That's really the question everyone is interested in and is impossible to predict. It depends on a number of things, and can be different in different countries. A lot depends on what steps are taken between lifting the lockdown and the steps post that, and most countries are going for a phased lifting. We see in China that it's come down to a very low level of new infections, they still have infections. It's important to get the infection rate down, as places like Taiwan, Hongkong, South Korea and Singapore have done. They still have new infections, but they are more localised outbreaks, which are quickly detected and contained.

Will US President Donald Trump's freeze on funding affect WHO's work?

The WHO will stick to its mandate and continue to support countries in implementing science-based measures to slow transmission, reverse and stop Covid-19. The 193 United Nations member-states recently pledged solidarity in the response to Covid and to support the WHO, in its global role to coordinate and give technical guidance on international health. It's early days yet, and we hope this decision does not affect our important work too much.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- As the total number of Covid-19 cases in India rose to 151 (134 active) on Wednesday, experts once again called for more widespread testing, rumours swirled on WhatsApp, more events were called off and more public places closed, and a research paper published in Nature Medicine (on March 17), debunked the theory that the Sars-Cov-2 virus that causes the disease was man-made. Globally, the number of cases crossed 200,000 on Wednesday, at least doubling in two weeks.

The big question in India is whether community transmission has already happened. This refers to the infection of a person who has not travelled to a country where the infection is raging and has not had contact with an infected person, directly or indirectly. Some experts believe this has already happened in India. As Ramanan Laxminarayan, Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy, said: "I believe community transmission began in India two to three weeks ago, around the same time as other countries. India is not an exception in the way the virus behaves. We just haven't tested a representative sample that India's population of 1.4 billion warrants". This means, it is only the lack of widespread testing in India that is keeping the numbers low. It also means the focus has to shift from prevention to mitigation.

There's already been some talk of expanding the country's testing capacity, by involving more government and private laboratories, although there has been no formal announcement on this. At some point (and sooner than later), the government has to get its hands around the whole testing problem and figure out a way of testing in scale, rapidly and inexpensively. In an interview on Tuesday, Gagandeep Kang, director of the Translational Health Science and Technology Institute and a Fellow of the Royal Society said opening up testing to Indian companies, "good at reducing cost" will help develop inexpensive tests. As of Wednesday, there are 72 government laboratories testing. Another 49 are to be added to this by the end of the week, and the government has spoken to 51 private ones about having them conduct tests. The testing protocol, however, remains the same - overseas travel to a Covid-positive country; exposure to someone diagnosed with the disease; or being a health care worker caring for Covid-19 patients. All accompanied by symptoms.

Social distancing, self-quarantines, and forced quarantines should continue, though, and be more strictly enforced. On Wednesday, there were again reports of several instances of people breaking quarantines.

India has so far not put out best-case and worst-case scenarios in terms of infections and fatalities. The mathematical models to do this exist, as does the expertise, but the number of people who have been tested is still low (11,500 as of March 17) for any of these models to be run.

Already, however, it is clear that Covid-19 is also affecting India's economy, and the livelihoods of millions. According to the latest data available, around 93 million Indians are engaged so-called casual labour, and paid every day. Of this, only 3% are engaged in public works. Already, governments around the world have announced hundreds of billions of dollars in fiscal stimuli to keep the economy afloat. US President Donald Trump is talking of cheques in the mail. The Indian government knows the benefit of direct cash transfers. The emerging consensus is that it should announce a plan for the economy.

There should also be a plan to combat rumours. On Wednesday, rumours about parts of Delhi being locked down, and wholesale markets being closed, swirled on India's most popular messaging platform WhatsApp. The platform, owned by Facebook Inc., announced a $1 million grant to Poynter to come up with a global fact-checking network to combat rumours on coronavirus.

One such rumour, which grew into a conspiracy theory, was that the virus was man-made, created in a Chinese laboratory as a possible biological weapon. A paper by Kristian Andersen of the Scripps Research Institute (he is the corresponding author; there are several co-authors as well), titled "The proximal origin of Sars-Cov-2" and published on Tuesday in Nature Medicine debunked that to some extent. The researchers compared the genome sequence of this virus with other strains of coronavirus and found that it "originated through natural processes".

But the mitigation of its impact on the nation's health and economy will definitely require manual intervention.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 29 -- A tumultuous 2020 that upended how we lived our lives appears to be ending on a happier note with several countries beginning vaccination against coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in December. The news of the Sars-CoV2 variant in the UK that spreads faster is a dampener but virologists say so far it is not known to cause more severe disease and is unlikely to impact the effectiveness of existing vaccines, diagnostic tests, or treatments.

"There is no need to change the existing treatment protocol in view of mutations emerging in the strain. Further, since Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has always advocated use of two or more gene assays for testing Sars-CoV-2, it is unlikely to miss infected cases using the current testing strategy," concluded experts at the meeting of the National Task Force on Covid-19 on Saturday under co-chairs of Dr Vinod Paul, member Niti Aayog, and Dr Balram Bhargava, director general, ICMR.

India plans to begin vaccinating 300 million health workers, frontline workers and vulnerable populations as early as January next year, but vaccines do not signal the end of public health precautions for the vaccinated.

Reducing exposure to the virus by wearing masks, observing social distancing and frequently washing hands will remain the mainstay of social behaviour in 2021 and beyond, till everyone has been vaccinated against the disease that sickened at least 80 million and killed 1.75 million globally since the start of the pandemic in China last year.

Though not yet approved in India, all three approved vaccines- Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and AstraZeneca-Oxford - are given in two doses four weeks apart and it takes six to eight weeks after the initial dose to achieve the desired immunity for protection. So, those vaccinated will have to continue using behaviours that reduce their risk of exposure to the virus.

It's still unknown how much protection Covid-19 vaccines provide in real-life conditions and for how long this protection lasts. What is known is that everyone can get vaccinated only by 2024. Since the herd immunity threshold for Covid-19 has not been established, we still cannot say how much of the world's population will have to be vaccinated to stop the spread of infection to those who have not been vaccinated.

The effectiveness of the vaccine will also depend on whether it is stored and transported at optimal temperature. it will also depend on health of the recipients since the "warp speed" of development limited human trials data to mostly to healthy adults and those with stable pre-existing diseases.

Again, Covid-19 vaccines have only been tested for their ability to prevent infection and not for prevention of transmission. Most vaccines prevent infection and stop its spread, but some, like the annual flu vaccines, protect those vaccinated from severe disease but don't always stop them from infecting unvaccinated people.

Vaccines train the body's immune cells to the virus to prevent infection but how effective these immune cells are in crossing the mucous barrier to destroy the viruses resting in the nose is still unknown. If viruses in the nose remain viable, those vaccinated can shed them while speaking or sneezing to infect unvaccinated people in close contact.

Vaccines apart, a major upside of 2020 has been the demonstration of unparalleled heroism and resilience amid monumental adversity. Everyone did their bit. Health and frontline workers worked overtime in unsafe conditions to save lives, people stayed locked up at home for months to slow the spread of disease, children gave up school and play, jobless migrants trudged home for days and weeks to escape hunger, and scientists, industry, global agencies and nations forged unprecedented partnerships and worked overtime to make it possible to bring new treatments and vaccines to people within nine months.

As a result, the year that began on a sick note following the World Health Organization's Country Office (WHO) in China discovering a statement about a mysterious "viral pneumonia" of unknown origin on the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission website on December 31, 2019, is ending with hope for a return to normalcy in the not-so-distant future.

The current wave in India appears to be waning, with the seven-day daily average for new infections staying below 25,000, down from a single day peak of 97,399 on September 10. Add to this results of antibodies surveys that indicate around 200-300 million have some degree of immunity against Sas-CoV2 and we have a momentum that can help get our derailed lives and economy on track by next summer. But this can happen only if we continue to take precautions and ensure the year-end holidays don't turn into superspreading events.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 23 -- Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has said that while US-India ties were "photo-ops" for President Donald Trump, for him they were about "getting things done", and reiterated his promise to work with India to combat terrorism and prevent China from threatening its neighbours.

To illustrate his contrast with the US president, Biden recalled the role he played in the passage of the "historic" India-US civil nuclear deal as chairman of the US Senate foreign relations committee in 2008.

"At the time, I said if the United States and India became closer friends, then the world will be a safer place," Biden wrote in an Op-Ed in India West, a news publication focused on the Indian diaspora.

President Barack Obama's 2009-2016 tenure saw "some of the best years" between the two countries, Biden wrote, adding that he and his Indian-descent running mate Kamala Harris will "build on that great progress and do even more."

"We can and should be natural allies," wrote Biden, who currently has the upper hand in the election according to opinion polls, using a phrase first used by late Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee during a trip to the US in 1998.

Leaders from both countries have since tried their own version to define the relationship in their own vision.

Biden reiterated his promise-first laid out in an expansive platform he unveiled on August 15 at a virtual event to mark India's Independence Day-to work with India on its key foreign policy concerns.

"If elected President, I will continue what I have long called for: The US and India will stand together against terrorism in all its forms and work together to promote a region of peace and stability where neither China nor any other country threatens its neighbours." The resolve to combat terrorism was a reference to cross-border terrorism emanating from Pakistan.

Both Biden and Trump have wooed Indian Americans voters-estimated to number 1.9 million-for their potential to make a difference, howsoever small, in battleground states that will determine the outcome. "The Indian American electorate of nearly 2 million voters is a powerful force that can make all the difference from North Carolina and Virginia to Pennsylvania and Michigan to Georgia and Texas and across the country," he wrote, leaving no doubt the Op-Ed was an appeal to Indian American voters.

He added: "And as we value the Indian-American diaspora, we'll continue to value the US-India relationship. For Donald Trump, it's photo-ops. For me, it's getting things done."

It could not be immediately ascertained if the former vice-president was referring to a video released by the Trump campaign of clips of the president with Prime Minister Narendra Modi from their joint appearances at the 'Howdy Modi' and 'Namaste Trump' events in Houston and Ahmedabad to woo Indian American voters.

Biden promised them better ties with their country of origin and better lives for them in the US, addressing their main concerns, as with other Americans-promise to contain the Covid-19 epidemic, expand healthcare, not raise taxes for those under a certain income, encourage legal immigration, and make colleges tuition-free for some certain income categories.

Bide also noted in the Op-Ed the importance of respecting diversity among other shared values. "We will meet every challenge together as we strengthen both democracies-fair and free elections, equality under the law, freedom of expression and religion, and the boundless strength both nations' draw from our diversity," he wrote, adding, "These core principles have endured throughout each nations' histories and will continue to be the source of our strength in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- Labour leader Keir Starmer on Thursday appointed Seema Malhotra and Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi to his shadow cabinet to monitor the work of the Boris Johnson government, increasing the number of Indian-origin MPs in the frontline opposition team.

Malhotra is MP from Feltham and Heston, while Dhesi is MP for Slough. They join Lisa Nandy and Preet Kaur Gill in the shadow cabinet, who were earlier appointed as shadow foreign secretary and shadow international development secretary respectively.

Malhotra has been appointed shadow employment minister, while Dhesi, who is the first turban-wearing Sikh MP elected to the House of Commons, is shadow railway minister. Goa-origin Valerie Vaz continues in her role as the shadow leader of the House.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

Starmer said: "This is a new team that will take the Labour Party forward in a new era. Under my leadership, the Labour Party will be utterly focused on working in the national interest, rebuilding people's trust in our party and winning the next election".

According to parliamentary rules, the shadow cabinet is the team of senior spokespeople chosen by the leader of the opposition to mirror the cabinet in government. Each member of the shadow cabinet is appointed to lead on a specific policy area for their party and to question and challenge their counterpart in the cabinet.

Click here for the latest updates from the coronavirus outbreak

In this way the official opposition seeks to present itself as an alternative government-in-waiting, the rules state.

Starmer, who promised to be a rallying figure in the party, defeated Nandy and Rebecca Long-Bailey in the leadership election that was triggered after Corbyn stepped down following the party's fourth election loss in a row in December.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- When I was a child, my parents taught me nasyam, the ayurvedic home remedy for severe cold and sinusitis. The technique is to suck in copious amounts of warm salt water and once it accumulates in your throat, spit it out. No amount of water should be swallowed. This procedure must be repeated a few times through one nostril, and then with the other. Also you can blow your nose once or twice to remove mucus and any residual saline in the nasal passages. Over the years, I have immensely benefitted from this remedy. The same holds true for many others in my family. I have been able to avoid antibiotics on many occasions as my sinusitis settled rapidly with nasyam.

Anecdotal evidence is not objective evidence; but now there is objective scientific evidence of its usefulness. On October 11, 2016, the clinical virology department of the Christian Medical College celebrated its golden jubilee with an international symposium on medical virology. One of my old students, Sandeep Ramalingam, a senior faculty member of the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, UK, gave a talk on nasyam and gargling, and presented scientific evidence on antiviral effects of chloride ions in the nasal mucosal cells.

In yoga, a similar procedure, nasal douche, with salt water is practiced called jala neti. In the western world, jala neti has become popular for treatment of nasal allergies and infections. They use a neti pot or jar, made in copper or plastic, with a nozzle to fit the nostril. Since neti requires a neti pot, nasyam is what I prefer.

The medical use of neti and nasyam has been researched by scientists in Australia, the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom. Unfortunately no such research has happened in its country of origin, India. These researches show that saline therapy in the nose protects against wood dust allergy and reduces the severity and duration of common cold.

Ramalingam investigated nasyam and gargling with saline and clinched the pathway - chloride ions do the trick, sodium is irrelevant, but without sodium chloride, in other words sea salt, choride ions cannot be delivered on nasal mucosa easily and without irritation or toxicity. Inside mucosal epithelial cells chlorine in chloride is converted to hypochlorous acid which effectively kills viruses that are already in the cells. This was the take-home lesson from his talk in Vellore in 2016.

We are in the middle of the coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19), caused by the respiratory tract infection. The immediate question that arises from the above background is the potential of nasyam or neti as prophylactic or therapeutic for Covid-19. On March 29, 2020, the Journal of Global Health carried a paper by Ramalingam and colleagues, suggesting that hypertonic saline nasal irrigation and gargling should be considered as a treatment option for Covid-19.

There is no study so far, but here is a simple and harmless procedure that may help protect your nasal mucosa from getting infected by any respiratory virus. I am sure that scientists in various biomedical research institutions will begin research to measure its prophylactic and therapeutic value in this epidemic in India.

We promote repeated hand-washing with soap and water; in certain situations, repeated salt-water nasyam may help prevent infection with any virus or even treat infection as it has documented anti-viral property.

Now that we are all at home, practice nasyam. If anyone gets symptoms of cold or sore throat, everyone in the household could practice nasyam and gargling, with warm salt water, made with boiled and cooled water, with salt to taste just perceptibly salty, and use for nasal washes and gargling about every 4 hours during waking time.

T. Jacob John is fomer head, the Indian Council for Medical Research's Centre for Advanced Research in Virology.

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- President Donald Trump on Thursday said the United States has intelligence that establishes a virology lab in Wuhan is the source of the pandemic and indicated new tariffs as his administration considers a range of punitive measures such as partly cancelling public debt and allowing victims to sue China.

"Yes I have," Trump told reporters when asked if he has seen intelligence that traces the epidemic's origin to the Wuhan lab with a high degree of confidence. He did not share any evidence and when asked how he felt confident it was the Wuhan lab, he demurred, saying, "I am not allowed to tell you that."

Earlier Thursday, office of the Director of National Intelligence, which heads the US intelligence community, said in the statement that though it concurs with the wider scientific community that the coronavirus was "not manmade or genetically modified", it was still examining "whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The source of the epidemic remains disputed. China has denied it started at the Wuhan lab and has blamed a local seafood market instead.

The United Sates has been investigating the origin of the epidemic in China, and the Wuhan lab has clearly not been ruled out, and the true magnitude of the crisis in China, which is widely suspected of suppressing the real numbers.

Questions are being raised about China's handling of the epidemic and calls for an impartial investigation into it have been growing worldwide, most recently by Australia.

The US intelligence community is conducting its own investigation as the office of the DNI stated Thursday. But it was not clear yet if the administration expected to revea more on the findings and how soon.

The president has turned up the rhetoric on China in recent days as his won administration's handling of the crisis has come under increasing criticism for not responding aggressively. He recently indicated he was not averse to making China pay for losses incurred by the United States.

When asked on Thursday about reports that he could cancel US debt obligations to China, Trump said he could "do it differently" and act in "probably a little bit more of a forthright manner".

"I could do the same thing but even for more money, just putting on tariffs," he said.

The new tariffs, if he does impose them, will be in addition to the 25% duty still in force on $370 billion worth of imports from China left over from the trade war between the two countries that ended in January with the signing of a limited Phase One deal.

The Washington Post reported Thursday that punitive measures under discussion partly cancelling public debt owed to China, which is the second largest holder of US public debt with around $1 trillion, and stripping China of sovereign immunity and allow American victims of the epidemic to sure China for damages.

Officials from across US federal government were expected to meet Thursday to map the course of action but the president is reported to be tilting towards punishing China, away from a more moderate response being advocated by his economic advisers. But he appears to have not made up his mind yet.

Republican lawmakers have also been been calling for punishing China. Senator Josh Hawley has moved a legislation to hold China "accountable" by designing a mechanism to make China pay compensation to all nations impacted by the epidemic and not just the united States.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 4 -- India and Australia elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed a crucial agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his counterpart Scott Morrison on Thursday.

The two sides also upgraded their "2+2" foreign affairs and defence dialogue to the ministerial level and unveiled a "shared vision for maritime cooperation in the Indo- Pacific".

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), one of seven agreements signed during the summit, will facilitate reciprocal access to military logistics facilities, allow for more complex joint military exercises and improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two countries.

"India is committed to expanding its relations with Australia in a comprehensive and quick manner. This is important not only for our two countries, but also for the Indo-Pacific region and the world," Modi said in his opening televised remarks in Hindi.

Morrision said the comprehensive strategic partnership formed by the two sides will take them "to a whole new level of relationship" and "continue to build the trust because we want commercial and trading relationships that are built on trust".

Referring to the joint declaration on cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, he added, "We share an ocean and we share responsibilities for that ocean as well - its health, well-being [and] security and the relationship we're forming around those issues and our maritime domain is the platform for so many other things between our countries."

The summit was held against the backdrop of growing tensions with China for both India and Australia, though secretary (east) Vijay Thakur Singh of the external affairs ministry told an online briefing there was no specific discussion on China.

However, many of the items on the agenda - shared democratic values, rules-based multilateral systems, an open and inclusive Indo-Pacific, respect for transparency, strengthening and diversifying supply chains for critical health, technology and other goods and services, and cooperation in rare earth minerals - appeared to be aimed at countering China's influence in the region, experts said.

Modi said the two sides should focus on how their relationship can be a "factor of stability for our region and for the world", while Morrison said Australia is working with friends such as India and Japan to provide a "steadying and stabilising and wise influence during.an incredibly difficult time".

Morrison said Australia is "committed to an open, inclusive, prosperous Indo-Pacific and India's role in that region.will be critical". He added, "We share a vision for open, free, rules-based multilateral systems in our region, whether that's in the health area or it's in trade or in other places."

He also tacitly referred to Australia's demand for a probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic while commending India's taking over as chair of the World Health Organization (WHO)'s executive board.

"This is a very important time to be chairing that executive board. I have no doubt the way that that will be led under India's leadership will be critical to how we deal with many difficult problems that we are encountering globally, particularly in the health area," Morrison said.

Among the other important agreements signed by the two sides during the virtual bilateral summit - the first such meeting for Modi - were a framework arrangement on cyber and cyber-enabled critical technology cooperation, a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on cooperation in mining and processing of critical and strategic minerals, and an implementing arrangement on cooperation in defence science and technology under the existing MoU on defence cooperation.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperation in mining and processing of rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves.

Indian officials said Australia is seen as a "reliable and secure supplier" of rare earth metals and institutions from both sides will jointly take forward collaboration in this field.

India, which imports more than 90% of the rare earth metals it needs from China, has been looking to diversify sources. In 2016, the imports from China were worth $3.4 million.

The two sides also signed three MoUs on cooperation in public administration and governance reforms, cooperation in vocational education and training and water resources management.

The virtual summit was arranged after Morrison was forced to put off a planned visit to India twice - first in January because of the devastating bushfires in Australia and then in May because of the Covid-19 crisis. Though the discussions were slated to last 40 minutes, they stretched to 70 minutes and secretary (east) characterised the talks as "extremely productive".

As part of the joint response to the Covid-19 crisis, an allocation will be made from the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund for work in seven areas to counter the pandemic.

An Australian statement said the joint declaration on maritime cooperation in the Indo-Pacific committed both sides to supporting rules-based maritime order in the region and working together to strengthen maritime domain awareness and combating trans-national challenges such as people smuggling, arms and narcotics trafficking, terrorism, and illegal and unregulated fishing.

The Australian side also said the cooperative arrangement on cyber affairs and critical technology will be complemented by a new, four-year $12.7 million partnership that will create a research and development fund for Indian and Australian businesses and support other countries to improve their cyber resilience.

Modi reiterated his invitation to Morrison to visit India when the situation normalises. Morrison, who has met Modi four times in the recent past, joked about how he had missed out on the "famous Modi hug".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 12 -- The global money-laundering and terrorist financing watchdog has warned that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking assistance.

In a report released last week, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) cautioned that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as funding their terror operations.

"In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF said in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

The report said FATF members have highlighted that tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens.

Many countries are reporting an overall increase in cash withdrawals, which FATF said is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe-haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," the report said.

It added some of the countries have also reported an increase in fund-raising scams involving criminals, who have posed as international organisations or charities and circulated emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fund-raising campaign (purportedly for research, victims and/or products).

The FATF said the health crisis is also impacting the abilities of governments and private sectors in implementing anti-money laundering measure as well as international cooperation.

Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extraditions, are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter-terror financing (AML/CFT) on-site inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections.

Pakistan last month got a four-month reprieve for meeting a deadline set by the FATF to counter terror financing as the multilateral watchdog announced a temporary suspension of its activities because of the Covid-19 crisis.

Several countries, according to report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators.

In fact, some Financial Intelligence Units in lower capacity countries are either significantly "reducing their operations" or even "shutting down completely", the report said. There are also reports of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to the suspension of trials and hearings.

"There are reports that diversion of law enforcement and security resources to Covid-19 responses in high-risk, poorly resourced countries, may embolden terrorists and terrorist financiers in their activities," the FATF said.

While banks worldwide are trying to follow anti-money laundering measures, several countries have flagged an increased activity in non-banking sectors like insurance, online gambling, precious metals, and stones and securities amid a decreased activity in others like real estate and casinos.

The movement of migrant workers in various countries, including India, will particularly cause disruption for the money value transfer service sector due to confinement measures and company shutdowns, (the report said?).

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," the FATF said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh, July 28 -- MANOHAR LAL KHATTAR, Haryana chief minister

Haryana chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar spoke to Ramesh Vinayak and Hitender Rao about reviving the economy after the pandemic, the virus trajectory in Gurugram, and running a coalition government, among other issues.

Edited excerpts: How is the economy shaping up post the lockdown? How good are revenue receipts and how much is your dependence on the market borrowings? April was bad for us. In fact, the revenue shortfall for April, May and June was about 9,000 crore. We have tried to make up for it by borrowing from the market. Revenue started trickling in after the lockdown was relaxed and the collections were about 60% in June. By July 20, we have recovered well and are at par with our projections. We are now able to meet our routine expenses on our own.

What budgetary cut are you contemplating in the revised estimates? It is quite understandable considering the deficit. The Rs 9,000 crore revenue shortfall would force us to recalibrate our outlay.

How will the downturn in fiscal health impact the state's development projects and welfare schemes? There will be no impact on welfare schemes, though our development projects have been delayed by three months. During the pandemic, we have spend an additional 1,500 crore to give relief to people including 600- 650 crore cash distribution.

This money was spent on the medical services, ration distribution, arranging return of migrant labourers, and relief camps.

In your role as finance minister, how do you plan to boost the economy during the pandemic? The central government package of 20 lakh crore is a big relief. In the changing scenario due to the Covid-19 situation, I feel that the service sector will suffer but the manufacturing and agriculture sectors will do well.

The central government has sought the views of the state and parents of students about reopening of schools.

We will not open primary schools and will take a call for higher classes in August. Colleges and professional institutions would be the first to start.

Projections show a rising coronavirus infection trajectory in the coming months. How do you plan to augment the health infrastructure including ventilator beds to meet any eventuality? See, what essentially matters is the number of active cases and not the cumulative numbers.

How many patients have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic is important since such patients qualify for home isolation and takes pressure off our systems. As per our current projections and rate of recovery, we are doing well in terms of health infrastructure. But we keep reviewing it.

The NCR districts of Gurugram, Faridabad and Sonepat have a majority of Covid-19 cases.

Health minister Anil Vij hinted at the possibility of stricter curbs. Is a curfew or a selective lockdown on the cards? The weekend lockdowns will not bring us results. Things are slowly coming back on track and the imposition of a fresh lockdown would mean putting pressure on people.

Our strategy instead is to go for aggressive containment in the NCR districts. We are screening more people and conducting more tests.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommended that NCR districts should follow Delhi's model for combating the spread of the coronavirus.

Do you see a need to work with Delhi since the increase in the number of cases in Gurugram has been attributed to the movement of people between the two cities? We, along with Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, are implementing a common strategy for combating the infection.

Infection travelled to Haryana from Delhi initially, but now both states are at par in terms of contagion spread.

Since there is so much backand- forth movement from Delhi to Haryana, it is hard to conclude now on the origin of the contagion.

Gurugram was kept in the orange zone despite a sharp rise in the number of cases to facilitate the reopening of the industry.

What impact did the closure of businesses in the Millennium City have on the state's revenue? How is the govt planning to boost the local economy? We cannot overlook the adverse economic impact of three months. But if you look at the power consumption for the industry, it is at par with 2019. This means that the industry is operating at the same capacity as it was last year. Of course, there could be workforce engagement related issues because of the need to maintain social distancing.

You recently spoke in Mewat about enacting a Freedom of Religion law to prohibit religious conversions by force, allurement or marriage. Why do you feel the need for such a law? There were complaints regarding forced conversions and marriages frommany districts.

People are free to adopt any religion in an informed manner but using coercion, allurement to force religious conversions is a matter of concern.

Such incidents vitiate the atmosphere of society. We are studying similar laws enacted by other states and accordingly take a call.

How has been your experience of running a coalition government so far? The BJP and Jannayak Janta Party have not been able decide on the common minimum programme. Any deadline? We are not new to coalition politics in the state. The BJP and the JJP both are likeminded entities, and both oppose the Congress. Common minimum programme is not a major issue because we do not have any conflict with our ally. We are well synchronized.

The proposed 75 % private sector quota law is an example that we are on similar page

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- For the first time in its history, the famous Rath Yatra of Jagannath temple in Odisha's Puri began this morning with a large number of priests pulling the three colourful chariots as lakhs of devotees stayed away from the festival following a Supreme Court order.

Around 1,500 priests of the 12th century temple milled around the three colourfully-decorated wooden chariots before they started pulling the ropes of the chariots towards the Gundicha temple amid beating of cymbals and drums in praise of Lord Jagannath and his siblings- Lord Balabhadra and Goddess Subhadra.

The priests who pulled the chariots, - Nandighosh, Taladwaja and Darpadalana - were tested for Covid-19 on Monday.

Gajapati Dibyasingha Deb, Puri's titular king, who is also the first servitor of Lord Jagannath, carried out the Chhera Panhara, a ritual sweeping of the chariots before they are pulled. "It's hard to imagine Rath Yatra without devotees on Badadanda(Grand Road). But Lord Jagannath stepped out of the temple for the whole universe," said Deb.

Puri Govardhan Peeth Shankaracharya Nischalananda Saraswati paid obeisance to the trinity atop the chariots along with his disciples.

Till Monday afternoon, uncertainty clouded the Rath Yatra as a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court led by chief justice of India SA Bobde heard dozens of intervention petitions seeking recall of the court's June 18 order that stayed the festival proceedings over fears of mass congregation in the time of the Covid-19 pandemic. For a few days it seemed the Rath Yatra would not be held for the first time in 285 years.

The judges on Monday afternoon reversed their decision after an appeal by the petitioners as well as affidavits by the state and Centre arguing that the event had been held continuously for centuries, and even in 1918, when the world was in the grip of the Spanish flu. The apex court agreed to allow the festival with several preconditions including absence of any devotees and pulling of the three chariots by not more than 1,500 priests.

In the morning, the district administration had disinfected the 2.5 km long road from the main temple to Gundicha temple. From Monday 9 pm, the police had enforced a curfew around the temple town restricting anyone's entry or exit for the next 41 hours. "We have mobilised 50 platoons of forces in Puri with two primary objectives - smooth and incident-free movement/pulling of the chariots from origin to destination and restricting entry of unauthorised persons into the town," said Director General of Police Abhay.

Before the break of dawn, there were a flurry of activities in the temple as rituals like Mangal Alati, Tadaplagi, Dwarpala Puja, Besha Sesha, Rath Prathishtha and Mangalarpana started one after another. It was followed by Pahandi rituals of the three deities and Lord Sudarshan where they were carried by the priests from the main temple to the chariots.

The devotees, who are an intrinsic part of the festival, remained glued to TV sets as Doordarshan telecast the live proceedings, but they were not unhappy over missing out seeing the deities in person. "It's all the wish of Lord Jagannath. I am happy with the decision of the Supreme Court. I will see my Lord after the lockdown is over," said Binapani Mallik, a housewife in Bhubaneswar.

Another senior citizen said he was happy to see the Lord come out of the temple. "After the SC order last week, I had given up hope. But I knew that the Lord of Universe would do a miracle to come out on the road and show his face to his millions of devotees," said Prabodh Mishra, a septuagenarian.

On Monday, 1,143 servitors of the temple were tested for Covid-19 of which one tested positive. The servitor who tested positive has been shifted to a Covid hospital before the beginning of the Rath Yatra rituals.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 3 -- As many as 145 buses carrying around 5,800 passengers from the neighbouring states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand had arrived in Delhi till 9.30am on Tuesday, hours after the city administration opened all the interstate bus terminals (ISBTs) for the first time in seven months.

The national Capital has three ISBTs at Kashmere Gate, Sarai Kale Khan and Anand Vihar -- all of which were opened from Monday midnight after remaining shut under the nationwide lockdown owing to the coronavirus pandemic since March 21.

KK Dahiya, managing director of the Delhi Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation (DTIDC) Limited that manages and operated all the ISBTs, said 70 buses, mostly from Haryana, had arrived at the Kashmere Gate ISBT till 9.30am. This was followed by 60 buses from UP and Uttarakhand at the Anand Vihar ISBT and 15 buses from Rajasthan and UP at the Sarai Kale Khan ISBT.

"People are being de-boarded at the entry gate of the ISBTs from where they are being allowed to leave for their respective destinations in the city after frisking and thermal screening. The same is being done for those entering the ISBTs to board buses for the neighbouring states. Even as buses were allowed to enter from midnight, the maximum frequency of interstate buses was seen between 6am and 9.30am," he said.

Dahiya added that there was no crowding as the number of buses allowed to enter the terminal has been slashed to 50% of the pre-Covid times, until November 15. Before the onset of the pandemic, the three ISBTs would witness a combined footfall of over 250,000 every day. On a daily basis, there were 3,500 trips of interstate buses and 2,000 trips of local buses.

According to the SOP prepared by the Delhi government, interstate buses have to be sanitised by the respective depots of bus operators at the point of origin and before departure from the respective ISBT. Thermal checking of both passengers and the bus crew at boarding and at the point of entry to ISBTs is also mandatory. Passengers have to mandatorily wear face mask and no standing passengers will be allowed in the buses. Social distancing will be ensured on ground station, at the time of boarding of passengers and inside the bus as per government guidelines. These will be done through markers on ground and waiting areas, similar to the ones in all buses and Metro.

"In addition to these, testing camps for Rapid/ RT-PCR tests have also been set up at all ISBTs in case any asymptomatic passenger shows signs of illness after thermal screening. The safety of both passengers and staff and crew is of utmost priority to us. We've been carefully monitoring patterns of travelling since we resumed bus services, and even though interstate travel is a challenge, we are ensuring sanitisation at every point. Apart from this, regular announcements and sensitisation of passengers about Covid-19 precautions through audio - visual communication is also being undertaken. Strict ban on use of gutka, tobacco products, etc. in the premises of ISBTs shall be made," Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 11 -- Srikant M Datar, an alumnus of Mumbai University and IIM Ahmedabad, has been named the new dean of Harvard University's business school.

Datar will succeed Nitin Nohria, another Indian-American, and will be the second dean of Indian origin at Harvard University, with Rakesh Khurana, who heads Harvard College.

"Srikant Datar is an innovative educator, a distinguished scholar and a deeply experienced academic leader," Harvard University president Lawrence Bacow said while announcing the appointment on Friday, as cited in a post on the Harvard Business School's (HBS) website. "He is a leading thinker about the future of business education, and he has recently played an essential role in HBS's creative response to the challenges posed by the Covid-19 pandemic."

Datar will be the 11th dean of the prestigious school.

He joined the HBS faculty in 1996 after teaching stints at Carnegie Mellon and Stanford. He started his higher education at University of Mumbai - it was called University of Bombay at that time - and his next stop was the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad.

"I am humbled and honoured to take on this role," said Datar. "Harvard Business School is an institution with a remarkable legacy of impact in research, education and practice. Yet, the events of the past year have hastened our passage to an unforeseen future. I look forward to working with colleagues and friends of the School - including throughout Harvard, in our Boston community, and around the world - to realise our mission in what undoubtedly will be an exciting new era."

Nohria, who also studied in Mumbai, had been HBS dean for more than 10 years, starting in 2010. Nohria had announced plans to step down last November, but stayed on in view of the pandemic.

"Srikant is an outstanding choice as Harvard Business School's next dean," Nohria said. "He has thought deeply about the challenges and opportunities facing management education, and has a proven record of collaboration, innovation and leadership - not only within HBS, but across Harvard and at other organisations."

The HBS post called Datar "a prominent thinker and innovator" on the future of business education.

He has co-authored Rethinking the MBA: Business Education at a Crossroads, and has developed courses on "Developing Mindsets for Innovative Problem Solving" and "Managing with Data Science".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 74 as on Thursday. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infect human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has until Tuesday killed over 3.18 lakh people and infected more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ". SARSCoV2 is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

A team of four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus' "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

Also read: 4,970 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours push India's tally past 1 lakh-mark

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and is now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

An independent expert spoke to HT and said the research was plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin.

China has consistently cited international research to deny that the virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology. The central Chinese city of Wuhan is where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

Also read: Covid-19 response, China's offer of help - All about day 1 of WHO session

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with Covid-19 is that we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow, in the past, been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky, a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh - both are bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India - and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia. Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human are not rare and have been regularly witnessed in diseases like Ebola, bird flu, MERS etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far, no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.

However, the evidence for that kind of an incident in a lab is thin in the paper, Ebright added.

"However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were researching bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross-contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether Covid-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- Once restrictions on passenger flights are lifted airports will facilitate limited domestic and international scheduled flights in phases and may be at 30% capacity to facilitate social distancing, the Airport Authority of India has stated in a set of guidelines for resumption of service post-lockdown.

Flight operations to its original level are likely to be scaled up in a gradual manner, according to the government's plan. Airline operations are likely to begin in tier-I cities first, it added.

"Initially it is presumed that airline operations will be limited to Tier-I cities i.e. Metros and some of the state capitals and major Tier-II cities. The flights schedule may be cleared on City Pair basis, so the origin and Destination Airports are open fully from lockdown situation," according to the standard operating procedure for recommencement of operations at AAI Airports post lockdown.

At airports with more than one terminal, initially only one terminal shall be used and the larger terminal can be scaled down to reduce cleaning area considering limited availability of material resources, the SOP stated.

"Immediately after the lockdown is lifted, or as per government directives in this direction, the scheduled flight operations will commence. Hence, all airports are required to be in preparedness to handle flight operations," it added.

Strict social distancing norms will be introduced inside the planes to ensure space between two passengers, Hindustan Times had reported on April 9. According to the SOP, passenger seating arrangement shall be done in such a manner so as to maintain social distancing (1- 1.5 m) among passengers using the chairs.

"Sufficient staff shall be deployed near washrooms, X-Ray machines, conveyor belts etc. to guide passengers to maintain sufficient distance," it said. Alternate check-in counters may also be introduced to avoid congestion.

"Queue at counters shall be managed by airlines staff to manage sufficient distance among passengers. Also, Check-In counters may be opened well in advance to stagger the crowd," it said. Social distancing (1-1.5 meter) markings and stickers will be provided at airports.

Based on social distancing norms, airports will work out terminal building capacity and forward it to AAI so that the slot allocation for the planned scheduled flights post Covid- 19 lockdown by airline operators can be done accordingly.

Food and Beverage Services and retail outlets will be limited to passengers till operations of airlines gradually increase. "Initially, they should serve tea/coffee etc. with take away snacks in boxes. As part of this limited restaurant facilities to be permitted inside security hold area," it said.

India has suspended international flights since March 22 while domestic flights were prohibited from March 25. The current lockdown period is scheduled till May 3 for now.

There will be a need for coordination with the respective state governments and local administration to ensure availability of proper public transport and private taxies for passengers and airline staff to reach airports. "Also, coordinate with the respective local administration to ensure that petrol and diesel is adequately available for sustaining operations at airports," it noted.

Initially, watch hours will also continue to be limited. "However, the watch hours will be restored to original pre-Covid-19 timings gradually once normalcy is restored," the SOP stated.

"Airlines are required to file their schedule with the DGCA and simultaneously apply for slots at CHQ for approval well in advance to operate within the limited watch hours to be made available at airports, as initially the Summer 2020 schedule cannot be fully implemented. The slots will be provided for ensuring staggered operation based on capacity restriction of terminal buildings to facilitate required social distancing," the SOP said.

Recommencement of international flights should be also done in a similar coordinated manner, it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 28 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi has told chief ministers to carefully study the situation in each district and zone, and assess the kind of activities that can be permitted without the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) spreading. He also said the key is to balance life and livelihood. The Indian Council of Medical Research asks all states to return rapid test kits sourced from China.

Need to save lives, spur economy: PM

India is focusing on a two-pronged strategy aimed at saving lives of its citizens while also restarting economic activities that have come to a virtual standstill due to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told chief ministers in a video conference on Monday.

Five Oppn-ruled states seek Rs 2.25L cr to tide over crisis

Five opposition ruled states have sought close to Rs 2.25 lakh crore from the Centre to overcome stress on state finances due to the national lockdown, which some chief ministers want to extend beyond May 3 in close to 330 Covid-19 affected districts.

CMs call for extension of curbs in hot spot districts

Most state governments recommended an extension of the lockdown in Covid-19 hot spots, a relaxation of rules to bring back stranded workers, and financial help to cope with a debilitating economic crisis in a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

The death toll around the world has crossed 200,000 but there's a growing opinion that the actual number could be higher.

ICMR tells states not to deploy rapid kits of China firms

Six days after it decided to evaluate rapid test kits (RTKs) used to test for Covid-19 antibodies after states reported huge variations in results, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on Monday asked all states to which it sent the kits, sourced from China, to return them .

Need for refined rapid kits, better staff training for accurate results

Inaccuracy in results from China-made rapid kits led India to suspend antibody testing for coronavirus disease last week. On Monday, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) asked for states to return the kits, citing problems with them highlighted in its own assessment.

Govt appeals against discrimination, says recovered patients don't spread infection

Patients who recover from Covid-19 do not transmit the infection, the health ministry clarified on Monday, appealing to the people to stop discriminating against those who have fought off the disease as health-care workers engaged in treating cases.

'Mild-symptom patients can be isolated at home'

Covid-19 patients who are pre-symptomatic or show mild symptoms can be isolated at home as long as they have enough space to avoid contact with other residents, according to a new Union health ministry guidelines issued on Monday. Whether a person can is fit for home isolation will be decided by the treating doctor and surveillance officer. According to existing guidelines, all positive cases are isolated and treated at a facility.

Action against 3 IRS officers for tax hike report

The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) initiated an inquiry on Monday and moved to punish three Indian Revenue Service (IRS) officers for their roles and complicity in preparing and circulating a report that suggested raising the income-tax rate up to 40% to fund economic revival in the aftermath of the coronavirus pandemic,a finance ministry official said.

Once lockdown ends, govt plans Make in India boost

After the extended 40-day Covid-19 lockdown that ends May 3, the government plans to aggressively push its Make in India programme by offering domestic and foreign manufacturers policy and fiscal incentives to manufacture locally even as it increases import duty to make imports expensive, two government officials familiar with the plan said.

States gear up to bring back stranded migrants

Days after Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh started taking back stranded workers, the Rajasthan government issued guidelines to bring back stranded workers from other states and Odisha announced that it will have similar guidelines in place by the end of April.

In touch with those from state stranded elsewhere: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar

Ensuring the relief and rehabilitation of hundreds of thousands of migrants from Bihar employed in other states is high on the list of priorities of chief minister Nitish Kumar. On the prospects of the workers returning home, Kumar said that when curbs on public movement are lifted after the extended lockdown ends on May 3, the host governments in other states must undertake health screening of Bihar migrants before letting them travel.

This Pune medical officer stays by the deceased in their final journey

What is it like to oversee and ensure the burial and cremation of those dead from Covid-19? Pune Municipal Corporation's (PMC) Assistant medical officer, Dr Kalpana Baliwant has been doing in these unprecedented times in a city besieged by the pandemic.

China warns Australia of total boycott if it pursues virus probe

Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the coronavirus origins, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Vaccine could be ready in 12 months: Bill Gates

Billionaire philanthropist Bill Gates is funding production of the seven most promising ideas for a vaccine as he refocuses his work on the coronavirus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 23 -- As Covid-19 cases begin to rise again across Europe and Russia dimming hopes that India may reopen its borders for foreign tourists this season, Goa is staring at the first ever season without the arrival of European tourists since the 1960s when the first hippies arrived here.

The Indian government on Thursday announced that most visas including for all OCI (Overseas Citizenship of India), PIO (Person of Indian Origin) card holders and foreign nationals were being restored except for tourist visas. Goa Tourism says the restriction on tourism visas will deal a huge blow to the industry.

Goa's tourism season usually begins with the receding monsoon and as winter sets in across the northern hemisphere, those seeking to escape the often biting cold climes choose to spend time in warmer parts of the world and Goa is among the preferred destinations for those seeking to travel.

"I have been coming to Goa for about 15 years, I guess, [and] I know there are plenty out there who have been visiting for much longer than I have. I have heard Goa is already opening up to tourism. [but] no sadly there is no chance of visiting India this winter. Until this pandemic is under some control, it is just too dangerous especially for an older and not so healthy folk!" Polly Hoad, a British tourist, who said she will have to sit out the harsh winter back home in the UK for the first time in 15 years.

She is not alone. For many Britishers for whom travelling out of the UK for the winter had become a habit and Goa was a destination of choice, an inability to travel even if they are willing to take the risk, will force them to sit back.

"It will be our first Xmas in England for over twenty years but I will make the best of it," Lili Angel, another regular tourist, said.

Also Read: Vistara to operate more flights to Goa and London to cater to rising demand

While tourism has reopened in the state and people from within other states of India have begun to come in, India is not issuing tourists visas as of now and is unlikely to lift the restrictions any time soon, especially, given the return of a second wave in much of Europe including the UK, Germany, Poland Russia and Ukraine, the primary sources of foreign tourists to Goa.

The Travel and Tourism Association of Goa (TTAG) believes that the arrival of foreign tourists is vital for the state's tourism industry.

"Foreign tourists travel in larger groups and stay for a longer time, often the average duration of stay is between 14-21 days. To compensate for the loss of a single foreign booking, a hotel will have to secure four to five different bookings of domestic tourists to maintain the same level of occupancy," Nilesh Shah the president of the TTAG, told HT.

Also Read: 'Unwarranted': Navy responds to obstacle charge in Goa's 'development'

A domestic tourist on average stays between 3-7 days. Many mid to large hotels depend entirely on foreign arrivals through deals with charter companies and now find themselves all at sea.

"We have been working with the government to try and get some arrangement in place wherein tourists can be chartered in via an air bubble agreement of some kind," Shah said.

"It (the continued suspension of tourist visas) is obviously a disappointment. At the same time, we also have to be realistic keeping in view that cases are rising once again in Europe, so the future remains uncertain," he added.

"The government needs to announce that tourist visas will be allowed once again, if not immediately then two months down the line because people can then begin to plan their holidays. Tourists especially foreign tourists like to plan their holidays well in advance and do not suddenly get up and decide to travel the next day," he added.

Across the last three calendar years, Goa received around eight million tourists, around one million of which were from abroad. The number is expected to fall sharply this year.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 31 -- No large country in the world has been able to contain the disease to one restricted geography the way China has.

According to worldometers.info, it has seen 84,165 cases of the coronavirus disease thus far with only 4,634 deaths. It has only 574 active cases of the disease (all data is till late evening of July 29). Merely by looking at the numbers it is difficult to imagine that the disease which has infected more than 17 million people worldwide, killing close to 670,000 (including over 4.4 million cases and 150,000 deaths in the US, and close to 1.6 million cases and almost 35,000 deaths in India) actually originated in Wuhan, China, from where it travelled, through people, all over the world. Sure there has been a minor flurry of cases in Beijing, but the numbers are far too small to suggest any sort of outbreak.

One theory is that the Chinese have completely buried all inconvenient information related to the disease and its fallout within the country. This is true at least in part; Beijing has steadfastly sidestepped calls for a scientific investigation into the origin of the virus. But there is nothing to suggest that it has engaged in a massive cover-up to hide outbreaks in other parts of the country.

Which is why its Covid-19 numbers are a mystery. This column has pointed out that the pandemic has followed roughly the same trajectory in most countries. It has also pointed out that its trajectory has been similar in large countries such as the US, Brazil, and India, with concentrated outbreaks in a few areas that gradually spread to other areas, which then started seeing similar outbreaks. China is the world's most populous country and the third largest country by geographical area. The US is the fourth largest, Brazil the fifth, and India the seventh (India is the second most populous country in the world, the US the third, and Brazil the sixth).

A recent paper in Science may have the answer. According to the paper, by Benjamin Cowling and other researchers, mostly at the University of Hong Kong, China's ability to stop Covid-19 in its tracks may have to do with its ability to manage the serial interval. In epidemiology, the serial interval is the gap between the onset of symptoms in Person A, and Person B, who is infected by Person A. The researchers' main finding is the title of the paper: "Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions".

The researchers found that the serial interval in Wuhan came down from 7.8 days to 2.6 days between early January and early February. They hypothesise that this was made possible by China's aggressive contact tracing, quarantine, and isolation protocols, which meant that all infections arising from one infected individual happened in a short period of time (in this case, 2.6 days), thereby ensuring that infected people, because they were isolated, could not infect any more people later in the infection cycle. The result, according to the researchers, was fewer cases. The sooner an infected person was isolated, the researchers found, the shorter was the serial interval. Their paper also explains that the serial interval is related to other epidemiological parameters, such as the attack rate of a virus (the proportion of people exposed to the virus over a period of time) and the reproduction rate or R naught, the number of people who will be infected by one infected person.

At this point, what Cowling and Co have proposed is a theory (backed by data and research), albeit a very plausible one.

It is also one that emphasizes the only way to deal with the coronavirus disease in the absence of a vaccine or a cure - test, trace, and isolate. And it is proof that better tracing and prompt (and stringent) isolation can lead to flatter infection curves.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 24 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 5 PM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

IT ministry to ban more apps over links with China

The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has decided to ban several mobile applications, mostly of Chinese origin, officials familiar with the matter said. Read more

'Chinese consulate in Houston was hub of spying': Mike Pompeo

Top officials in the United States have escalated their public condemnations of China in the last several weeks, with speeches by FBI Director Chris Wray, Attorney General William Barr and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Read more

Xbox X to launch with the largest lineup for any console, says Satya Nadella

Microsoft posted its fourth-quarter earnings for this fiscal on Wednesday and it looks like the company's various divisions actually benefited from the global pandemic as they beat Wall Street's expectations both on sales and profit for the past three months. Read more

Covid-19 patients in Assam perform 'Bihu' at a quarantine centre

Covid-19 patients were spotted dancing & singing in Assam's Dibrugarh. The patients were seen performing 'Bihu' at a quarantine centre. A patient was seen playing the flute while others danced to its tune. They also sang a popular Assamese song 'Phul Phulise'. Watch the full video for more. Read more

Parents' Day 2020: When is it and why do we celebrate this day

National Parents' Day, which is celebrated on the fourth week of July annually, will be observed on July 26, 2020. It falls on the fourth Sunday of July, two months after Mother's Day in May, and a month after Father's Day in June. Although it's observed across the US, it is not a public holiday. Read more

Anurag Kashyap posts old video of Kangana Ranaut supporting him after Bombay Velvet failure, says 'she always stood by me'

Filmmaker Anurag Kashyap has shared an old video of actor Kangana Ranaut defending him after the box office failure of his film, Bombay Velvet. He said that he was 'not her enemy' and that she always supported him. Read more

Are West Indies missing a trick with Jason Holder the all-rounder?

A half a minute video clip of Ben Stokes running in full tilt and then diving on the long-off boundary to save a run off his own bowling went viral on social media platforms. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Aug. 3 -- A real recovery in India's automobile industry will be achieved when sales grow in double digits compared to FY18-19, said RC Bhargava, chairman of Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. In an interview, Bhargava refrained from giving a sales forecast for this fiscal, citing the continued uncertainty amid a rising number of Covid-19 cases.

He said the sales rebound seen in July was led by the rural market though there has been some improvement in urban demand as well. Edited excerpts: How will you interpret the current recovery in sales in the sector? There has been a lot of pent-up demand and this has its origins partly in the fact that in the previous year (FY19-20), because of various factors, sales of cars for the industry as a whole went down by 18%, and Maruti, as a consequence, was down by 16%. That was unusual because, usually, every year, we used to have at least 6-8% industry growth. Then, because of these three months of the shutdown and the subsequent restart, there was no sale and there were a lot of people waiting to buy cars.

Is the current recovery in demand sustainable? The real issue we should look for, and I am not talking of the next 4-6 months; the recovery would really be when we get to FY18-19 volumes and then, on top of that, we can get growth in double digits. Then you can say the industry has recovered and Indian manufacturing is on a strong wicket

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, May 24 -- Only two-fifths of all Olive Ridley turtle hatchlings made their way to the sea in Maharashtra between 2019 and 2020.

According to data collated from different forest ranges by the state mangrove cell and Maharashtra Mangrove Foundation on World Turtle Day (May 23), 12,149 hatchlings survived from 27,254 eggs during 2019-20, which is a survival rate of 44.5%.

In 2018-19, the survival rate was 54.4%, with 12,601 hatchlings that made it to sea from a total of 23,131 eggs.

Sporadic nesting of turtles is reported from an average of 33 sandy beaches across three districts in Konkan - Raigad, Ratnagiri, and Sindhudurg.

While Sindhudurg witnessed a marked improvement in survival rate, from 47.3% in 2018-19 to 74.3% in 2019-20, Ratnagiri observed a decline to 34% in 2019-20 against 57.4% in 2018-19. Raigad also witnessed a drop from 65.4% to 52.2% over two years.

"We must realise that this is preliminary information, and there might be several data gaps since this annual statistical collation from three districts is a relatively new process. We need to study the pattern for at least 10 years to come up with exact trends," said Virendra Tiwari, additional principal chief conservator of forest (mangrove cell).

Olive Ridley sea turtles are found in warm tropical currents of the Indian and Pacific oceans. A schedule I species under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, they travel thousands of kilometres in the ocean, with only the females returning to their original nesting sites within a minimum of two years, to lay eggs.

After a 50 to 60-day incubation period, juvenile turtles break the eggshell, dig through the sand, and crawl to the sea. While females return to their place of birth, males never return to land. "Female turtles use geomagnetic imprinting [navigating to their geographic area of origin using magnetic field] and olfactory [relating to the sense of smell] cues to find their natal areas," said Harshal Karve, marine biologist, Mangrove Foundation.

Changes in weather patterns are the main reason for the fall in survival rate, said Mohan Upadhyay, livelihood assistant, Mangrove Foundation. "Firstly, nesting was delayed due to a series of extreme weather events including heavy rain coupled with cyclones in the Arabian Sea last monsoon. The winter was much warmer than previous years for coastal districts. Following this, there was a spike in maximum temperatures this year from late February. When temperatures rise, it affects the incubation period, resulting in a lower survival rate," said Upadhyay.

Independent experts, however, said the survival rate does not depend completely on extreme weather factors. "Hatchling survival is affected by rising beach temperature and prolonged rainy days can damage some nests. But proper management and protection for natural nests can address these issues. However, even a 44% survival rate for natural in-situ nests is not bad. Focused conservation can help improve this," said Basudev Tripathi, senior scientist, Zoological Survey of India and member of International Union for Conservation of Nature.

Meanwhile, the Mangrove Foundation has commissioned a research study to assess the incubation temperature of nests along the Maharashtra coast. The project is being undertaken by a PhD scholar from the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun.

"Atmospheric temperature plays a major role in developing and determining the sex of baby turtles. Temperature data loggers have been deployed at various turtle nesting sites in Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg, and the results will help us understand the nesting ecology," said Karve.

A similar study undertaken by the Mangrove Foundation - comparing nesting data from 2002 to 2006 and 2014 to 2019 - has shown that the peak nesting period had shifted from winter months (December) to early summer months (February-March). "Many nests which are now being laid along the Maharashtra coast during the February-March period hatch out in the summer months of April-May when the ambient and sand temperatures tend to be on the higher side [above 32 degrees Celsius], which may lead most of the turtle hatchling to be females. Also, higher nest temperature data suggests a lower survival rate for hatchlings," said Tiwari. "We are therefore developing solutions to ensure that the hatchlings are protected from higher temperatures through the use of sheds, regular monitoring, and litter-free turtle nesting habitats."

Using some of the results, this year green sheds were installed to cover nesting sites from direct sunlight and high temperatures. "However, the Covid-19 lockdown made material transport difficult," said Upadhyay.

The state forest department, with local NGO Sahayadri Nisarg Mitra, has been educating local communities on sea turtle conservation. "From locating nesting sites, excavation, relocation of eggs, fencing nets, and preventing poaching and flooding, around two persons per nesting site have been trained. The volunteers have begun collating information about the process from nesting to hatching," said Karve.

To further boost turtle conservation, earlier this month the forest department introduced an honourarium of Rs.15.63 lakh to locals in Ratnagiri, while the Sindhudurg district administration provided Rs.6lakh to Rs.8 lakh annually under its conservation management plan.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- At the UN Security Council's virtual meeting on the coronavirus pandemic late on Thursday, the United States called for "science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics and spread of the virus".

"We cannot stress enough how important these methods are," Ambassador Kelly Kraft told the security council at its first closed-door meeting to discuss the pandemic that has killed 90,000 and infected 1.5 million people across 200 countries.

Ambassador Kelly Craft's reference on the origin of the virus echoes a point that US President Donald Trump and his administration has frequently made, variously labelling the Sars-C0V-2 pathogen the "Chinese Virus" to underscore its origin in the Chinese city of Wuhan and message that Beijing should have acted faster to warn the world.

China has blocked the pandemic from being discussed by the UN Security Council for all of March when it held the UNSC president's post, arguing that the pandemic was not within its mandate.

Washington, on the other hand, insisted that any council action refer to the origins of the virus, much to the annoyance of China. US President Trump had set the tone for his administration's stand at Thursday's council meeting this week when he put the World Health Organisation on notice, calling it "China centric" and giving the US bad advice.

"The United States reiterates today the need for complete transparency and the timely sharing of public health data and information within the international community. The most effective way to contain this pandemic is through accurate, science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics, and spread of the virus," Ambassador Kelly Craft said early in her remarks on the disease.

China's UN Ambassador Zhang Jun, according to news agency Reuters, told the Security Council that it should reject any acts of stigmatization and politicisation.

The UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who briefed the council about the pandemic, described it as the "gravest test" since the UN was founded 75 years ago.

The secretary-general reiterated that the United Nations faces "its gravest test" since the organization was founded 75 years ago from the pandemic and concluded saying: "This is the fight of a generation - and the raison d'etre of (the reason for) the United Nations itself."

The council had met on Thursday at the request of nine of the elected members. After the meeting the council issued a short statement, agreed by consensus, which expressed support for Guterres' efforts concerning "the potential impact of Covid-19 pandemic to conflict-affected countries."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 2 -- Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, has said the United States and India were "natural partners" and if elected the relationship will be a "high priority" for his administration.

The former vice-president also said he will end the temporary suspension of H-1B visas ordered by President Donald Trump last week ostensibly to ensure American had the first crack at jobs becoming available as the US reopens from Covid-19 lockdown. But the visa programme, of which Indians are the largest beneficiaries, has been in the crosshairs of immigration hawks in his administration.

India and the US are "natural partners", Biden said at a virtual fundraiser Wednesday, using a phrase for describing the relationship that has evolved from "natural allies", as first used by late Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee. Former US president George W Bush switched in "partners" for "allies".

"That partnership, a strategic partnership, is necessary and important in our security," Biden said and proceeded to give a more expansive account of his role in promoting the relationship, such as securing the civil nuclear deal that ended India's isolation from the community of nuclear states.

"I was proud to play a role more than a decade ago in securing congressional approval for the US India Civil Nuclear Agreement," he said, adding, "which is a big deal." It was indeed, and has remained so, setting a high bar for everything that has followed in the relationship.

"Helping open the door to great progress in our relationship and strengthening our strategic partnership with India was a high priority in the Obama-Biden administration and will be a high priority if I'm elected president," the former vice-president said, and added, "India needs to be a partner in the region for our safety('s) sake and quite frankly for theirs."

Biden visited India as vice-president in July 2013, with his wife Jill Biden.

At a virtual town-hall with Asian American and Pacific Islanders, the former vice-president came out clearly agains Trump's suspension of H-1Bs. "He (Trump) just ended H-1B visas the rest of this year. That will not be in my administration," he said in response to a questions.

People on this visa "have built this country", Biden said.

This will come as a huge relief for the Indians hoping to work in the United States and US and Indian companies that hire them on H-1B. The United States issues 85,000 of these temporary non-immigrant visas for high-skill jobs every year, and more than 70% go to Indians.

Critics of the programme have argued H-1B visas are being used to bring cheaper labor from abroad and displace Americans. The Trump administration stepped up scrutiny of the programme soon after Trump came into offie in January 2017 and issued an executive order titled "Buy American, Hire American".

A larger reform of the programme was announced along with the suspension last week. It would include doing away with the electronic lottery system to pick successful H-1B petitions from among the hundred and thousands that are filed. Selection will be based on those getting the highest salary. Other changes are also in the offing, but there is no timeline for it yet.

The vice-president went on to speak of other immigration issues as the plight of undocumented immigrants brought as children, called Dreamers. Many of them are of Indian origin.

"On day one (of his presidency), I'm going to send a legislative immigration reform bill to congress to provide a roadmap to citizenship for 11 million undocumented immigrants who contribute so much to this country," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- As the number of coronavirus infection in India more than doubled in the last four days to cross 250 while the number of infections across the world rose to over 2,65,000. US President Donald Trump declared coroavirus a major disaster in the state of New York.

Italy recorded the highest toll in a single day on Friday with 627 deaths that took the number of casualties in the country to 4,032. It is so the largest daily rise in absolute terms since the cornavirus hit the country about a month ago.

In Washington, the White House said the United States has reached mutual agreements with Canada and Mexico to restrict non-essential travel across America's northern and southern borders.

In India, 63 fresh cases were reported Friday prompting experts to reiterate that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread of coronavirus could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

Many states have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission which is more dangerous because a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Meanwhile, the Lucknow police have lodged an FIR against Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor for allegedly not complying with directives to safeguard against the spread of coronavirus disease after her return from London earlier this month.

Follow coronavirus updates here.

She tested Covid-19 positive on Friday and left a chain of politicians who have either put themselves on self-isolation or earmarked for monitoring by the administration.

Here is a look at the trends in India and the world.

India trends:

--India reports 63 new cases on Friday highest jump since infections began here

--Singer Kanika Kapoor's contacts being traced. Members of Parliament including Derek O' Brien, Anupriya Patel and Varun Gandhi who were in touch with fellow MP Dushyant Singh are in quarantine. Dushyant Singh and his mother Vasundhara Raje Scindia who had attended Kanika Kapoor's birthday, had earlier quarantined themselves.

--Many hospitals cancel elective surgeries and set aside beds

--Delhi closes malls, markets for 3 days

--Covid 19 infected Italian who was discharged from hospital after testing negative dies of cardiac arrest in Jaipur

--India expands testing protocol to include more people and has intensified contact tracing

---Vegetable prices surge due to talks of mandi closure

--Delhi man who tested positive in Tamil Nadu could be first case of community transmission in India

--The Nifty 50 saw its best one-day gain in more than six months, but ended the week more than 12% lower. Both Nifty and Sensex logged their worst week since 2008

Global trends:

--Covid 19 deaths cross 10,000

--New Zealand reports first local outbreak

--Italy deaths cross 4000, New York and California in lockdown

--Clampdown begins in London with theatres, pubs shutting down

--Data from Wuhan awaited if they are recording any fresh local infection cases. They didn't record any local new infection for 24 hours on Thursday-Friday

--The new coronavirus has infected far more people in US than those who have been tested, analysis by Columbia University researchers show

--Cases in New York state top 7,800

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 23 -- China on Wednesday said it was in touch with Indian authorities on the situation of the 23 Indian sailors stranded on a ship anchored off a northern Chinese port since June, but did not say when they will be allowed to leave the vessel.

As many as 23 Indian sailors are stuck on bulk carrier MV Jag Anand, which has been anchored off Jingtang port on Bohai Sea in northern China's Hebei province since June. Bohai Sea is a westward, inner extension of Yellow Sea.

In a separate instance, at least 16 more Indian seafarers have not been allowed to leave their ship MV Anastasia, stranded off Caofeidian port in the same province.

Beijing has not allowed them to get off the vessel in the backdrop of increasing imported Covid-19 infections in the country, putting the physical and mental health of the sailors at risk.

There's been no report of any Covid-19 case on the ship in the past six months on Jag Anand.

But that hasn't stopped the Chinese port authorities from implementing strict anti-epidemic protocols, preventing the sailors from disembarking.

"China has explicit stipulations on the epidemic control measures and quarantine of seafarers at ports," said Zhao Lijian, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, at a regular ministry briefing on Wednesday when asked about the condition of the Indian sailors aboard Jag Anand.

"The local authorities of China have been in close communication with the Indian side and replied to their requests in a timely manner. We also provide necessary facilitation and assistance while meeting certain quarantine and epidemic prevention requirements," Zhao said.

The ship sailed from the port of Gladstone in Australia on May 26 - carrying Australian coal - and reached Jingtang port in China on June 13.

Since that day, the ship has been anchored 2-3km away from the port.

HT had reported in November that while the local port authorities have not allowed "crew change" - whereby a ship's crew can disembark and head back to their country of origin - it has been communicated to them that anyone needing treatment could be allowed to come ashore temporarily for medical attention.

A news report by India's ANI in November had said the 23 Indian crew members on board were seeking help from the Indian government to return home. Some are suffering from health issues and the ship is running short of medicines, the report said.

However, that's not the only merchant navy ship on which Indian sailors have been stranded for months.

At least 16 Indians are stuck on MV Anastasia off the Caofeidian port in Hebei province.

"Onboard the Anastasia are 18 seafarers - 16 of them Indian, one Russian and one Filipino - forced to work at sea for far longer that their current anchorage, with crew clocking up to 20 months as ports refuse to let them disembark for fear of spreading contagion," a report in The Sydney Morning Herald said Tuesday, adding that at least four them were on "suicide watch".

An estimated 1,500 seafarers are stranded in Chinese harbours, the report added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 74 as on Thursday. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 22 -- The US ordered China to shut its consulate general in Houston city, Beijing said on Wednesday, adding that it was an "unprecedented escalation" in Washington's recent actions against China and warned of "legitimate and necessary" response against the decision. This dramatic development is sure to further sour the rapidly deteriorating bilateral ties with the two countries already at loggerheads over South China Sea disputes, the Hong Kong security bill, US arms sales to Taiwan, the condition of minorities in Xinjiang, and the origin of the coronavirus besides an ongoing trade war.

Earlier on Wednesday, Hu Xijin, the editor of the Communist Party's Global Times newspaper said Washington had given 72 hours to Beijing - that is by July 24 - to close down the Houston consulate.

Also read: Relationship with India important, monitoring LAC very closely - US defense secretary

Hu's tweet came hours after Houston police and firefighters descended on the consulate following witness reports that papers were being burned outside in open containers, the Houston Chronicle and two local TV stations reported, citing local police.

In Beijing, the Chinese foreign ministry lashed out at the Donald Trump administration for passing the order.

"It is a political provocation unilaterally launched by the US side, which seriously violates international law, basic norms governing international relations and the bilateral consular agreement between China and the US."

Speaking at the regular ministry briefing, Wang said, "China strongly condemns such an outrageous and unjustified move which will sabotage China-US relations. We urge the US to immediately withdraw its erroneous decision, otherwise, China will make legitimate and necessary reactions".

"The unilateral closure of China's consulate general in Houston within a short period of time is an unprecedented escalation of its recent actions against China," Wang said and listed allegations of Washington harassing its diplomats and students in the US.

"For some time, the US government has been shifting the blame to China with stigmatisation and unwarranted attacks against China's social system, harassing Chinese diplomatic and consular staff in the US, intimidating and interrogating Chinese students and confiscating their personal electrical devices, even detaining them without cause," Wang said.

The spokesperson said China had shown goodwill to US diplomats in China and had promoted Sino-US ties through its envoys in the US.

"On the contrary, the US put restrictions on Chinese diplomats in June and last October respectively with no valid reason. [The US] has seized and opened mail and official supplies," Wang said.

Due to the deliberate smearing and hatred-inciting moves from the US, Chinese delegations in the US have recently received bomb threats and death threats. Responding to a separate question at the press conference, spokesperson Wang asked the US to immediately stop making accusations against it about cybercrimes, in response to Washington's indictment of two Chinese nationals for hacking Covid-19 vaccine-related data and defence secrets.

Wang said ".the consulate was operating normally" but sidestepped questions about US media reports in Houston on Tuesday night that documents were being burned in a courtyard at the consulate.

Earlier on Wednesday, US media reported that Houston police and fire officials responded to reports that documents were being burned in the courtyard of the Consulate General of China in Houston on Tuesday night, citing the Houston Police Department (PD).

Houston PD said they began receiving reports just after 8 pm that documents were being burned at 3417 Montrose Boulevard where the consulate is located, click2houston.com reported.

The Chinese Consulate in Houston was opened in 1979 - the first in the year the US and China established diplomatic relations.

The consulate website says the office covers eight southern US states - including Texas and Florida - and has nearly one million people in the area registered at the consulate.

There are five Chinese consulates in the US while the embassy is in Washington.

The US has its embassy in Beijing and consulates in Chengdu, Shanghai, Shenyang, Guangzhou, Wuhan and Hong Kong.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 28 -- A war of words between the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress over the Sino-India border dispute and alleged links between China and the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation (RGF), a trust chaired by Congress president Sonia Gandhi, intensified on Saturday with allegations and counter-allegations flying thick and fast on both sides.

BJP president JP Nadda asked the principal opposition party a series of questions, reiterated allegations that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance was in power at Centre, said his party will leave no stone unturned in "exposing double-faced politicians", and alleged that fugitive economic offender Mehul Choksi gave donations to the trust.

The BJP said both the Chinese government and the Chinese embassy in India have contributed to RGF, and even the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund (PMNRF) donated money to the trust when the Congress-led UPA was in power.

"I want to tell Sonia Gandhi that under the garb of China and Covid-19 crisis, one should not shy away from answering the questions the nation wants to know... It's a shame. It's a sacrifice of national interest by accepting money from foreign powers in personal trusts," Nadda told reporters.

He alleged that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy between 2005 and 2009 and from "tax havens" such as Luxembourg between 2006 and 2009. NGOs and companies with "deep commercial interests" donated to RGF, he said.

"Congress and corruption are synonymous," Nadda said, asking the opposition party to come clean on its "links" with China and the details of its MoU (memorandum of understanding) with the Communist Party of China. He said India's trade deficit with China soared to $36.2 billion in 2013-14 from $1.1 billion in 2003-2004, and asked if it was a "quid pro quo". The UPA was in power between 2004 and 2014.

Nadda also targeted former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, accusing him of allocating ~100 crore to the foundation as the finance minister in 1991, when India was going through its "worst financial crisis". Singh and Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi and P Chidambaram are trustees of RGF, which was set up in June 1991.

"RGF not only takes money from scams but also gives dodgy donations to their own organisations. Why did it turn donate money to Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust controlled by the family and Christian Missionary organisations like World Vision?" Nadda asked, referring to the Nehru-Gandhi family.

In its reply, the Congress dared the ruling party to ask the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) - the BJP's ideological mentor - and think-tanks Vivekananda International Foundation and India Foundation -considered pro-BJP - to disclose their source of funding and donors.

"Will the BJP disclose the source of funding, amounts received, name of donors [including of Chinese origin] for "Overseas Friends of BJP [OF-BJP]"?" Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala asked. "...What is the connection of Shri Rajkumar Naraindas Sabnani alias Raju Sabnani to OF-BJP?" he added. Sabnani is a businessman based in Hong Kong.

Surjewala said neither did RGF receive any donation from Choksi, wanted in the Punjab National Bank fraud case, and nor did it give him any loan. But the foundation received "a modest donation of ~10 lakh from Naviraj Estates Pvt. Ltd. in 2013, of which Shri Choksi was one of the Directors".

S Gurumurthy, the chairman of Vivekananda International Foundation (VIF), said on Twitter its trust deed prohibits receipt of foreign donations. "...It permits donations from people of Indian origin associated with VIF. As yet no one has got associated and no donations have been received," he said.

Earlier on Saturday, former Union minister P Chidambaram targeted Nadda in a series of tweets, a day after the BJP chief accused the Congress of committing a "brazen fraud" by diverting public money in PMNRF to a "family-run foundation".

PMNRF was set up in 1948 by India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, entirely with public contributions. It does not get any budgetary support. PMNRF resources are utilised primarily to give relief to families of those killed in natural calamities, and to victims of major accidents and riots, according to its website.

Chidambaram said Nadda "specialises in half-truths", and pointed out that Surjewala "exposed his half-truths".

In his rebuttal on Friday, Surjewala issued a statement saying the BJP and the central government "keep referring to a 2005 grant of ~1.45 crores" from the Chinese embassy to RGF for a disabled persons' welfare programme and research on Sino-India relations. The statement also said after the 2004 tsunami, RGF received ~20 lakh from PMNRF for relief activities in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

"What has the grant to RGF 15 years ago got to do with China's intrusion into Indian territory in 2020 under the watch of the Modi government?

"Suppose RGF returns the ~20 lakh, will PM Modi assure the country that China will vacate its transgression and restore status quo ante?" Chidambaram asked.

The allegations and counter-allegations come against the backdrop of a face-off between India and China along the contested border.

Twenty Indian soldiers and an undisclosed number of Chinese troopers died in a brawl in Ladakh's Galwan Valley on June 15, ratcheting up tensions between the neighbours. While the Congress accuses the government of ceding ground to the Chinese, the ruling BJP says the opposition party is playing with issues of national security. The Congress also says the BJP is raking up the RGF donation issue to divert attention.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 10 -- Global audit and consultancy major Deloitte's CEO Punit Renjen in his interaction at the Hindustan Times Leadership summit said that the 21st century is India's.

"This is India's century. Many across the world are bullish about India. It has the talent and demographic advantage and the vibrancy of the culture. Many see the opportunities that exist in India," Renjen said during a conversation with Hindustan Times editor-in chief HT's editor-in-chief R. Sukumar.

He said the global supply chain is an area that India could target as it aims for a $5 trillion economy.

The Indian-origin Renjen who took over as Delottie's Global CEO in 2015 and was re-elected in 2019 described 2020 as a miserable year because of the Covid-19 pandemic that has changed life across the world.

"2020 has been a miserable year for everyone, especially for the business community. Deloitte was also impacted substantially, but being a large organisation helped us survive. I don't think we are going to go back to the way we used to live. So there's a silver lining, and wake-up call as far as climate change is concerned," he said.

The Deloitte boss described said the pandemic as "a very disruptive force".

"We are not going back to the way we lived. There is a wake up call to address climate, social justice. But this pandemic has been a very disruptive force."

One of the major changes will be the way people work, he said.

"Remote and flexible work is here to stay. We have 300,000 people, 800 offices in 150 countries. Will we need 800 offices? I don't think so. So Covid-19 has brought in a change in the way we work," he said.

Renjen was confident that the global economy will bounce back from the pandemic.

"It will vary. Some Asian economies have started bouncing back. I think most economies will ounce back."

Renjen also said that outsourcing rules will change following the pandemic, Deloitte will double down in India where it has a major presence.

"The rules of outsourcing will change. We are doubling down in India.We serve the world from India from our centres in Hyderabad, Gurgaon and Pune and our plan is to double the workforce."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 4 -- Being the nerve centre of Sufi culture in India and the home of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, after whom the area was named, congregations are a daily affair at Nizamuddin Basti. Every year, thousands gather here in the Islamic month of Rabi-ul Awwal to observe the urs (death anniversary) of the Auliya on the 17th and 18th of the month (to fall sometime in November this year, as per the Christian calendar). Besides the urs, hundreds pay obeisance at the dargah (resting place) of the Sufi saint every day at the locality which announces its existence by the blue dome, or the Neela Gumbad, on the intersection of Mathura Road and Zakir Hussain Marg.

Besides its Sufi character, Nizamuddin is also a backpacker's and gourmand's delight with several small lodges; eateries churning out qorma, nahari, paaya and biryani; and small shops that sell attar (perfumes), skull caps, kurtas, and Islamic books. It also has one of the first branches of the famous Old Delhi Mughlai restaurant, Karim's. Residents of nearby colonies also visit the various meat shops in the area for their daily supply.

It is said that Auliya's basti never stands still. However, over the last three days, hundreds of potential Covid-19 patients were evacuated from the Markaz, the headquarters of the Tablighi Jamaat, located just a few metres away from the Dargah. A congregation of indeterminate length held last month at the Markaz has now emerged one of the biggest spreaders of the Sars-Cov-2 virus.

Farid Nizami, the 48-year-old caretaker of 13th-century dargah, says he has been getting queries from across the world and from those who live in the surrounding area about the rise in Coronavirus cases caused by a religious gathering of members of the Tablighi Jamaat in mid-March. "The moment the name of Nizamuddin occurs anywhere, people immediately associate it with the dargah. I am having to explain to everyone over and again that this incident has nothing to do with the Dargah," he said, adding that the mausoleum had for the first time in its history last month shut its doors to the thousands of pilgrims who visit it every day -- the moment the Prime Minister announced the March 22 "janta curfew" to control the spread of the virus.

"The members of the Jamaat have nothing to do with the Dargah, or with sufism. Their religious traditions are different and they hardly ever even visit the dargah," Nizami added.

The spread of Covid-19 at the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters situated in the same Nizamuddin Basti, however, has caused worry among the residents of the 700-year-old settlement around the mausoleum of the Sufi saint.

Abdur Rahmaan (56), a local resident, said: "Ever since the government began alerting us on Coronavirus cases, we have been spreading awareness among the people of this basti about social distancing. However, for the past few days we have been facing a lot of discrimination when we go out to get grocery and other essential commodities from nearby markets. People feel that we are carrying the virus and refuse to supply us with any goods we need."

The settlement around the dargah, where a thriving population of those claiming lineage to Hazrat Nizamuddin and his disciples dwells, has been at the centre of cultural activities in Delhi since the 13th century.

"Every dynasty that ruled Delhi since has built in this area, because of the proximity to the saint's grave," said Ratish Nanda, CEO of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, which has been carrying out development efforts in the basti for at least a decade. A large number of royal tombs came up in the vicinity, including Humayun's tomb, which is one among the three Unesco world heritage sites in Delhi. The presence of a 16th century heritage park, Sundar Nursery, which was redeveloped three years ago, is yet another attraction for tourists.

"Like every other urban village in Delhi, the Nizamuddin basti has grown organically, and has several segregated communities who came to the area at different points in time." added Nanda.

There are about 400 families in the area who trace their descent to the saint. Then there was a wave of refugees from West Punjab who came here in 1947. Nizamuddin still remains one of the first ports of call for a Muslim immigrant in Delhi. During the 1982 Asian Games, a large population of labourers came to the area and continued to stay here long after the games were over.

Nizamuddin is also a cultural hub. "Many things that are deeply connected to the idea of India found their origins in Nizamuddin," said heritage enthusiast Sohail Hashmi. "While the Chisti saint Nizamuddin Auliya decided to stay here, it is through his closest disciple, the poet, musician and scholar, Amir Khusrao, that Sufi thought is transmitted into the language of Delhi. It is he who begins the musical tradition of Qawaali, drawing in elements from folk music in Delhi and Punjab. The beginning of the langar tradition also took place in the hospice of Nizamuddin," adds Hashmi.

The Qawali tradition at the Nizamuddin Dargah continues to draw about 1,500 visitors every Thursday night. The mausoleum is visited by thousands of pilgrims from across the world on the birth and death anniversaries of Nizamuddin and Khusrao as well.

Being a space of cultural significance, literary figures such as the 17th century poet Abdul Rahil Khan-i-Khana and the 19th century poet Mirza Ghalib also came to be buried there. "Thousands of people come here every year to celebrate Ghalib in seminar, mushairas, and ghazal programs," said Aqil Ahmad, secretary of the Ghalib academy, a cultural and educational institution established in 1969 in West Nizamuddin, consisting of a research centre, art gallery, and a calligraphy training centre.

In was in the 1920s that the Tablighi Jamaat was given land by the Nizamuddin Dargah to build their headquarters.

Speaking about how the present controversy about the Jamaat gathering might be affecting the health and reputation of people at Nizamuddin, Nanda said "presently our only concern is the well being of the 20,000 residents of the basti and to identify anyone who will need hospitalisation".

"Thereafter much needs to be done to reiterate that the mammoth Tablighi Jamaat headquarters that now overshadows the basti, has in fact little association with pilgrims to the dargah or with the local residents," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 2 -- The WhatsApp universe would have us believe that Nostradamus predicted the coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19) and that the authors Sylvia Browne and Lindsay Harrison, too, foresaw this in their book End of Days: Predictions and Prophecies about the End of the World.

In a life-imitating-fiction moment, people are amazed at how prescient Steven Soderberg's 2011 masterly science fiction film, Contagion, foreshadowed just such a pandemic with wide-ranging effects. That Dr Lipkins, the virologist consultant for the film tested positive for Covid-19 adds to an eerie feeling about the virus' surreal reach and power across time and space.

Foretold or not, the scale, scope and rapid spread of Covid-19 has taken the world by surprise and caused a tectonic shock to global public health, economy and society. The United Nations called it the most challenging crisis since World War II.

Our deepest fears about individual and collective vulnerability and the mortality of the human race itself in the face of this highly-contagious pandemic have been stoked. This is especially because there is no immediate vaccine or proven cure yet.

Theories about whether it was a spontaneous, accidental or deliberately perpetrated outbreak, and about the origin of the virus from animal-to-human being a blow back from nature are abound. We may perhaps never find out, but we must learn lessons. The need for a truly global, empowered and effective bio-surveillance and forewarning mechanism to prevent, detect and track viruses at inception within countries for the global public good has been underlined.

The biggest dilemma in shaping and executing public policy to contain the pandemic is to banish an apocalyptic sense of doom and gloom. At the same time, a morale-raising message about the seriousness of the pandemic and the do-or-die socioeconomic choices people need to make to win the war against Covid-19 need to be conveyed. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has managed to do just that with the media playing a largely positive role.

The coronavirus outbreak began in China and gripped its Hubei province of 60 million people and Wuhan, its glittering capital, in December 2019. It then spread as a global pandemic to 163 countries in all continents with nearly 858,000 infected and over 40,000 dead, and counting.

It went on to affect the rest of Asia and particularly affected Europe and the United States. The latter is now the country with the highest number of cases and fatalities, outstripping China .

It is being reported that after being secretive and in an initial state of denial about gravity of the outbreak, China moved to curb its spread within China with iron-curtain efficacy, military ruthlessness and logistical prowess. It has now declared that it has flattened the curve with only a few new cases and deaths. A video of the Governor of Wuhan claims it as a victory of the Chinese system of discipline and control over people's behaviour.

While it is comforting that China, the original epicentre of the virus, has been able to flatten the curve, it owes the world some answers . How did China reach the present stage? What lessons were learnt? How did Chinese authorities manage to lock off huge parts of the country affecting 800 million people? And now, how are they opening up Wuhan once again domestically and internationally? Equally important: How are they using pharmaceutical and virological knowledge and capital to find and share data, a possible cure and vaccine with the rest of the world?

Can democracies - developed countries like those in Europe and North America and a large, developing, densely-populated country of 1.3 billion like India with a federal polity, socioeconomic and cultural complexity and plurality - discipline their populations into complying with social distancing norms to flatten and bend the curve? As the Nizamuddin case shows, one dereliction can trigger a cluster contagion and be one too many.

Countries like India have mounted unprecedented and comprehensive prevention, transmission control, mitigation and response efforts. It has forced the government to impose a total lockdown affecting 1.3 billion people. This is a truly staggering, but necessary, response.Transformational behaviour change is the key to success.

The impact of Covid-19 is being acutely experienced at the community, province and national levels. Governments have the primary responsibility. It is a time when we erect walls, fences and ensure border controls, but it is also a truly global existential crisis requiring a concerted global response, action and solidarity. The World Health Organization and the United Nations along with all countries must work to make sure that end-of-the-world prophesies about the pandemic do not come to pass.

Lakshmi Puri is a former deputy executive director of UN Women and former acting deputy secretary general of UNCTAD. This is the first of a series of three articles by the writer.

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The coronavirus pandemic has infected around 600,000 people across the globe and claimed more than 24,000 lives worldwide, the World Health Organisation states.

From China, the virus spread quickly to the rest of the world, finding a new epicentre in Europe and the United States. For the first time for any country, US Covid-19 figures crossed 100,000 surpassing China's record of over 81,000 Covid-19 cases.

Here are key Covid-19 developments from across the globe.

1. The United States continues to lead with 101,657 cases followed by Italy, China and Spain.

2. Covid-19 has already plunged the global economy into recession, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said on Friday.

3. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, UK health secretary Matt Hancock and chief medical officer Chris Whitty test positive.

4. Death toll in Italy surged by 919 to a total of 9,134. It's the highest number of deaths in a day.

5. If the rate of growth in Covid-19 cases continues, the New York City area will suffer a more severe outbreak than those experienced in Wuhan, China or the Lombardy region of Italy, says a New York Times analysis. Death toll in New York jumped to 519, 40 per cent of US.

6. A New York hospital has started sharing on ventilators, putting two patients on each.

7. US President Donald Trump signed into law an unprecedented $2 trillion rescue plan Friday to salvage an economy crippled by coronavirus.

8. US President Donald Trump also used for the first time war-time powers under the Defense Production Act, under increasing pressure from state governors, to force a private company, General Motors, to ramp up production of ventilators needed to treat severely ill Covid-19 patients.

9. The US, France, Germany and other countries are engaged in hectic efforts to evacuate close to 14,000 of their nationals stranded in India following the suspension of commercial flights around the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

10. Chinese President Xi Jinping on Friday called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 25 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

83 killed after being hit by lightning in Bihar, PM Modi tweets on the disaster

In Bihar, at least 83 people lost their lives while 30 others were injured in thunderstorms and lightning that struck several parts of the state on Thursday. The lightning also killed more than 15 cattle in Khagaria district. Large scale damage to property has also been reported from various districts. Read more

'The result is before people': Patanjali's fresh defence of Coronil after states slap ban

Patanjali Ayurveda Limited CEO and Yoga Guru Ramdev's associate, Acharya Balkrishna issued a clarification on Thursday amid accusations that the Ayurvedic product Coronil, produced by the Haridwar-based firm, was not approved as an alternate medicine to treat coronavirus disease by the government. Read more

Vande Bharat Mission- 4th phase to begin from July 4

The government has firmed up plans to launch the fourth phase of Vande Bharat Mission to repatriate Indian citizens stuck in foreign destinations from July 3, according to news agency ANI. Read more

CBSE CTET 2020 exam postponed, check details at ctet.nic.in

The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) has postponed the Central Teacher Eligibility Test (CTET), which was scheduled to be conducted on July 5. The new examination dates for CBSE CTET 2020 will be announced after the situation becomes more conducive for the examination to be held. Read more

US economic recovery looks to be weakening in some states with Covid outbreaks

The US economic recovery is showing incipient signs of weakening in some states where coronavirus cases are mounting.The ebbing is evident in such high-frequency data as OpenTable restaurant reservations and follows a big bounce in activity as businesses reopened from lockdowns meant to check the spread of Covid-19.Read more

1983 World Cup: Five interesting facts from India's campaign

Whenever the future generations will talk about India's rise to the zenith of world cricket, they will always go back to the year 1983. The Indian cricket team did achieve several firsts before 1983 and did put in some world class performances against much stronger opposition. Read more

Manoj Bajpayee on Sushant Singh Rajput's death: 'I hadn't achieved anything till the age of 34'

Sushant Singh Rajput's Sonchiriya co-star Manoj Bajpayee has said that he had achieved nothing till the age of 34, which is how old Sushant was when he died last week. Manoj also said that he will always remember Sushant as a man who embraced his small-town origins. Read more

Amazon, Flipkart, others to add 'country of origin' label on online goods

Amazon India, Flipkart and other e-retailers will soon be highlighting Chinese goods sold in India online. Essentially, the e-retailers will be adding a 'country of origin' label to the goods sold online in the country. However, it remains uncertain when the e-commerce companies will start adding the 'country of origin' label to their product listings on their respective platforms. Read more

Michael Jackson: The King Of Pop and fashion icon

Michael Jackson, better known as the King Of Pop is considered on of the greatest entertainers in the history of music, and although the last few years of his life were embroiled in controversy, the singer-songwriter still holds a place in the hearts of many, even 11 years after his death, on 25 June, 2009. Read more

12-year-old Kerala boy's model train made from paper wows Railway Ministry. Watch

For ages, trains have fascinated children of all ages. From choo choo-ing with a model steam engine to creating a full track complete with a station, many kids tend to have extra love towards trains. But Adwaith Krishna, a 7th standard student has taken his fascination for trains to another level. Read more

Donald Trump clarifies 'slow down testing' remark as Covid cases rise in USA

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

What is Styrene, the gas that leaked from Visakhapatnam plant and killed 8

A chemical gas leak at a chemical factory in Andhra Pradesh on Thursday killed at least eight people. More than 1,000 people fell sick after inhaling the poisonous Styrene gas leaked from the plant. Read more

As part of Haryana's diversification drive, farmers opting for non-paddy crops to get Rs 7,000 per acre

In its first firm crop diversification push, the Haryana government has decided to buy maize and pulses at the minimum support price (MSP). Read more

Madhya Pradesh, hard hit by Covid-19, has no info on samples for 10 days; experts concerned

Unlike its neighbouring states Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh - which continue to share their Covid-19 data on the number of samples collected and tested with the public - the Madhya Pradesh government has stopped doing so. Read more

Search for Covid-19 origin heats up as WHO seeks mission to China

The World Health Organization is considering a new mission to seek the source of the coronavirus in China, amid growing controversy over the origin of a pandemic that has killed more than a quarter of a million people. Read more

Google, Gates Foundation join forces to bring digital payments to developing countries

Google, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation coupled with other charitable organisations including Coil, ModusBox, Omidyar Network, and The Rockefeller Foundation, have joined forces to launch a charitable organisation that is aimed at bringing digital payments to developing countries. Read more

Monkey 'robs' ATM in Delhi. People call it Money Heist: monkey edition

A video of an ATM 'robbery' has sparked hilarious reactions among people because of the unusual culprit behind the 'crime'. It's a monkey. Read more

Alia Bhatt's fashion: Throwback to her best summer looks and accessories

Gully Boy and Raazi fame actor Alia Bhatt is one of the significant millennial style icons and quite a relatable one. Since her first film, Student Of The Year back in 2012, the Kalank actor's fashion was also evolved like her choice of roles. Read more

Watch- Covid-19: Fuel duty may give govt Rs 1.2 lakh crore boost | What you need to know

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top stories you need to know. Sunetra talks about the number of covid-19 cases in India, fresh spikes in urban centres, fuel duty, labour helplines receive over 10k distress calls and more. Watch the full video for more details. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 16 -- The United States will airlift 200 mobile ventilators, each estimated to cost about Rs 1 million, to help Indians combat Covid-19, people familiar with the developments told Hindustan Times.

"It has been indicated that the consignment will arrive by the end of this month or latest, early June," a government official said. Each of these mobile ventilators is estimated to cost $ 13,000 (Rs 9.6 lakh at current exchange rates) without accounting for the transportation costs. In all, the ventilators will cost about $ 2.6 million (or Rs 192 million) plus freight charges.

US President Donald Trump had announced the decision to send the ventilators on Twitter to underline close relations between the two countries. The gesture coincides with reports of India's 85,700 coronavirus cases surpassing the tally of China (82,933), the country where the outbreak began.

"We stand with India and @narendramodi during this pandemic. We're also cooperating on vaccine development. Together we will beat the invisible enemy!" President Trump said.

Trump reiterated the point at his Press conference moments later, referring to his India visit in February, the role played by Indian expatriates in the US and describing Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a "good friend of mine".

"We are working closely with India," he told reporters.

Trump also said the US and India were cooperating to develop a vaccine for coronavirus that has claimed over 307,000 lives and infected more than 4.5 million people globally since it emerged in China in December last year.

The US move comes weeks after Prime Minister Modi acted on Trump's request to reverse a ban on export of hydroxychloroquine, a malaria drug that was championed by the US President as a "game changer" in the fight against the coronavirus. Hydroxychloroquine, or HCQ, is being used in India as a prophylaxis for health workers at the frontline of the country's response to the epidemic.

Diplomats in Washington and New Delhi said Trump's offer to send the ventilators and his public statements were an indicator of the deepening ties between the two countries and close contact between the two countries at different levels.

It also comes against the backdrop of growing congruence of views between the two countries on accountability and transparency on the origin of the coronavirus, reforms in the World Health Organisation led by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and even strategic issues such as terrorism and the situatio in the Indo Pacific.

For weeks, Trump has roasted the WHO for allowing itself to be led by China's assessment of the virus when the disease was detected in central China's Wuhan city last year. There have also been accusations from Washington that the Sars-CoV-2 virus may not be natural and may have been created in a laboratory, a possibility that was echoed this week by PM Modi's cabinet colleague Nitin Gadkari in a media interview.

That the two sides are on the same page on China and WHO also came across at a seven-nation video conference initiated by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. There was broad agreement on the need to stress on transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has killed over 3 lakh people worldwide. The emphasis on transparency and accountability at this meeting attended by Foreign Minister S Jaishankar is seen to be aimed at China and the WHO that is due to hold its annual meet on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 22 -- On April 26, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) Sarsanghchalak (head) Mohan Bhagwat addressed swayamsevaks for the second time in a month. While not unusual, this time it was different. He called India's 1.3 billion people his own. Critics may think this was just a convenient turn of phrase. But his sentiments are a true reflection of the Sangh's thinking.

People who heard the three-day lecture series at Vigyan Bhavan two years ago will know that this is no new development. Bhagwat expressed similar thoughts in his annual Vijayadashami address as well.

The Sangh considers every Indian to be a Hindu. Since this is the foundation of its thinking, then the mistakes of a few shouldn't be seen as a reflection on society as a whole. And those who have made mistakes should accept them, and move on.

Bhagwat spoke of swadeshi (indigenous) and self-reliance. Sangh-inspired organisations such as the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, the Bharatiya Kisan Sangh and the Swadeshi Jagran Manch have also been making efforts to realise these objectives. Recently, in his Panchayati Raj Day address, Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi also spoke about being self-sufficient right from the village level. On May 12, the PM spoke about Aatmnirbhar Bharat (self-reliant India). RSS ideologue, Dattopant Thengadi, who was instrumental in creating these organisations, was one of the most vociferous proponents of swadeshi and Aatmnirbhar Bharat. Thengadi, in his book Third Way, laid out a road map for a self-dependent India.

Most critics of swadeshi are confused about the concept. For them, swadeshi implies turning the wheel back to the 19th century. Thengadi said, "we require computer chips and not potato chips". Swadeshi is the practical manifestation of patriotism. Patriotism should not be seen as isolationism. Patriots are not against internationalism. He added, "Their pleas for national self-reliance are not incompatible with international cooperation, provided that latter is on equal footing - with due regard to the national respect of every country."

In his lectures, he quoted the effect of Mahatma Gandhi's influence on Motilal Nehru's lifestyle that was initially considered lavish by that era's standards. But Motilal Nehru switched to khadi at the Mahatma's request. In his address to the nation, the PM also emphasised the use of local brands.

The origin of the coronavirus disease in China and the subsequent news about the supply of substandard Chinese goods to different countries have given India a big push to become self-reliant.

On the other hand, India has given appropriate aid and assistance to many countries following the spirit of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam (the world is one family). Indian scientists and industrialists have also contributed towards making India self-reliant.

The Sangh chief also urged the government to fulfil its obligations in this regard. He said that the administration will have to become more responsible and people-oriented. Recently, the Bharatiya Shikshan Mandal, an organisation inspired by the Sangh, also announced a competition for an indigenous video conferencing app.

Both the Sangh and the PM are unanimous about the economic direction of the country. According to the PM, in a post-Covid-19 world, the country should head towards self-reliance, organic farming and a swadeshi-based economy. These are issues that the Sangh chief mentioned in his Vijayadashami speech. He also mentioned that foreign investment should also come to India only on India's terms. The government has rightly made recent changes in its foreign investment policy in this context.

The lockdown has resulted in huge improvements in the quality of the environment. The clear air and clean flowing rivers are proof. The need for a lifestyle based on the conservation and the protection of nature is imperative for India. The sarsanghchalak has also emphasised the need for society to move forward without exploiting nature.

At this crucial time, the swayamsevaks are engaged in several services to help all Indians, irrespective of differences, who are vulnerable at this time. Today, more than 340,000 swayamsevaks are offering services at about 67,000 locations across India.

Apart from delivering ration kits to more than five million families, they have delivered over 300 million cooked food packets to people and have made over 22,466 blood donations. The government and administration can maintain the lockdown in the country only for a certain amount of time. Society can emulate the practices of the Sangh to maintain disciple post the lockdown.

Even after the lockdown is lifted, people have to learn to stay away from crowded places. Similarly, the State and the administration too will have to change according to the needs of society.

Overall, we must move towards a new nature-based self-reliant society and governance.

Rajiv Tuli is a member of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Delhi state executive

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 15 -- Three Indians are among 77 academically outstanding and socially committed postgraduates selected on Wednesday for the prestigious Gates Cambridge Scholarship to study at the University of Cambridge from the 2020-21 academic year.

The three scholar-elects from India are: Anirudh Sharma (PhD Clinical School MBPhD Programme), Priyanka Kotamraju (PhD Sociology) and Stuti Pachisia (PhD English). Besides, there are others of Indian origin from United States. The 2019 cohort included seven Indians.

The international postgraduate scholarship programme was launched in 2000 with a $210 million donation to the University of Cambridge from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Since the first cohort in 2001, over 1,700 scholars have been selected from over 100 countries.

Stephen Toope, vice-chancellor of the university, said: "The Gates Cambridge Scholars are an outstanding group of people. They have not only demonstrated exceptional academic abilities in their fields, but have also shown a real commitment to engaging with the world - and to changing it for the better".

"They truly embody the values our University cherishes - excellence, a global outlook and an aspiration to contribute to society, values that are needed more than ever at this terrible time," he said.

Eighty per cent of the 2020 cohort will pursue PhDs. Their subjects range from the impact of climate change on coastal birds and rabies control to indigenous rights in New Zealand, the history of uncertainty in polar climate science and the moral basis of identity-based harm.

Barry Everitt, provost of the Gates Cambridge Trust, added: "This year's selection process has taken place against the background of the COVID-19 pandemic which more than ever shows the vital need to bring together from around the world the most brilliant minds from the most diverse backgrounds to work on global challenges".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 1 -- For 10 months last year, at least five days a week, very rarely more, even more rarely less, I wrote a column on the coronavirus disease, Covid-19. It was mostly focused on science and data - the two things that I have maintained are needed to fight Covid-19 - although there were digressions into economics, the nature of work and play, literature, and music.

I stopped writing the column on January 1. It was the day India announced the launch of the vaccine - and it was, I believed (and still do), the beginning of the end. Sure, Covid-19 will be around for a long time; it may never be eradicated; but the vaccines render it powerless.

There's been a lot to write about since then, and there are times I have considered restarting the column. The mutant strains of the Sars-CoV-2 virus have really come into their own in recent months, and we learn about them with every passing day. India has made several avoidable missteps in its vaccination drive, just like it did with its testing protocols in the initial days of the pandemic. And the number of cases in the country appears to be on the rise, although it is still around a sixth of the peaks seen last year, and the fact that I have repeatedly got it wrong about a second wave (something I am delighted about because who would wish for one?) stops me from terming it as such.

There has been no let-up in the volume of scientific papers being published on the virus, its effects, and vaccines and other treatments, and I continue to read a lot more scientific literature than I did before the outbreak of the disease - December in China, and early March in India - when the first local cases were registered.

We knew little about coronaviruses (although they weren't unknown) before the pandemic. We would have known a lot less if not for Sars, which emerged in 2002-03, flared up, and then died out. Over the past year we have learnt more about the virus itself, details that point to a level of sophistication unseen in other viruses, and aimed at increasing its power to infect cells. This has resulted in a plausible theory about its bio-engineered origins in a laboratory somewhere in China, but it's just as plausible that the virus jumped from bats to humans through an intermediate species, picking up some weaponry along the way. Sars-CoV-2 isn't as lethal as some other viruses but it is highly infective, and the combination perhaps makes it among the most dangerous pathogens humans have faced. Someday (soon, maybe) we will understand the evolutionary journey of the virus, and, if our scars are healed by then, perhaps even marvel at it.

We have answers, at least partial ones to many questions - why the virus affects some more adversely than it does others? Why some people become superspreaders? Why the death toll in the US and the UK are high? And we do not have answers to others, including, for those of us in India, the mystery of the country's Covid-19 numbers, or, if a smaller mystery-within-a mystery is needed, the reason for Uttar Pradesh and Bihar's low Covid-19 infections and deaths. Or why, in general, states with good public health parameters have fared worse than those with poor ones.

Beyond the numbers, though, history will record events of 2020 (and 2021) along three dimensions: scientific, government, and individual.

The scientific response to Covid-19 has been staggering in its speed and ingenuity. All previous records for vaccine development have been broken, not once, not twice, not three times, but several times over. A clutch of repurposed drugs and some new ones are now available to treat Covid-19. Death and hospitalisation rates have progressively reduced (with some exceptions). Science is winning.

The response of governments has been mixed - not surprising because of the scale and the complexity of the problem and the speed with which the disease emerged, and not surprising because governments have traditionally had an uneasy relationship with science and data, the only two things that should have, in ideal circumstances, driven their response to the pandemic. The Swedish, firm believers in science, seemed to turn their back on it in a strategy that was initially praised, then criticised, then acclaimed again, and finally debunked. For the record, I insisted all along that it was the wrong approach (not out of prescience but the understanding that when it came to pandemics, science could never be wrong). Still, while there were missteps (and there continue to be), and governments could have performed better than they did, and taken smarter decisions, they could just as easily have done worse on both counts.

I just hope their experience with the pandemic has made governments realise what really matters (in this case, to repeat myself, science and data).

Meanwhile, people adapted - to no jobs or those that paid less than they did before the pandemic; to constantly wearing masks; to social distancing, isolation, and quarantines; to not dining out or travelling; to working from home (or not working from home); to studying from home; and to many other things that would have seemed strange just a year ago.

And so, scientists shone, governments faltered to varying degrees, and the rest of us, well, did what we do best - we coped.

P.S: The last column I wrote on Covid-19, Dispatch 238, appeared on January 2. My colleague Kunal Pradhan who edited most of the columns, and who had gotten into the practice, once I crossed 100 columns, of telling me which cricketer had scored as much as the day's column number, and why it mattered, was stumped. As it turns out, a few days later, on January 5, New Zealand's Kane Williamson made 238, and it turned out to be a record because 238, until then, had been the lowest score never to be made by a batsman (which basically meant all scores between, and including 0 and 237 had been made by at least one batsman). It's just that we didn't know it at the time.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- With business virtually at standstill, retail and hospitality industries have planned new models to keep going in a controlled environment during and after the lockdown to check the spread of coronavirus.

The Shopping Centres Association of India (SCAI) has prepared a standard operating procedure (SOP) and approached the administrations in several states, including West Bengal, seeking resumption of operation with limited manpower and restricted entry of shoppers. The industry provides livelihood for 12 million people across India.

"The retail industry contributes over 10% to India's gross domestic product (GDP), the second largest after agriculture. It employs over 8% of the overall workforce making it the third largest in the country," Amitabh Taneja, chairman and founding director, SCAI, said in a summary to the SOP that was sent to chief minister Mamata Banerjee on May 1 along with his letter.

Click here for full Covid-19 coverage.

The SOP mandates, among many other things, 50 per cent occupancy of common areas and gross leasable areas, distance of five feet between customers at eating outlets, Installation of plexiglass at checkout points, 50 per cent use of parking capacity, restricted washroom usage, no promotional activity and sensor-based sanitization points at entry and inside stores and outlets.

State government officials were not willing to comment but a senior bureaucrat said that SCAI representatives were told that the government would wait for the Centre to take a call on opening malls.

"It will take India quite some time to turn into a green zone. Shopping centres and malls cannot be shut down till then because billions of lives depend on the manufacturing industry which has taken a hit. If the government can allow offices and airports to operate with limited staff, something can be tried at malls as well. Look at the streets. I am quite sure there would have been complete order at liquor stores in the malls had they been allowed to open," Rahul Saraf, managing director of Kolkata-based Forum Group and director SCAI, told HT.

"A mall provides a formal and regulated environment. One should not wait for normalcy to return," he added.

The amount of business in a mall works out to be around Rs 10,000 per square feet a year and the space used for business in some of the big malls in and around Kolkata adds up to around five million square feet, said Saraf.

"Let there be caveats but thousands of frontline and back-end workers should be allowed to earn their livelihood," he added.

With the number of Covid cases on the rise, the hospitality industry in Bengal is going through an equally rough time and many are trying to work out new models.

Rishi Jain, executive director, Jain Group, which owns Holiday Inn near Kolkata Airport, has started renting out the top floor of the property to people looking for a quarantine facility that is more hospitable than a government building.

"Entry and exit to the top floor are not used by other guests and the floor below it is kept empty to act as a buffer zone. Only disposable utensils and containers are used in the top floor," said Jain.

"In our hotel, retail selling has come to a zero with no one coming in to have lunch or dinner or ordering food from home. Luckily we have some guests of foreign origin and supply of raw materials is unaffected till now. We are operating with 30 per cent staff strength," said Jain.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 10 -- India and Nepal have decided to start flights under a bilateral air bubble arrangement, people familiar with developments said on Thursday, marking another step by the two sides to normalise ties hit by a border row earlier this year.

"Initially, we are starting with one daily flight from each side between Delhi and Kathmandu. From the Indian side, it will be Air India which had a daily flight between the two capitals in the pre-Covid-19 period," one of the people cited above said on condition of anonymity.

Flights between the two countries and cross-border movement of people through several checkpoints were suspended following the outbreak of Covid-19. The movement of essential supplies and cargo, however, had continued as Nepal is largely dependent on imports from India.

The move follows a string of visits to Nepal by senior Indian officials to reset ties that were hit after Kathmandu issued a new political map in May that included Indian territories, including the strategic Kalapani region.

Following visits by Research and Analysis Wing chief Samant Goel and Indian Army chief Gen MM Naravane, foreign secretary Harsh Shringla travelled to Kathmandu last month for wide-ranging talks with the Nepalese leadership to take forward bilateral ties, especially in connectivity and trade. The two sides also agreed to respect each other's sensitivities and handle the border issue through existing mechanisms.

The people cited above said the creation of a bilateral air bubble arrangement had been proposed to Nepal by the Indian side some time ago, and Kathmandu had cleared the move after Shringla, during his recent visit, highlighted the importance of people-to-people connectivity in the special relations between the two sides.

"We are starting the air bubble arrangement with Indian and Nepalese nationals and holders of Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) and Person of Indian Origin (PIO) cards of all nationalities, and all valid Indian visa holders, except tourist visas," said the person cited above.

The air bubble arrangement will follow all medical protocols as is done with other countries that have similar arrangements, and this includes reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test report of 72 hours prior to the travel, the people said.

India currently has air bubble arrangements with 22 countries, including the US, the UK, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Tanzania, the Netherlands, the Maldives, Japan and Bangladesh.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 14 -- A group of armed forces veterans in Canada has started a campaign to try to mend a growing rift between various communities in the country over farm laws passed in India last year that have sparked protests.

The Veterans' Association of Ontario, which comprises Indian-origin members who have served in the armed forces in India and Canada, is bringing together representatives from Hindu and Sikh organisations to resolve differences over the farm laws that have divided the Indo-Canadian community.

Brigadier (Retd) Nawab Heer, chair of the association, told HT he was "hopeful" the situation will be "defused", adding, "I don't know why we should be creating tensions among ourselves. Views should be respected on both sides. If the Indian diaspora has to flourish here, we have to be together."

The association has facilitated dialogue between some leaders of the two communities, while religious establishments like gurdwaras have also been brought into the process of trying to create harmony.

Among the initiatives the entity has planned is a cultural fair this spring, to be organised jointly by the Sikh and Hindu communities.

Heer says the plan is to have a physical fair, but if Covid-19 curbs continue, it may have to be held virtually.

Also on the agenda is counselling and orientation for international students from India, some of whom have participated in the protests against the laws that have taken place in Canada.

Heer, who is Sikh, said such students were often "gullible and vulnerable" and need to be "insulated" from elements that "instigated" them.

The protests in Canada against India's farm laws, including a rally in front of the Indian High Commission in Ottawa on Saturday, have seen the involvement of pro-Khalistan groups. There have also been several reports of threats and intimidation of individuals considered pro-India by separatists.

This has also led to violence, including assault and harassment during a "Tiranga-Maple" car rally organised by the Indo-Canadian community in the Greater Toronto Area on February 28.

On the other hand, some extreme voices within the Hindu community have given calls for boycotting Sikh establishments such as stores and restaurants, and confronting them outside gurdwaras.

Having received "positive" feedback for their efforts so far, Heer is optimistic that negativity can be "curbed" except among those "with vested interests" to keep the divisions in place.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- The coronavirus strain that triggered the ongoing outbreak in Beijing could have originated in Europe, local officials said Friday after Chinese scientists released the genome sequence of samples picked up from the Xinfadi market linked to nearly all the cases.

Preliminary genetic sequencing research shows that this virus came from Europe , Zhang Yong, an assistant director at China's Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), was quoted as saying, adding that strain is older than the viruses currently circulating in Europe.

Gao Fu, the CDC director, had earlier said the virus could have started spreading in Beijing as early as the start of May.

The genome sequencing, put out late Thursday, had been shared with the WHO and the Global Influenza Data Initiative (GISAID), the CDC said.

The first cluster of new coronavirus infections was traced to the Huanan seafood market in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, the first epidentre of the pandemic, in December.

It has since infected almost 8.5 million people globally.

Earlier in the day, the national health commission (NHC) said Beijing had added 25 new cases of Covid-19 for June 18, four more than the day before, taking the total number to 183 for the new outbreak in the city with nearly all the infections linked to the sprawling Xinfadi fresh food market in the southwestern Fengtai district.

"The large amounts of samples found in the Xinfadi wholesale market indicate that the virus has been around for some time. If it had only just arrived in the city for a short period of time, there may not have been so many positive samples found; however, we need more data before making an informed decision about its origin," the CDC official Zhang said.

The first case in this new outbreak was reported on June 11, leading city authorities to reimpose a level two alert days after it had been lowered to the level three, or the least, alert on June 6.

Beijing authorities acted quickly to curb infection risks in the capital, shutting down and disinfecting fresh food and wet markets, fencing off dozens of residential communities near the affected markets, restricting travel out of Beijing and carrying out hundreds of thousands of nucleic acid tests.

Beijing is under a restricted lockdown with three categories of people not allowed to leave.

The first category includes confirmed Covid-19 patients, suspected cases, close contacts, asymptomatic carriers and people with fever.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- The Union health ministry clarified on Monday that community transmission of Covid-19 hadn't yet begun in India, a day after signalling the onset of "limited community transmission" of the disease. The ministry said limited community transmission isn's the same as community transmission -- Stage 3 of infectious diseases such as the one caused by the SARS-Cov-2 virus.

"Limited community transmission means where a more than one person has acquired, directly or indirectly, infection from the same source. Community transmission of alarming proportions has not been seen in India yet. There is nothing to hide...if we get evidence of large-scale community transmission, where the source of transmission is not known, we will declare it. As of now there's no community transmission in India," said Lav Aggarwal, joint secretary in the health ministry.

Later, India's health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan tweeted: "Today, related to #CoronaVirus, the @MoHFW_India (ministry of health and family welfare) made it clear that its spread has not reached the community transmission level yet and its transmission is still in the local phase. "

In Stage 3, the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated.

India has reported 1,308 cases and 32 deaths due to Covid-19. On Monday, 25 new cases were identified in Delhi, of which 18 cases were in one cluster, Nizamuddin.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

There are four main stages of the disease outbreak. Stage 1 is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage 2 is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage 3 is community transmission. Stage 4 is an epidemic.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the pandemic, has maintained that India is still in Stage 2, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact with an infected person or travel history rising over the past week.

Community transmission happens when the source of infection is untraced and the patient has no travel history or known contact with a confirmed Covid-19 case. It indicates that undiagnosed cases are infecting others, which is when infection clusters spiral out of control and turn into epidemics.

A senior public health expert, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said: "We've had pockets of community transmission in several locations in half-a-dozen states, but now the number of people with untraceable infection is increasing, which is a sign that community transmission has begun."

According to T Jacob John, head of the department of clinical virology and microbiology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, community transmission in India began in mid-February.

"Instead of splitting hairs, the focus should be on preparing to be three steps ahead of the virus. It's not a cops and robbers game, we should not be fooled into reacting to the virus but should be fooling the virus by anticipating the curve and proactively deciding what we need to do stop the spread," said John, emeritus medical scientist, ICMR.

The US Centers for Disease Control (USCDC) declared its first case of a person in California with no relevant travel history or exposure to another known patient asa "possible instance of community spread of Covid-19 in the United States" on February 26.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 3 -- It would not have come as a surprise to most people when a national survey last week showed an staggering 93% of Indians expressing confidence in Prime Minster Narendra Modi's leadership in tackling the coronavirus crisis. In fact, other surveys had shown public's confidence having steadily grown, from 77% at the beginning of the national lockdown over a month ago, to 83% earlier this month.

This was evident to anyone with an ear to the ground, such as the millions of volunteers who have been reaching out to assist those in need, or those who are in touch with many of them to coordinate aid. That confidence was also echoed by the vast majority of domestic and international public health experts monitoring India. Their sentiments were backed by solid evidence of the nation having done remarkably well in managing the pandemic.

Nevertheless, for a group of the usual suspects among international media, and some of their fellow travellers in India, all this might have been happening in a different galaxy. So deeply do they seem vested in purveying bad news about India, that they appeared oblivious to the overwhelming evidence that India was a stunningly positive outlier.

In the early stages, this school of reportage and commentary predicted catastrophe for India. They kept emphasising that since first world nations with superior healthcare systems were in big trouble, India was doomed. Some headlines include "Callousness of India's Covid response"; "A vulnerable population braces for a pandemic"; "The consequences (in India) will be especially grim"; and even "Mr Modi is in big trouble."

Next, as the days went by, they cast doubts on the relatively few infections by hyping the "low level of testing." Never mind that their cynicism -which should have been corroborated by a severe shortage of hospital beds and ventilators, and a sharp rise in respiratory-related deaths- was contradicted by reality. As testing was ramped up dramatically to the hundreds of thousands, and it became clear that far fewer Indians were turning up positive per 100 (IS THIS 1,000?) tests than in Europe and the United States (US), that bogey has mostly been quietly tucked away.

Thereafter, their acknowledgment that India was doing relatively well has been fleeting, and the tone grudging. Some sounded wistful, almost as if hoping that the good news about India were untrue, or if it were, that it would soon be overcome by negative developments. To be sure, the road ahead for India's fight against the virus will be long and arduous. But while it is not the global media's job to exude undue optimism about India, neither should it be to downplay real achievements and ooze negativism.

Finally, when the doom and gloom failed to materialise, these purveyors of a rigidly-blinkered narrative on India turned to their favourite charge: Islamophobia. They pounced on the developments surrounding the Tablighi Jamaat, and the public's disapproval of its members' behaviour, to accuse the Modi government and most Indian media of polarising the situation.

Of course, the reports that made this claim invariably omitted mentioning that the government's rules -such as the closure of places of worship- were equally applicable to all religions. Or that the PM's repeated appeals to unite people, including asserting that this virus "does not see race, religion, caste...we are in this together" was exactly the opposite of their allegation. And ironically, even those in the Indian media who went out of their way to be politically correct, more often preferring to use the euphemism "single source" rather than name the Tablighi Jamaat, were nevertheless accused just the same.

Such jaundiced views about India have gradually become commonplace among far-left, modern liberals within and without the country. Another aspect that stands out among this group is an excessive empathy for China that defies reason and which has eroded their credibility.

That was visible in the hotly-contested debate about the name of this virus. Although originally termed the "Wuhan virus" and later whitewashed into "SARS-CoV-2," the moment US President Donald Trump called it a "Chinese virus," all hell broke loose. Calling it that has, somewhat oddly, been termed racist by these commentators. More to the point, as the American talk show host and classical liberal -and no fan of Trump- Bill Maher pointed out, all past epidemics have been named after the place of their origin. These include German measles, Japanese encephalitis, Spanish flu, Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and others.

The reason this should be of interest in India is that none of this cohort objected a few years ago when an antibiotic-resistant bacterial strain was named the "New Delhi metallo beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1), because it was possibly first acquired here. This sort of hypocrisy only reinforces the perception of an entrenched bias against India among these circles.

As India grapples with the next phase of this pandemic, both in containing it as well as reviving the economy, it will also have to contend with more such determinedly pessimistic portrayals. It would be more appropriate for us to strive for a more balanced global narrative on India.

Baijayant "Jay" Panda is vice president, BJP

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- In a first, a Parliamentary standing committee will scrutinise the working of the transparency watchdogs, the Central Information Commission (CIC) and the state information commissions (SICs). The move has irked the right to information activists saying it "usurps" the powers of the state legislatives.

As the information commissions are statutory bodies, the CIC is required to submit annual reports to the Parliament and the SICs to state legislatives through its administrative wings, the Ministry of Personnel and Training in Centre and Services Department in the states. However, these annual reports are rarely discussed in Parliament or state legislatures even though members have raised questions over the efficacy of the information law through short duration discussion and zero hour, where a member can raise an issue approved by the Chair.

Rajya Sabha secretary general Utpal Kumar Singh has listed 12 issues for examination by the Parliamentary standing committee in the current financial year (2020-21), which includes a review of the working of the Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions. Others issued listed in agenda include reviews of working of virtual courts, Guardianship and Adoption laws and functioning of Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanisms.

Committee chairperson and BJP leader Bhupendra Yadav was not available for comments. A Rajya Sabha official privy to the development said the committee decides on the agenda after taking inputs from all members, which include 10 MPs from Rajya Sabha and 20 from Lok Sabha.

Also read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

"The committee has decided to review the information commission as there were lots of media reports about their functioning," he said.

The committee has powers to summon any official and seek suggestions from the non-government organisations to review the performance of any organization including the information commissions," officials said.

A report by Satark Nagarik Sangathan (SNS), released on eve of 15 years of RTI on October 9, 2020, said that around one-third of information commissions in India were headless, one-fourth of information commissioner posts were lying vacant and Jharkhand and Tripura information commissions were defunct.

The report said nine states, such as Uttar Pradesh, Telangana and Rajasthan, does not have a chief information commissioner, whose appointment under the RTI law is a statutory requirement. Since then, Rajasthan has appointed the chief information commissioner.

The Centre on November 10, 2020, filled the vacant post of chief information commissioner, since August 2020, with appointment of Yashwardhan Kumar Sinha.

Another report filed by Transparency International India on the same day said that around 33 million RTI applications were filed with various government departments across the country in the past 15 years, showing the widespread use of the watershed law that has empowered citizens to raise governance questions with public authorities. Only about 9 per cent of these RTI applications resulted in a second appeal, showing that over 90 per cent of the applicants were satisfied with the government response which, transparency law activists said, is the RTI's biggest achievement.

"We have no problem with the review of the chief information commission by a Parliamentary Standing Committee as the legislature has powers to review," said Anjali Bhardwaj of SNS. "We want the committee to give terms of reference of the review and the exercise should not be used to weaken the RTI Act. Earlier, the Central government had weakened the RTI law by bringing new service rules for information commissioners".

In October 2019, the Centre had notified rules downgrading information commissioner post from equivalence to election commissioners to a secretary in the government. The new rule also reduced the term of an information commission from five to three years and gave powers to the Centre to remove them, which Bhardwaj said had undermined the spirit of the RTI Act in name of rationalisation.

Venkatesh Nayak of the National Campaign for People Right to Information (NCPRI) asked how could Parliament review the functioning of the state information commissions as they come under the purview of the state governments and state legislatures.

"This is another attempt to usurp the powers of the state legislature, to which state information commissions submit their annual reports," Nayak said. Agreeing with him, Bhardwaj said the standing committee should take transparency and federalism into account while reviewing the functioning of the information commissions.

The importance of the RTI law for India could be gauged from Supreme Court 2019 judgment which said that the RTI has the potential to bring about good governance which is an integral part of a vibrant democracy. "Attaining good governance is also one of the visions of the Constitution. It also has a vital connection with the development," the court said.

The RTI is a Central law, which was adopted completely by the states without any substantial change. However, through rules, the state governments have brought in certain changes for appointing information commissions and functioning of the state information commissions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 27 -- Six people, including a foreigner, had died due to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) during treatment at hospitals in Delhi, Haryana and at a quarantine facility after being rescued from the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters, known as the Markaz, in Nizamuddin during the lockdown in March-end, the Delhi Police have told a Delhi court, in a charge sheet filed in May.

Various agencies had mounted a rescue operation to remove over 2,300 people from the Markaz after several who had allegedly attended a religious congregation there returned to their respective home states and were tested positive for the virus. Seven deaths, six of which were in Telangana alone, were also reported.

The deaths prompted the authorities to take measures to prevent the spread of the virus and file a criminal case against the Tablighi Jamaat chief Maulana Saad and six other office bearers, for defying a series of government directives, which curbed religious and large gatherings, issued to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the national capital. Charges of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and criminal conspiracy were added to the case after the deaths of some of the attendees. No arrests have been made in the case, so far.

Advocate Fuzail Ayubi, counsel for the Markaz, said that the assumption of the investigating agency to charge his clients for 304 (culpable homicide not amounting to murder) is completely "Misplaced" "The section 304 could not have been applied here in these circumstances and the assumption of the investigating agency is completely misplaced," he said.

According to the charge sheet filed in the case in the Saket court, the city police have said that during investigation it was found that six persons who were part of the religious congregation at the Markaz had lost their lives at the Lok Nayak hospital, a quarantine centre in Sultanpuri and AIIMS, Jhajjar.

"As per the certificates issued by the concerned doctors, their deaths had occurred due to corona virus infection," the charge sheet read.

While Yousuf Sahibu (36) from Tamil Nadu died on March 31 at AIIMS, Jhajjar, and Modokulov Maksat (38), from Kyrgyzstan died at the same hospital on April 13. Two persons from Tamil Nadu-Majeeth Mustafa (68) and Thathkir Pichaikani (64) died at the Lok Nayak Hospital in Central Delhi, on April 9 and March 29 respectively.

Another Tamil Nadu resident Mohammad Mustafa,60, had also died during treatment at the quarantine centre in Sultanpuri on April 22, the charge sheet says. The casualties also include a Delhi resident, Mohammad Aslam Abbasi (74) who died at the Lok Nayak hospital on March 31.

The police have filed charge sheets against more than 900 foreigners and charged them for allegedly attending the religious congregation organised in March by the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters, in violation of their visa conditions and the Indian government's guidelines on the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

In the charge sheet filed, the police said that the foreigners accepted that they had attended the religious congregation for the purpose of professing and propagating the principles and doctrines of the Tablighi Jamaat and had remained at its headquarters (Markaz) for some period.

"In order to ascertain their visit to Banglewali Masjid, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Delhi the register maintained at the Banglewali Masjid was taken into police possession, which further confirms their visit, including their name, country, passport number, period of stay and date of expiry of visa," the police said.

The police also added that in order to substantiate the legitimacy of their visit to India, passports of 723 foreigners and Identity Cards of 23 Nepal nationals have been taken into possession through seizure/handing over memos.

"Some of the accused foreign nationals were unable to provide / produce their passports. Despite efforts their passports could not be taken over till now. Hence, passport numbers of these foreign nationals have not been mentioned against their respective names and country of origin in the list of accused persons," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- Being the nerve centre of Sufi culture in India and the home of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, after whom the area was named, congregations are a daily affair at Nizamuddin Basti. Every year, thousands gather here in the Islamic month of Rabi-ul Awwal to observe the urs (death anniversary) of the Auliya on the 17th and 18th of the month (to fall sometime in November this year, as per the Christian calendar). Besides the urs, hundreds pay obeisance at the dargah (resting place) of the Sufi saint every day at the locality which announces its existence by the blue dome, or the Neela Gumbad, on the intersection of Mathura Road and Zakir Hussain Marg.

Besides its Sufi character, Nizamuddin is also a backpacker's and gourmand's delight with several small lodges; eateries churning out qorma, nahari, paaya and biryani; and small shops that sell attar (perfumes), skull caps, kurtas, and Islamic books. It also has one of the first branches of the famous Old Delhi Mughlai restaurant, Karim's. Residents of nearby colonies also visit the various meat shops in the area for their daily supply.

It is said that Auliya's basti never stands still. However, over the last three days, hundreds of potential Covid-19 patients were evacuated from the Markaz, the headquarters of the Tablighi Jamaat, located just a few metres away from the Dargah. A congregation of indeterminate length held last month at the Markaz has now emerged one of the biggest spreaders of the Sars-Cov-2 virus.

Farid Nizami, the 48-year-old caretaker of 13th-century dargah, says he has been getting queries from across the world and from those who live in the surrounding area about the rise in Coronavirus cases caused by a religious gathering of members of the Tablighi Jamaat in mid-March.

"The moment the name of Nizamuddin occurs anywhere, people immediately associate it with the dargah. I am having to explain to everyone over and again that this incident has nothing to do with the Dargah," he said, adding that the mausoleum had for the first time in its history last month shut its doors to the thousands of pilgrims who visit it every day -- the moment the Prime Minister announced the March 22 "janta curfew" to control the spread of the virus.

"The members of the Jamaat have nothing to do with the Dargah, or with sufism. Their religious traditions are different and they hardly ever even visit the dargah," Nizami added.

The spread of Covid-19 at the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters situated in the same Nizamuddin Basti, however, has caused worry among the residents of the 700-year-old settlement spread around the mausoleum of the Sufi saint.

Abdur Rahmaan (56), a local resident, said: "Ever since the government began alerting us on Coronavirus cases, we have been spreading awareness among the people of this basti about social distancing. However, for the past few days we have been facing a lot of discrimination when we go out to get grocery and other essential commodities from nearby markets. People feel that we are carrying the virus and refuse to supply us with any goods we need."

The settlement around the dargah, where a thriving population of those claiming lineage to Hazrat Nizamuddin and his disciples dwells, has been at the centre of cultural activities in Delhi since the 13th century.

"Every dynasty that ruled Delhi since has built in this area, because of the proximity to the saint's grave," said Ratish Nanda, CEO of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, which has been carrying out development efforts in the basti for at least a decade. A large number of royal tombs came up in the vicinity, including Humayun's tomb, which is one among the three Unesco world heritage sites in Delhi. The presence of a 16th century heritage park, Sundar Nursery, which was redeveloped three years ago, is yet another attraction for tourists.

"Like every other urban village in Delhi, the Nizamuddin basti has grown organically, and has several segregated communities who came to the area at different points in time." added Nanda.

There are about 400 families in the area who trace their descent to the saint. Then there was a wave of refugees from West Punjab who came here in 1947. Nizamuddin still remains one of the first ports of call for a Muslim immigrant in Delhi. During the 1982 Asian Games, a large population of labourers came to the area and continued to stay here long after the games were over.

Nizamuddin is also a cultural hub. "Many things that are deeply connected to the idea of India found their origins in Nizamuddin," said heritage enthusiast Sohail Hashmi. "While the Chisti saint Nizamuddin Auliya decided to stay here, it is through his closest disciple, the poet, musician and scholar, Amir Khusrao, that Sufi thought is transmitted into the language of Delhi. It is he who begins the musical tradition of Qawaali, drawing in elements from folk music in Delhi and Punjab. The beginning of the langar tradition also took place in the hospice of Nizamuddin," adds Hashmi.

The Qawali tradition at the Nizamuddin Dargah continues to draw about 1,500 visitors every Thursday night. The mausoleum is visited by thousands of pilgrims from across the world on the birth and death anniversaries of Nizamuddin and Khusrao as well.

Being a space of cultural significance, literary figures such as the 17th century poet Abdul Rahil Khan-i-Khana and the 19th century poet Mirza Ghalib also came to be buried there.

"Thousands of people come here every year to celebrate Ghalib in seminar, mushairas, and ghazal programs," said Aqil Ahmad, secretary of the Ghalib academy, a cultural and educational institution established in 1969 in West Nizamuddin, consisting of a research centre, art gallery, and a calligraphy training centre.

In was in the 1920s that the Tablighi Jamaat was given land by the Nizamuddin Dargah to build their headquarters.

Speaking about how the present controversy about the Jamaat gathering might be affecting the health and reputation of people at Nizamuddin, Nanda said "presently our only concern is the well being of the 20,000 residents of the basti and to identify anyone who will need hospitalisation".

"Thereafter much needs to be done to reiterate that the mammoth Tablighi Jamaat headquarters that now overshadows the basti, has in fact little association with pilgrims to the dargah or with the local residents," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 4 -- India and Australia elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed a crucial agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his counterpart Scott Morrison on Thursday.

The two sides also upgraded their "2+2" foreign affairs and defence dialogue to the ministerial level and unveiled a "shared vision for maritime cooperation in the Indo- Pacific".

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), one of seven agreements signed during the summit, will facilitate reciprocal access to military logistics facilities, allow for more complex joint military exercises and improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two countries.

"India is committed to expanding its relations with Australia in a comprehensive and quick manner. This is important not only for our two countries, but also for the Indo-Pacific region and the world," Modi said in his opening televised remarks in Hindi.

Morrision said the comprehensive strategic partnership formed by the two sides will take them "to a whole new level of relationship" and "continue to build the trust because we want commercial and trading relationships that are built on trust".

Referring to the joint declaration on cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, he added, "We share an ocean and we share responsibilities for that ocean as well - its health, well-being [and] security and the relationship we're forming around those issues and our maritime domain is the platform for so many other things between our countries."

The summit was held against the backdrop of growing tensions with China for both India and Australia, though secretary (east) Vijay Thakur Singh of the external affairs ministry told an online briefing there was no specific discussion on China.

However, many of the items on the agenda - shared democratic values, rules-based multilateral systems, an open and inclusive Indo-Pacific, respect for transparency, strengthening and diversifying supply chains for critical health, technology and other goods and services, and cooperation in rare earth minerals - appeared to be aimed at countering China's influence in the region, experts said.

Modi said the two sides should focus on how their relationship can be a "factor of stability for our region and for the world", while Morrison said Australia is working with friends such as India and Japan to provide a "steadying and stabilising and wise influence during.an incredibly difficult time".

Morrison said Australia is "committed to an open, inclusive, prosperous Indo-Pacific and India's role in that region.will be critical". He added, "We share a vision for open, free, rules-based multilateral systems in our region, whether that's in the health area or it's in trade or in other places."

He also tacitly referred to Australia's demand for a probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic while commending India's taking over as chair of the World Health Organization (WHO)'s executive board.

"This is a very important time to be chairing that executive board. I have no doubt the way that that will be led under India's leadership will be critical to how we deal with many difficult problems that we are encountering globally, particularly in the health area," Morrison said.

Among the other important agreements signed by the two sides during the virtual bilateral summit - the first such meeting for Modi - were a framework arrangement on cyber and cyber-enabled critical technology cooperation, a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on cooperation in mining and processing of critical and strategic minerals, and an implementing arrangement on cooperation in defence science and technology under the existing MoU on defence cooperation.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperation in mining and processing of rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves.

Indian officials said Australia is seen as a "reliable and secure supplier" of rare earth metals and institutions from both sides will jointly take forward collaboration in this field.

India, which imports more than 90% of the rare earth metals it needs from China, has been looking to diversify sources. In 2016, the imports from China were worth $3.4 million.

The two sides also signed three MoUs on cooperation in public administration and governance reforms, cooperation in vocational education and training and water resources management.

The virtual summit was arranged after Morrison was forced to put off a planned visit to India twice - first in January because of the devastating bushfires in Australia and then in May because of the Covid-19 crisis. Though the discussions were slated to last 40 minutes, they stretched to 70 minutes and secretary (east) characterised the talks as "extremely productive".

As part of the joint response to the Covid-19 crisis, an allocation will be made from the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund for work in seven areas to counter the pandemic.

An Australian statement said the joint declaration on maritime cooperation in the Indo-Pacific committed both sides to supporting rules-based maritime order in the region and working together to strengthen maritime domain awareness and combating trans-national challenges such as people smuggling, arms and narcotics trafficking, terrorism, and illegal and unregulated fishing.

The Australian side also said the cooperative arrangement on cyber affairs and critical technology will be complemented by a new, four-year $12.7 million partnership that will create a research and development fund for Indian and Australian businesses and support other countries to improve their cyber resilience.

Modi reiterated his invitation to Morrison to visit India when the situation normalises. Morrison, who has met Modi four times in the recent past, joked about how he had missed out on the "famous Modi hug".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 6 -- China on Wednesday said the US should not use tariffs as weapons after President Donald Trump threatened to impose more trade taxes on Chinese goods as punishment for Beijing's handling of the coronavirus outbreak.

Trump said on Friday that raising tariffs on China was "certainly an option" as he considers ways to retaliate against Beijing for the coronavirus pandemic.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said tariffs in general hurt all parties involved.

"So the US should stop thinking it can use tariffs as a weapon and a big stick to coerce other countries," Hua said at the regular ministry briefing on Wednesday.

The new virus emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year and has spread around the world, infecting some 3.6 million people and killing more than 2,55,000 of them, according to a Reuters tally.

China and the US have been trading barbs and blames on the Covid-19 pandemic, its origins and how each has handled it.

Hua urged the United States not to try to divert attention from its own mismanagement of its coronavirus epidemic by shifting blame onto China.

"What has the US done in the past few months? How did it allow the outbreak to develop to the stage today? Is this how a government should be responsible to its people?" she asked.

Responding to a question, Hua said as of May 1, China has provided more than 5.3 billion masks, 330 million pairs of surgical gloves, 38.85 million pieces of protective clothing, 5.98 million pairs of goggles, and nearly 7,500 ventilators to the US.

"Therefore, the claims about China's so-called concealment of epidemic situation, delay of notification, and profit from epidemic situation are purely nonsense.," Hua added.

"The most urgent task is to control the outbreak in the U.S. and to save as many lives as possible ... Saving lives should take precedence over political self-interest," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 29 -- The Kumrahar assembly constituency in Patna has traditionally been known as the stronghold of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), but that tag is under a cloud in the ongoing three-phase Bihar polls.

Though the BJP has stitched up the caste calculus and its traditional support base appears to be intact, localised issues could prove to be a stumbling block, despite the party's recent feat such as the Bhoomipujan at Ayodhya for the construction of the long-pending Ram temple.

Lack of development in the constituency is the overriding factor, but the BJP may still afford to be cautiously optimistic because of a lack of a strong candidate against its sitting lawmaker.

But a tour of the constituency amid the raging coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak gives a tell-tale glimpse of the broken civic infrastructure.

Also read | Millions cast votes in Bihar under the shadow of Covid-19

The roads in Kumrahar, which is located in the heart of the state capital Patna and boasts of the historic remains of the ancient city of Patliputra, including an 80-pillar hall of the Emperor Ashoka's era, are in a pitiable condition. Drainage system is also in shambles, as development has been few and far between since the British colonial era.

The open and filthy drain at Saidpur near Moin-ul-Haq Stadium at Rajendra Nagar has been a civic nuisance for local residents, who have to put up with the overpowering stench and mosquito menace.

The roads have become death traps and several accidents have been reported from the neighbourhood. The public's demand to cover and clean the drain has been falling on civic authorities' deaf ears for years.

Public parks and open spaces are also neglected. They have become safe havens for criminal and anti-social activities due to a lack of maintenance.

The approach road to Bazaar Samiti, Bihar's biggest wholesale market, which receives over two dozen truck loads of fruits and fish daily from West Bengal, Maharashtra, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Hyderabad and Karnataka, is in a mess.

Basic civic amenities such as washrooms and drinking water are non-existent, much to the distress of thousands of wholesale fruit and fish market dealers and retailers, including women sellers.

The state government has been found wanting in ensuring supply of water and the crisis aggravates every summer with unfailing regularity.

Kumrahar residents are not spared of their annual monsoon woes, either.

In September-October, 2019 Kumrahar had turned into an island after a burst of intense showers. Local residents remained cut off from the rest of Patna and spent a few harrowing days without food, electricity and water supplies.

These civic issues may impact BJP candidate Arun Kumar Sinha's poll prospects. Sinha is pitted against Dr Dharmendra Kumar of the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) and Rajesh Ranjan Pappu of the Jan Adhikar Party (JAP).

Kumrahar assembly constituency is a part of the Patna Sahib Lok Sabha constituency and comprises areas under Patna Municipal Corporation's (PMC) wards 14 and from 16 to 22.

Earlier, Kumrahar was a part Patna Central Assembly constituency, but was renamed in 2008 following the delimitation as per the Delimitation Act, 2002 and on the basis of the 2001 Census.

The constituency is a treasure trove and boasts of several monuments and heritage sites tracing their origin to the ancient city of Patliputra.

Several illustrious personalities from Bihar such as poet Ramdhari Singh Dinkar, novelist Phanishwar Nath Renu, folk singers, Vindhyavasini Devi and Padamshree Sharda Sinha, and dhrupad singer and Padmashree Pandit Siyaram Tiwari have all called the constituency their home at one point in time of their lives or the other.

The total voter population of the constituency is 4,21,902, including 225328, 196539 and 35 males, females and third gender, respectively.

Upper castes, comprising Kayasthas, Rajputs, Bhumihars and Brahmins, form a bulk of the constituency's voters, but there is also a sizeable population of Yadavs, Chandravanshi, Dalits and Muslims.

Over two dozen candidates are trying their luck at the hustings from Kumrahar, including Vivek Shankar, Amit Kumar and Vinod Kumar Pathak, who are fighting as independents, Ashok Kumar Keshri from the Rashtra Seva Dal and Suryakar Jeetendra from the Socialist Unity Centre Of India (Communist).

Sinha, a three-time lawmaker, had won the seat in 2010, when he had defeated Kamal Parwez of the Lok Janshakti Party (LJP) by over 50% votes. In 2005, he had defeated Aquil Haider of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) by over 40% votes.

However, in this election, many candidates are new entrants to politics.

"The voters are yearning for a change. Though voters have supported the BJP for over a decade, there has been no development in the country. Worse, last year's floods turned out to be a nightmare for local residents, as many had died of hunger and water-borne diseases. Our local legislator (Sinha) was missing in action amid the unfolding humanitarian crisis. Why will the public vote for him? We will vote for a party, which helps the public during floods," said Yogesh Gupta, a young resident of Rajendra Nagar neighbourhood.

Gupta alleged that Sinha, despite being a public representative, is aloof and seldom interacts with the public from his constituency.

CM Agarwal, a businessman and a voter from the constituency, echoed Gupta. He said the majority of the local residents are unhappy with Sinha.

"He was unapproachable, when the public needed him the most last year during the floods. Nobody was compensated for the loss of lives and property. A survey was all that was carried out, but no financial aid was distributed among the flood-affected. Upper caste voters are also seeking a change," Agarwal said.

Dr Amar Kumar Singh, another resident of Rajendra Nagar, said there is no alternative (TINA) factor that appears to be working in favour of Sinha since 2005.

Dr Vinod Kumar, a resident of Sandalpur, and Udit Kumar, a yoga teacher from Kazipur neighbourhood, said most of the parties have failed to field strong candidates in Kumrahar. "Voters have no option, but to support the BJP," they said.

Rajeshwar Prasad Singh, a retired professor from Patna University, gave the BJP an outside chance because of a lack of a strong electoral contest.

"Be that as it may, Sinha is never seen among his voters at any public function," he said.

However, Sinha rebuffed the allegations and maintained that several development works were undertaken by him. He cited the development of Premchand Rangshala and International level Science City as cases in point.

"Many other projects such as an upgrade in Saidpur drainage facility and renovation of Bazaar Samiti are in the works," he said.

"Last year's floods were a lesson for the state government. Fortunately, no such incident was reported this year," he added.

Pappu, the JAP candidate, said he deserved a chance to serve the people from the constituency. "We have proved how committed we are towards social service. The voters may still remember the way we had distributed food packets and water bottles during the floods and evacuated many of them to safer places. Now, it's the payback time for the voters," he said.

"The voters of Kumrahar have given three chances to the BJP. Now, the JAP deserves a chance," he added.

Dr Kumar, a dentist and the RJD's candidate, claimed that Kumrahar brought out Patna's rear as far as development was concerned.

"Besides thoroughfares, all roads and lanes in neighbourhoods are in a deplorable condition," he said.

He said, if he is elected he would resolve teething civic woes such water supply, roads and drainage facility at Saidpur.

Kumarahar goes to polls on November 3 in the second phase of the elections.

The third and the final phase will be on November 7.

The election results will be declared on November 10.

Kumrahar Assembly constituency (No 183): At a glance

* Kumrahar assembly seat is a part of the Patna Sahib Lok Sabha constituency.

* Comprises wards 14 and from 16 -22 of Patna Municipal Corporation.

* Was a part Patna Central Assembly constituency

* Became a separate assembly constituency in 2008 following the delimitation as per the Delimitation Act, 2002 and on the basis of the 2001 Census

* Total number of voters: 4,21,902

* Total number of male voters: 2,25,328

* Total number of female voters: 1,96,539

* Total number of third gender voters: 35

* Upper castes, comprising Kayasthas, Rajputs, Bhumihars and Brahmins, form a bulk of the voters

* Also a sizeable population of Yadavs, Chandravanshi, Dalits and Muslims.

Key issues

* Civic infrastructure woes such as pitiable road condition and poor drainage system

* Public parks have become safe havens for criminal and anti-social elements

*Bazaar Samiti, Patna's main wholesale market, lacks washrooms, drinking water facilities and its approach road is also broken

* Poor water supply

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 2 -- A Covid-19-positive health worker from Delhi's All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) has urged former Congress president Rahul Gandhi to take up with the government the issue of risk allowance for nurses and doctors as they face health concerns on the frontline of the fight against the outbreak.

"We are exhausted but we are fighting on the frontline without any fear. We will win. You and the government are with us. I have complete faith that we will fight this war against the coronavirus and win. I think you will agree that we are fighting as an army," Vipin Krishnan, who has been working in AIIMS for the past two years, told Gandhi during a video interaction. "Yes, you are a nonviolent army," Gandhi said in his response.

Krishnan was joined by three other Indian origin health workers - Anu Ragnat from New Zealand, Narendra Singh from Australia and Sherlylmol Puravady from the United Kingdom - in sharing their experiences with Gandhi while fighting the pandemic.

The video was released on Wednesday, the National Doctors' Day.

Krishnan, who belongs to Kerala and, along with his wife, is in quarantine after both tested positive for Covid-19, also raised concerns over compensation to the families of the Covid warriors who died while treating patients, saying the government should do something for them.

"Two nurses from south India died in Delhi. One X-ray technician, a retired doctor from AIIMS and a sanitation worker also passed away. However, they are yet to receive the compensation of Rs 1 crore announced by the Delhi government," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 30 -- Limited community transmission of the Covid-19 disease has begun in India, a Union health ministry document has said, admitting for the first time the country is entering that phase of the outbreak when the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated.

India has reported 1,190 cases and 29 deaths due to the Sars-Cov-2 virus, which causes the deadly infection, till Monday morning.

A document detailing the standard operating procedure (SOP), released by the ministry of health and family welfare issued late on Sunday night, said:"This SOP is applicable to current phase of Covid-19 pandemic in India (local transmission and limited community transmission), wherein as per plan of action, all suspect cases are admitted to isolation facilities."

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the epidemic, has publicly maintained that India is still in Stage II, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact to an infected person or travel history rising over the past week.

Community transmission happens when the source of infection is untraced and the patient has no travel history or known contact with a confirmed Covid-19 case. It indicates that undiagnosed cases are infecting others, which is when infection clusters spiral out of control and turn into epidemics.

"We've had pockets of community transmission in several locations in half a dozen states, but now the number of people with untraceable infection is increasing, which is a sign that community transmission has begun. It is irreversible now," said a senior public health expert, requesting anonymity.

Raman Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology and communicable diseases, ICMR, said: "I cannot comment on this right now, this issue will be addressed in the ministry briefing."

According to T Jacob John, head of the department of clinical virology and microbiology at Christian Medical College Vellore, community transmission in India began mid-February.

"Instead of splitting hair, the focus should be on preparing to be three steps ahead of the virus. It's not a cops and robbers game, we should not be fooled into reacting to the virus but should be fooling the virus by anticipating the curve and proactively deciding what we need to do stop the spread," said John, Emeritus Medical Scientist, ICMR.

The US Centers for Disease Control (USCDC) declared its first case of a person in California with no relevant travel history or exposure to another known patient as "possible instance of community spread of Covid-19 in the United States" on February 26.

"At this time, the patient's exposure is unknown. It's possible this could be an instance of community spread of COVID-19, which would be the first time this has happened in the United States. Community spread means spread of an illness for which the source of infection is unknown, " said the USCDC in a statement.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, Oct. 9 -- With the ways of living, the ways of celebrating our festivals have also changed due to the pandemic. So as Durga Puja approaches, the thought of not being able to revel in the age-old tradition of sindur khela makes one wonder how will the festival be this year! Durga Puja pandals aren't planning to organise sindur khela in groups. But, where there's a festival, there's a way. And women in Delhi-NCR have already set plans to celebrate this tradition from the comfort of their homes.

The relevance of celebrating sindur khela varies from one community to another. Shampa Sircar Das, a Delhi-based artist, says, "This tradition has its origins in the Durga Pujas that were organised by the zamindars, to usher bonhomie among homemakers. The red vermillion colour symbolises the strength of womanhood or shakti that a woman has and uses to shield her family and the society while facing different challenges."

Talking about her plans of indulging in festive celebrations, Das says, "This year the pandemic has left us with no choice since a majority of puja celebration committees have decided to perform only Ghot Puja (worshipping an urn symbolising the goddess), and a few of them will perform puja with small idols without any usual lavish celebrations. The joy and preparation of wearing a red and white saree and taking along in a thali, flowers, sweets and sindur will become online this year! The final goodbye to Ma Durga on Dashami and the ritual of applying sindur on the Goddess's feet and forehead which is followed by the sheer joy of playing vermilion or sindur with each other will all be done a virtually."

Some denizens have even invited their friends to celebrate sindur khela in a closed complex. "I'll be inviting some close friends of mine and in the garden of my house we will celebrate this ritual with all the fervour. I've also planned what all foods will be served and my music playlist is also ready. I don't want to ruin the spirit of this annual affair due to the pandemic! When Ma is coming all the way for us, we must keep the spirit high," says Sanghamitra Mallick, a Gurugram-based content writer.

"Durga puja in Covid-19 might be dull, but not for me. I'm on my shopping spree! Dhunuchi dance and bhog is planned with my girls on Asthami and Mughlai dinner with family on Navami and sindur khela, all at my house. We would be wearing the new sarees to celebrate the rituals. Pandals are fun but let's dance and celebrate for our soul this time," says Alaknanda Kathak, a Noida-based dancer.

Author tweets @ruchikagarg271

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh, Feb. 15 -- A 36-year-old man from Singapore visiting his in-laws in Chandigarh was quarantined on Saturday after he reported to the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research with symptoms of the novel coronavirus.

"He has been admitted to the isolation ward of Nehru Hospital and his vitals are stable. He is under observation," said Dr Raman Sharma of the department of hospital administration.

The man works in Singapore and had arrived in Chandigarh via Kolkata last Monday. He developed the symptoms on Thursday evening or Friday morning, and approached the institute on Saturday, said Dr Sharma.

According to hospital sources, the patient's blood samples have sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune and the test reports are expected in the next 24 hours. "The line of treatment will be provided as per the reports," they said.

A viral outbreak that began in China has infected more than 67,000 people globally. The World Health Organisation has named the illness COVID-19, referring to its origin late last year and the coronavirus that causes it. According to latest figures released by the Chinese health authorities on Saturday, the deadly virus has claimed 1,523 lives among 66,492 cases, mostly in the central province of Hubei.

Japan has reported 337 cases, including 285 from a cruise ship docked in Yokohama, and a death. Even Singapore has reported 72 cases among other countries across the world.

India has had three confirmed cases so far. A 28-year-old banker from Mohali, who had the history of travelling to China and was admitted to the PGIMER last month, had tested negative.

The Chandigarh health administration has issued an advisory to city hotels, asking them to immediately report about visitors from neighbouring countries along with Thailand, Japan and South Korea.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 8 -- A 29-year-old man from Gurdaspur district of Punjab died while rescuing three children being swept away in the Kings River in California.

Manjeet Singh jumped into the river to rescue a boy and two girls who were playing in the water off Reedley Beach on Wednesday. They were swept away by a current that pushed them south under a bridge.

Seeing the trio drowning and crying for help, Manjeet jumped into the river to try to save them. "He removed his turban and attempted to use it as a rope to pull the children in but was quickly pulled under himself. He went in to try and help them and, unfortunately, went under water fairly quickly and never came back up," reported Los Angeles Times, quoting Reedley police commander Marc Ediger.

The sacrifice of the Sikh youngster is widely being hailed in the US and India with religious, social and political leaders paying tribute on their social media handles.

According to US media reports, two children were brought to shore unharmed, but one of the girls was underwater for nearly 15 minutes. She was taken to Valley Children's Hospital in Fresno and as of Friday remained in a critical condition and on life support.

SON OF A FARMER, HE WENT TO US TWO YEARS AGO

Manjeet was the youngest son of Gurbax Singh, a farmer and former block samiti member at Chhina village in Gurdaspur district. The family struggled to send him abroad two years ago.

"There is no bigger sacrifice than to lay down one's life for saving others," said Panthdeep Singh, the sarpanch of the village.

"Manjeet went to the US two years ago. He was at Fresno to learn truck driving. He had his first training session to become a truck driver on the day of the tragedy. Our entire village salutes him for his sacrifice," the sarpanch said.

SARPANCH URGES GOVT TO HELP BRING BACK BODY

"He was kindhearted and keen to serve humanity. During the Covid-19 lockdown, he extended financial help to needy families in Dera Baba Nanak area. Besides, he sent donations for the village's development. He would ask us not to disclose his name as donor," Panthdeep Singh said.

The sarpanch urged the government to help bring back his body to India so that his family could see their brave son one last time and perform the last rites. "It is as much an honour as being killed at war," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 19 -- Canadian lawmakers have passed a motion urging the government to decide whether to permit participation of Chinese telecom giant Huawei in the country's 5G network while also seeking a plan of action against intimidation of Canadians by China.

The motion was passed with the support of opposition MPs, who outnumber the minority Liberal Party government of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau in the House of Commons.

The development came on a day when Canada's cyber-spy agency warned that "state-sponsored" programmes of countries such China posed the "the greatest strategic threats to Canada".

The opposition motion came in reaction to reports that China was using proxies to coerce Canadians of Chinese origin into silence and not criticising the regime of President Xi Jinping.

It calls for a "robust plan" from the government "to combat China's growing foreign operations here in Canada and its increasing intimidation of Canadians living in Canada, and table it within 30 days of the adoption of this motion".

Meanwhile, the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security (Cyber Centre), which is part of the Communications Security Establishment, released a report identifying China, Russia, Iran and North Korea as foreign states that posed a security threat to Canada in this realm.

"State-sponsored actors are very likely attempting to develop cyber capabilities to disrupt Canadian critical infrastructure, such as the supply of electricity, to further their goals," the report from the Cyber Centre stated.

While it judged such action was "unlikely", it added that "cyber threat actors may target critical Canadian organisations to collect information, pre-position for future activities, or as a form of intimidation".

It described such state-sponsored activity as the "most sophisticated" threat that Canada faced.

The report also pointed out that such nations will "almost certainly continue" their attempts to steal intellectual property related to research in Canada into countering the Covid-19 pandemic.

"State-sponsored actors will almost certainly continue to conduct commercial espionage against Canadian businesses, academia, and governments to steal Canadian intellectual property and proprietary information," it stated.

It also warned that such dangers were not restricted to within the country, but was "almost certainly higher for Canadian organisations that operate abroad or work directly with foreign state-owned enterprises".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, July 3 -- Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, has said the US and India are "natural partners" and if elected, the relationship will be a "high priority" for his administration. He promised to end the temporary suspension of H-1B visas that President Donald Trump ordered last week ostensibly to ensure American have the first crack at jobs as the US reopens after Covid-19 lockdown.

The visa programme, of which Indians are the largest beneficiaries, has been in the crosshairs of the Trump administration's immigration hawks.

"That partnership [with India], a strategic partnership, is necessary and important in our security," said Biden at a virtual fund-raiser on Wednesday. He gave an account of his role in promoting the relationship and securing the US-India civil nuclear deal.

"I was proud to play a role more than a decade ago in securing congressional approval for the US-India Civil Nuclear Agreement," he said. He added it was a big deal.

The deal set a high bar for everything that has followed in the relationship.

"Helping open the door to great progress in our relationship and strengthening our strategic partnership with India was a high priority in the Obama-Biden administration and will be a high priority if I am elected president," Biden, a former vice-president, said. "India needs to be a partner in the region for our safety sake and quite frankly for theirs."

Late former Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee first used the phrase "natural allies" to describe the US-India relationship. Former US president George W Bush switched in "partners" for "allies".

At a virtual town-hall with Asian American and Pacific Islanders, Biden opposed Trump's suspension of H-1B visas. "He [Trump] just ended H-1B visas for the rest of this year. That will not be in my administration," he said in response to a question. People on this visa "have built this country", said Biden, who visited India as vice-president in July 2013 with his wife, Jill Biden.

The US issues 85,000 of temporary non-immigrant H-1B visas for high-skill jobs annually. Over 70% of them go to Indians. The programme critics argue H-1B visas are used to bring cheaper labour from abroad to displace Americans. The Trump administration stepped up scrutiny of the programme after taking office in January 2017. It issued an executive order titled 'Buy American, Hire American'.

The administration announced a reform of the programme along with the suspension last week and it would include doing away with the electronic lottery system to pick successful H-1B applications from among the thousands that are filed. The selection will be based on those getting the highest salary. Other changes are also in the offing, but there is no timeline for it yet.

Biden also spoke about other immigration issues like the plight of undocumented immigrants brought as children, called Dreamers, to the US. Many of them are of Indian origin. "On day one [of his presidency], I am going to send a legislative immigration reform bill to the Congress to provide a road map to citizenship for 11 million undocumented immigrants who contribute so much to this country."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 11 -- Apex traders' body Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) has objected to the bid placed by a Chinese joint venture company for a global tender by the railways for manufacturing Vande Bharat trains.

The traders body has written to union railway minister Piyush Goyal on Saturday urging him to not allow the bid placed by the Chinese joint venture company CRRC Pioneer Electric (India) Private Limited which is one of the six bidders for the project.

"We appreciate several steps taken by the Union Government and your Ministry as well to block Chinese Companies for their participation in Railways, Highways and other infrastructure related projects. As a part of our "boycott Chinese campaign" which began on June 10, 2020, under our mission statement Bhartiya Saamaan-Hamara Abhimaan, we request you to please not allow Chinese state owned CRRC Corporation to participate in global tenders for semi-high speed indigenous Train 18 project of Indian Railways. The total worth of the project is more than Rs 1500 crore for 44 Vande Bharat Express Trains," CAIT said in its letter, a copy of which has been reviewed by Hindustan Times.

ALSO READ | China-India joint venture only foreign bidder for Vande Bharat train sets

The JV was established jointly by China-based CRRC Yongji Electric Co. Ltd and Gurugram-based Pioneer Fil-med Private Limited in 2015.

The other five bidders include: state-owned Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bharat Industries, Sangrur, Electrowaves Electronics (P) Ltd, MEDHA Servo Drives Private Limited, and Powernetics Equipment India Private Limited.

Indian railways' Integral Coach Factory, Chennai had floated a tender for manufacturing 44 rakes or train sets of semi-high speed Vande Bharat trains on July 10.

This comes at a time when India and China are involved in a tense border stand-off along the Line of Actual Control in Ladakh. A brutal brawl in Galwan Valley on June 15 led to 20 Indian and an unspecified number of Chinese soldiers being killed. India has also decided to ban 59 apps, mostly having Chinese links.

Railways has also scrapped a tender for thermal cameras meant for 'Covid-19 surveillance' after Indian firms alleged that the tender specifications favoured a Chinese company, Hindustan Times reported on July 1.

The traders' body had last month also requested the commerce minister to make it mandatory for e-commerce companies in India such as Amazon, Flipkart to mentions the country of origin with each product sold on their platforms.

"We further wish to state that this initiative of the Government is a part of 'Make in India' call of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and as such considering the above fact and the current critical period, it will be most appropriate not to consider the said Chinese Company and rather emphasis should be laid more on Indian Companies who have been shortlisted for this project," the letter added.

The ambitious 'Make in India' project involves manufacturing of for 44 train sets of 16 coaches each of Vande Bharat Trains.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had flagged off the maiden run of the Vande Bharat train on the New Delhi -Varanasi route on February 15, 2019. The second such train set service between New Delhi and Shri Mata Vaishnodevi Katra was flagged off by home minister Amit Shah on October 3, 2019.

The Railway ministry on Wednesday also began the formal process to allow a private company to run trains on 109 routes -- a process that aims to, for the first time, open up one of the government's most prominent enterprises that has in recent decades been outpaced by the demands of a rapidly growing economy.

On whether Chinese firms will be allowed to bid for the private trains, railway board chairman VK Yadav had last week said, "As far as the question on Chinese companies arises, there are guidelines under the Make in India Policy by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) and we will follow them."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 20 -- A study published five years ago had warned of viruses similar to that responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome circulating among the Chinese bat population that may pose a serious future threat.

The study was co-authored by Shi Zhengli, a virologist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, and published in the scientific journal Nature.Last month, Shi published a study linking the origin of the Covid-19 virus to bats. The study published in Nature concluded that 2019-nCoV was 96% identical at the genome level to a bat coronavirus.

The 2015 study had focused on SHC014-CoV, another coronavirus strain which was found to be circulating among the Chinese horseshoe bat populations, but highlighted that recent metagenomic (study of genetic material) studies had identified sequences closely related to the SARS-like viruses in bats which could spill over into outbreaks.

Many scientists and virologists working on animal-to-human transmission of viruses saw the Covid-19 pandemic coming.

For instance, Peter Daszak, a disease ecologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a US-based research organisation, wrote in The New York Times that in a World Health Organization meeting in 2018, experts coined the term "disease X," a virus emerging in animals which would be transmitted to humans and would spread as easily as the flu but with a higher mortality-very similar to Covid-19.

A 2017 study on the diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China found a total of 73 coronaviruses in a sample of 1,067 bats from 21 species in China. Another assessment of why bat viruses are so deadly, conducted by the University of California-Berkeley in February after Covid -9 started spreading, suggested bat cells have a strong immune response, constantly primed to respond to viruses.

High virulence and infectivity wreak havoc when these viruses infect animals with tamer immune systems like humans, the study published in Science Daily concluded. Bats' ability to fly allows them to pick up pathogens over a vast area.

Several other scientific studies have suggested that land-use change or wild habitat loss are leading to more contact between bats and recipient hosts. "Disrupting bat habitat appears to stress the animals and makes them shed even more virus in their saliva, urine and feces that can infect other animals," said the Science Daily study.

Researchers working on the ground say the interplay between these factors make virus spillover and an outbreak situation even more likely.

"The relationship between habitat loss and virus spillover from bats is not that simple. There are many areas where we live in close proximity with bats, but there is no spillover. The exceptional thing about bats is that they have the ability to tolerate high viral load without getting sick themselves. In general though, interfaces between bats and people provide opportunities for spillover. We need to study and better understand which particular viruses spill over and cause outbreaks," said Uma Ramakrishnan, associate professor and senior fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Rohit Chakravarty, a wildlife biologist at the Indian Bat Conservation Unit, said certain human behaviours made people more vulnerable to Covid-19 like spillovers. "Habitat loss and bushmeat consumption bring humans in closer contact with wildlife. Large commercial wildlife markets that exist in China and Southeast Asia bring humans in contact with live animals that are kept in unsanitary conditions, thereby compounding the risk of disease transmission," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- New Delhi India will take up incidents of racism in the UK with the country's government when required, external affairs minister S Jaishankar said on Monday against the backdrop of strains caused by a debate on the farmers' protest in the British parliament.

Jaishankar made the remarks while responding to concerns raised in the Rajya Sabha by BJP lawmaker Ashwini Vaishnaw, who contended that racism and cyberbullying forced Rashmi Samant, the first Indian woman elected president of the Oxford University Student Union, to quit her post.

"What I do want to say is that we have strong ties with the UK, we will take up such matters with great candour when required. We will monitor these developments very, very closely," Jaishankar said in his response after Vaishnaw brought up the matter through a zero hour mention.

"We will raise it when required and we will always champion the fight against racism and other forms of intolerance," Jaishankar said.

He further said: "I do want to say that as the land of Mahatma Gandhi, we can never ever turn our eyes away from racism, wherever it is, particularly when it is in a country where we have such a large diaspora. As a friend of the UK, we also have concerns about its reputational impact."

Vaishnaw also referred to the issue of alleged racism within the UK royal family that was brought up in a recent interview by Meghan Markle, the wife of Prince Harry. Noting that the behaviour of a society is a reflection of its beliefs and value systems, Vaishnaw said: "If such practices of racial discrimination are followed at the highest level in a society, what would be the following at the lower levels?"

He also contended migrants were poorly treated and segregated in the UK and this was a matter of concern in India because of the large diaspora in Britain. Vaishnaw also claimed a recent report had said the death rate among people of Asian origin because of Covid-19 was higher than the death rate of other communities in the UK.

Samant quit as president of the Oxford University Student Union after the emergence of old social media posts that were deemed to be "racist" and "insensitive" by groups representing Asian and Jewish students. She also upset others by comparing imperialist Cecil Rhodes to Adolf Hitler in a student union debate and separating "women" and "transwomen" in an Instagram caption.

She initially offered an apology for the social media posts, some dating back to 2017, but later stepped down as president-elect after facing continued criticism. Since returning to India, Samant has claimed she was unfairly targeted.

The remarks in the Rajya Sabha came about a week after the foreign secretary summoned British envoy Alex Ellis to protest against what it said was an "unwarranted and tendentious" debate in the UK Parliament that saw lawmakers criticising the Indian government's handling of the farmers' protest.

The debate was held in response to a public petition that garnered more than 115,000 signatures, and saw Labour, Conservative, Liberal Democratic and Scottish National Party lawmakers calling on the Boris Johnson government to raise their concerns about the handling of the protest and media freedoms with the Indian establishment.

Most of the British MPs who joined the debate acknowledged India's agricultural reforms were a domestic matter but noted their constituents had strong links with India's farm sector and were upset by what they described as the use of force against protesting farmers.

...

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- New viruses being discovered are only the "tip of the iceberg", according to a leading Wuhan-based virologist at the centre of Covid-19-related conspiracy theories because of her research on coronaviruses found in bats.

"The unknown viruses that we have discovered are actually just the tip of the iceberg," Shi Zhengli, deputy director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, said in an interview to Chinese state television on Monday. She added it was important to carry out advanced research on pathogens.

Shi is known as China's "bat woman", as she has worked on coronaviruses found in the flying mammals for years, most notably inside abandoned mines in the southwestern province of Yunnan.

She has kept a low profile since the Covid-19 outbreak in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, only occasionally commenting on social media, including once to deny that she had defected from China after the pandemic rapidly spread.

According to the Communist Party of China's mouthpiece, the People's Daily's English website, Shi had reacted on February 2to a research article by Indian scientists implying the novel coronavirus possibly originated from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

"The 2019 novel coronavirus is a punishment by nature to humans' unsanitary life styles. I promise with my life that the virus has nothing to do with the lab," she said on social media app WeChat.

In a short interview with state television channel CGTN on Monday, Shi defended China's transparency in handling the outbreak and emphasised the need for more research on viruses.

"If we want to protect humans from viruses or avoid a second outbreak of new infectious diseases, we must go in advance to learn of these unknown viruses carried by wild animals in nature and then give early warnings," she said.

"And we must be able to store some drugs and reagents for detection, prevention or treatment for future prevention and control," Shi added.

Like other leading Chinese scientists involved in epidemic control in China, Shi denied her institute was the origin of the novel coronavirus. Shi said her institute shared its data with the world and the WHO was well informed about breakthroughs.

"Later, we, along with two other medical institutes in our country, submitted the whole genome sequence of the virus to WHO on January 12, 2020," she said.

"At the same time, we also uploaded other sequences to a gene library called GISAID, which is used by governments and scientists around the world to identify pathogens, to develop vaccines and screen drugs."

Earlier this month, Shi denied rumours of "defecting to the West", saying on WeChat: "Everything is all right for my family and me, dear friends!"

Posting nine recent photos, Shi added: "No matter how difficult things are, it (defecting) shall never happen. We've done nothing wrong. With strong belief in science, we will see the day when the clouds disperse and the sun shines."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- What is known about the coronavirus pandemic is that it originated in China and in a matter of months spread across the globe killing lakhs of people and infecting millions.

While the contagion has brought more than half of the planet to a grinding halt, scientists are busy tracing Covid-19's path to the human body.

There are many theories doing the rounds when it comes to the origin of the novel coronavirus. Some even believe it was a result of a failed lab experiment. A study conducted by the Pew Research Centre suggests that most Americans believe that Covid-19 was lab-grown. Nearly three in ten Americans or a quarter of the American population, as many as 29% of those surveyed, believe that novel coronavirus was grown in a lab, the survey indicated. 43% of Americans believe that the virus came about naturally.

The more scientific and believable theories rest on the premise that links the virus to its zoonotic traces, connecting it to bats.

China's world-famous Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, which is a live animal market, was the place where a man was first reported to have got the infection from an animal. How did the infection reach Wuhan's seafood market is still debatable.

The identity of the animal source of coronavirus remains a key and urgent question.

Coronavirus is being increasingly linked to bats as the obscure animals have traditionally been found to have links with outbreaks in countries like Uganda and Bangladesh. Bats are believed to be the natural hosts of the SARS, MERS and the Ebola virus.

In the case of SARS and MERS, the virus came from bats but was transmitted to humans via other animals.

The 2002 Sars outbreak got to humans from bats through cat-like civets. MERS-CoV spread from bats to camels to humans.

Some of the recently conducted studies point at scaly, ant-eating pangolins to be the intermediary animal between bats and humans in the case of Covid-19.

Researchers in Guangzhou, China believe pangolins could be the probable animal source of the coronavirus outbreak.

However, it is reported that pangolins were not listed on the inventory of items sold in Wuhan, the sale of the mammal is illegal.

As per a research paper published in the Journal of Medical Virology, two researchers from the South China Agricultural University in Guangzhou identified pangolins as the potential source of the Covid-19 virus. The researchers made their theory public in February 2020.

The experts based their findings on "genetic comparison of coronaviruses taken from pangolins and from humans infected during the recent outbreak," the research published in the Journal of Medical Virology read.

"By analyzing more than 1 000 metagenomic samples and using molecular biology testing, they found that the positive rate of ? coronavirus in pangolins was 70% and that the genome sequence of an isolated virus strain was 99% similar to that of the SARS-CoV-2 virus".

The study, therefore, called for further investigation into the role of pangolins in transmitting coronavirus to humans.

Earlier this week, the Indian Council of Medical Research also stated the possibility of pangolins acting as the intermediary animal between bats and humans.

"We also conducted surveillance, in which we found that there are two types of bats, and they carried coronavirus which was not capable of affecting humans. It's rare, maybe once in 1,000 years that it gets transmitted from bats to humans," Indian Council of Medical Research's (CMR) Gangakhedkar said during the press conference.

"As per research in China, it was found that coronavirus might have originated due to mutation in bats. Bats might have transmitted it to pangolins, from pangolins it got transmitted to humans," Gangakhedkar added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 9 -- Two stranded persons, who were evacuated from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on Thursday amid the lockdown restrictions imposed to contain the spread of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, tested positive on Saturday, said Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan.

Both the persons, who have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease, arrived in Kerala on Thursday by two Air India special flights from Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the UAE, the CM said.

Vijayan warned that the state has to maintain utmost vigil because of the influx of expatriates and all those who are stranded in other parts of the country because of lockdown restrictions.

Three flights from the Persian Gulf are expected to arrive in Kerala as part of the 'Mission Vande Bharat' -- the largest-ever evacuation since Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990 -- on Saturday evening.

Similarly, a naval ship, which is ferrying 650 stranded people from the Maldives, will reach Kochi port on Sunday.

The CM said that Kerala would observe a total shutdown on Sunday in a bid to step up its vigil and only essential services would be allowed to be delivered.

"If we lower our guard at this juncture, we'll forgo our advantage. We'll continue our strict surveillance. We can't allow people to enter Kerala without valid passes. It's mandatory for people coming from other states to carry passes from their place of origin to their chosen destination in a bid to contain the viral outbreak," he added.

The CM also announced that the state government would arrange special trains from New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, etc; to bring back all those who are stranded.

"We're in talks with the Union Ministry of Railways. Among the stranded, students, pregnant women, and senior citizens will get first priority to come back home," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 4 -- The Centre has decided to launch a grand celebration to mark 75 years of India's independence with events, exhibitions, rallies and a tourism outreach with Prime Minister Narendra Modi kicking off the festivities on March 12, the 91st anniversary of the historic Dandi March, officials said on Wednesday.

The culture ministry is the nodal point for all events, which will include exhibitions on freedom fighters Mahatma Gandhi, Vallabhbhai Patel and Subhas Chandra Bose, said the officials quoted above. All government departments and state governments will come up with their own plans to mark the occasion.

India will also promote tourism by celebrating 2022 as the Visit India Year through a promotion campaign highlighting India's strengths like heritage, culture, art, wellness and yoga. Specific sites will be identified in each state to be developed and promoted under the Dekho Apna Desh scheme, said a document prepared by the Union tourism ministry and seen by HT.

The programme,called Azadi Ka Amrut Mahotsav will commence 75 weeks prior to August, 15, 2022 -- the day independent India turns 75 -- and end on August 15, 2023. PM Modi is likely to hold a meeting early next week, after which the final plan will be unveiled, said officials.

One previous meeting was chaired by Union home minister Amit Shah, who is also part of a panel overseeing Bose's 125th birth anniversary celebrations. Bose is an important election issue in West Bengal, which goes to the polls along with Assam, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Puducherry in March-April.

The Union tourism ministry will launch a mega plan to boost visitors to major historical attractions.

"Indian diaspora across countries would be encouraged to visit the country of their origin for taking pride in India's achievements since Independence... all government of India ministries and departments and state governments would be requested to come up with their action plans of incentives and events," read the tourism ministry document.

According to a March 3 communication by the ministry of information and broadcasting (I&B), seen by HT, the celebration will kick off in Gujarat with an event inaugurated by PM Modi on March 12.

Exhibitions on Gandhi, Patel and Bose will be organised by the I&B ministry at various locations; states will hold exhibitions on other unsung heroes of the freedom struggle. The celebrations will last through the 25 days of the Dandi March, undertaken by Gandhi and his followers in 1930 to protest a colonial salt tax, and conclude on April 5.

Chief secretaries of all states will choose two or three places of historical significance, with a total of 75 destinations selected across the country. Youth clubs, National Service Scheme, National Cadet Corps volunteers, in collaboration with the department of youth affairs, will organise cycle rallies.

The department of school education and literacy and the University Grants Commission will organise a one-hour long symposium and conference on India's freedom struggle. An essay competition will also be held by the department.

The events will be covered live by Doordarshan and All India Radio, and social media campaigns, including dedicated hashtags and tweets by influencers, also figure in the government's plan to maximise the reach of the events, said the officials quoted above.

The tourism ministry is also planning a host of activities to help the sector recover after Covid-19 losses. According to a communication, seen by HT, the ministry will organise a promotion of defence museums and encourage the Indian diaspora to visit various cities under the Dekho Apna Desh campaign.

All state governments are also slated to come up with incentives. "The event would be befitting way of celebrating India@75, considering it's ancient and diverse heritage and culture, natural resources and arts and recent improvements in tourism infrastructure," the document read.

Officials from the tourism ministry said they were in the process of collating a list of all defence museums. "We have reached out to the ministry of defence and culture to see where all the museums located, we should know the details in a few days," an official said.

The tourism ministry document said the government will hold road shows, themed tours, webinars, interactive sessions and workshops. The ministry also plans to organise a nationwide event titled Paryatan Parv 2022 from January 26, 2022 to September 27, 2022, which is World Tourism Day. The event will comprise photography, essay and debate contests, illumination at key tourism sites, cultural programmes, tourism exhibitions and guided heritage walks.

The ministry is also planning a series of webinars on various themes such as the Statue of Unity in Gujarat, the freedom movement and stories of places associated with freedom fighters. HT last year reported that the culture ministry is also planning a web series on the freedom struggle, slated to go on air before August 15.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 2 -- States receiving migrant labourers from across India are gearing up for a massive challenge: a spurt in Covid-19 cases. And, some states such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha, have already unveiled unprecedented steps.

The Bihar government has made a 21-day quarantine mandatory for all workers and has cancelled the leave of all doctors and health workers. Odisha, which will test all workers for Covid-19 after a mandatory 14-day quarantine period, has instructed all community centres to remain open around the clock, and has decided to create 4,200 new isolation beds.

Like most other states, Uttar Pradesh has made a 14-day quarantine mandatory, after which each family will get food grains for 15 days. The state has created special isolation wards at district hospitals. Jharkhand will be providing cooked meals to workers during the 15-day quarantine period and free rations for their families.

On Friday, Indian railways ran special trains, called Shramik, to take migrant workers back to their villages. More trains took back workers from at least 10 states on Saturday. However, the return of migrant workers has created a fear of Covid-19 cases increasing.

At least seven migrant workers, who returned to Uttar Pradesh, have tested positive. In just one district of Bihar, 13 migrant workers have tested positive. In Odisha, 20 workers, who returned from Bengal, have tested positive.

Between April 25 and May 1, when many workers returned, Bihar reported 243 new cases, which is almost 50% of the 475 cases in the state. Officials said many of the new cases reported in the second phase of the lockdown were migrants, who somehow managed to reach Bihar, and spread infections to new areas.

Many of the new cases have been reported from districts, such as Madhubani, Darbhanga, Sitamarhi and Purnea, which were previously free of Covid-19 cases. Madhubani district magistrate, Dr Nilesh Ramchandra Deor, said all the 13 positive cases are of migrants from Delhi, Mumbai and Lucknow, while the origin of the earlier five cases was traced to a woman who came by car from Delhi.

"The emerging trend of new cases shows the challenging phase for the state may have just begun with more and more people returning to their native places and we have to be prepared for it," said a senior official of the government, who was not willing to be named.

The state government has cancelled leaves of doctors, health officials and contractual employees in the health department till May 31. All medical facilities have been asked to remain prepared for the admissions of a large number of cases, an official said.

In Uttar Pradesh, seven daily wage workers, who returned from Maharashtra, tested positive for Covid-19. They have been put in government quarantine in Basti district. District magistrate, Ashutosh Niranjan, said that the workers had travelled in state-run buses from Maharashtra. Uttar Pradesh was one of the first states to bring back stranded workers by buses.

The state government officials said about a million migrants, who are expected to return, will be kept at the district and panchayat quarantine centres. The officials also said that additional isolation beds have been created at the district level, should there be a spurt in cases. "Special attention is being paid to workers coming back from Maharashtra, which has the highest number of cases in India," said a senior UP government official.

The state first Shramik train, carrying 847 migrants, will reach Lucknow's Charbagh railway station on Sunday morning from Nashik. Divisional railway manager (DRM), Lucknow division, NR Sanjay Tripathi, said, "We have also made arrangements at the station to strictly ensure social distancing." Once the migrant labourers go through the thermal scanning, the district wise segregation will be done and they will be taken to buses. "We have arranged 65 buses for them," said Mukesh Meshram, divisional commissioner, Lucknow.

In Odisha, about 20 workers who returned from West Bengal, have tested positive for Covid-19 in the past few days in Ganjam and other districts. "More than half of the 149 Covid-19 cases in Odisha have travel history of hotspots in West Bengal," said Odisha chief secretary, Asit Tripathy. On Friday, two new cases were reported from Bolangir district with a travel history to Tamil Nadu.

About 325 workers from Surat in Gujarat, who hired seven buses to return, are in quarantine. Around 1,200 workers from Kerala, who reached Odisha on Saturday morning, have been sent to quarantine centres in their respective districts, the chief secretary said. Odisha has quarantined returned workers in 7000-odd temporary medical centres, with 2.6 lakh beds, in the grampanchayats.

Four buses carrying more than 120 workers left for West Bengal from Dumka district on Friday. These buses were supposed to bring over 100 Jharkhand workers from 24-Pargana South, Howrah, Kolkata and Malda.

"The buses were stopped at Bengal border and the officials there said that they have not received any such order to allow buses of other states. So, the buses were asked to return," said Dumka deputy commissioner Rajeshwari B.

Dhanbad deputy commissioner (DC), Amit Kumar, said the state is in talks with officials of the West Bengal government but they are not allowing buses to enter border. "So, we have decided to send out buses to other neighbouring states, excluding Bengal, to bring back our migrant workers," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Jan. 29 -- India's policy response to the coronavirus pandemic was guided by the realisation that gross domestic product (GDP) growth will come back but human lives won't, chief economic adviser (CEA), Krishnamurthy V Subramanian said on Friday. Subramanian's comments came after the Economic Survey was tabled in both the Houses of Parliament by the Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman.

"India's response stemmed from humane principle advocated eloquently in the Mahabharata 'Saving a life that is in jeopardy is the origin of dharma'," Subramanian said. "The policy response which India came up with was mature and a farsighted one. India undertook short-term pain to get long-term gain. The 'V-shaped recovery' makes India a sui generis case in mature policymaking," he said during a press conference.

Subramanian also said that the government's measures, including the nationwide lockdown, prevented 3.7 million cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and 100,000 deaths as he dedicated the survey to frontline workers helping the country battle the pandemic. "Early, intense lockdown not only saves more human lives but also enables quicker, better economic recovery," he said.

The Economic Survey has projected that the Indian economy can contract by 7.7% in the current financial year ending on March 31 and the growth could be 11% in the next financial. The contraction in FY21 is mainly due to the coronavirus pandemic and the damage caused by the subsequent countrywide lockdown to contain it.

The survey unveiled two days before the Union Budget is in line with the forecasts by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which has said it expected the country's GDP to contract by 7.5% in the year ending March 31.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 8 -- A Canadian minister has denounced China for "intimidation" of people around the world through Beijing's state entities or proxies in order to silence dissent, pressure political opponents and instil general fear of state power.

In a letter to lawmakers, Bill Blair, Minister of Public Safety responsible for the country's internal security, said that "foreign states, including the PRC (Peoples Republic of China), attempt to threaten and intimidate individuals around the world, including in Canada, through various state entities and non-state proxies."

That letter was sent in response to a motion moved by the Opposition calling for the government to outline its plans for participation of the Chinese telecommunications company Huawei in Canada's 5G infrastructure and to table a plan to counter foreign interference.

In the letter, as cited by the outlet National Observer, Blair added that the government is "aware that these tactics can also be used as cover for silencing dissent, including on university campuses, pressuring political opponents and instilling general fear of state power, no matter where a person is located." He mentioned China's Operation Fox Hunt as "one such example."

Operation Fox Hunt was launched under the direction of Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2014 through the Ministry of Public Security to "target Chinese nationals who he sees as threats and who live outside China, around the world," according to Christopher Wray, director of US Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Citing Blair's letter, the outlet Global News said the government was "'particularly concerned' about giving foreign adversaries control over and access to sensitive technologies, critical infrastructure and the personal data of Canadians."

Blair also noted that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Communications Security Establishment, and Canada Border Services Agency, were engaged in combating such foreign interference.

Such interference, the minister said, had worsened after the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic as government agencies had "observed state-sponsored information manipulation" with such "campaigns" aimed at sowing "doubt about the origins of the Covid-19 virus and the means required to counter it; discredit responses to Covid-19 while casting their own as superior."

The motion is expected to come up for discussion in the House of Commons once it reconvenes later this month.

Earlier, according to a report in the daily Global & Mail, in the strongest public denunciation of China's bullying of the community in Canada, a spokesperson for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service had said that the "fear of state-backed or state-linked retribution targeting both them and their loved ones, in Canada and abroad, can force individuals to submit to foreign interference". Together, Canada's spy agency felt, such activities "constitute a threat to Canada's sovereignty and to the safety of Canadians."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 31 -- The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday even as officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,100 others who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of India such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz - which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters - such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practised here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors. The basement and the ground floors housing a kitchen and a communal dining area, which, officials fear, may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on February 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others.

The seven who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 14 -- A top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

Earlier this month, Chinese news outlets quoted Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, as saying that the virus originated in Italy.

"The novel coronavirus running rampant around the world is not the Wuhan variant, but a variant that mutated in north Italy," China's national broadcaster quoted Kekule as saying in an interview on German television.

"The starting point of the pandemic is not in Wuhan, " official news agency Xinhua quoted him as saying.

In an emailed interview with the Hindustan Times, Kekule strongly denied the version of his argument published in Chinese state media, saying his words were twisted out of context.

"Chinese media are quoting from my recent bestseller book Der Corona-Kompass (The Corona Compass, available only in German so far) and from an interview I gave about the book in the popular German TV show Markus Lanz," said Kekule, who also holds a chair as University Professor and Director of the Institute for Medical Microbiology at Martin Luther University in Halle.

"The origin of the virus in China is described in detail in my book, and also the Chinese efforts to conceal the magnitude of the outbreak at the beginning. I never stated that the virus originally came from Italy, this is pure propaganda," he added.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Kekule's interview to a German channel was similarly picked up to fit into the narrative.

By the time the German expert reacted, his interview had spread across Chinese social media, with many thanking him for clearing China's name.

"Unfortunately, they are taking one or two phrases out of context, giving my statement a made-up twist. Chinese state media are referring to my account of the outbreak in Northern Italy and my critique of the WHO and EU in this context," Kekule said.

"There is, however, no scientific basis to deny that the virus originally came from China. I explained (on the television show) that the virus came of course from China, but the "G" variant was able to prevail in northern Italy because the outbreak was not detected there for several weeks, paving the way to the pandemic around the globe, including re-imports to China."

Kekule explained that the "G variant" (carrying a D614G mutation in the S gene) of the virus emerged in northern Italy, possibly because the outbreak went undetected for several weeks there.

"The G variant is most likely more contagious than the variant originally detected in Wuhan. This might be the reason why it spread world-wide from Italy. Since July 2020, more than 99% of the virus strains analysed worldwide are G variants, i.e. the viruses presently circulating have their common origin in Northern Italy."

The German scientist said that he went on the same television show to explain his position.

"The same evening I spoke again on the TV show Markus Lanz and we made it crystal clear that I had been misquoted in an act of propaganda," he said.

"Science tells us, that humankind must change its behaviour towards nature, including the habit of killing wild animals that carry dangerous viruses," he said.

"When even nations refuse to take responsibility of their actions, how should individuals learn to change their dangerous habits?"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 1 -- The Delhi government on Wednesday started conducting random Covid-19 tests on domestic passengers arriving at the T3 and T2 terminals of the Indira Gandhi International Airport. Covid tests are also being conducted at railway stations and interstate bus terminals since the past two-three months but none of the tests conducted at these places was done on the basis of city of origin -- to test passengers from states witnessing a surge in Covid-19 cases.

On Wednesday (Day One of the exercise), the Delhi government randomly picked 660 samples for RT-PCR tests from passengers who landed at the IGI airport, even as officials deployed at railway stations and ISBTs were seen testing mostly those who walked up to their counters. There was no prioritisation or identification of passengers who arrived from states that are witnessing a steep surge in cases such as Maharashtra, Kerala, Punjab and Gujarat, among others.

To be sure, the DDMA in its March 23 order had stated, "All district disaster management authorities shall conduct random testing (RAT/RT-PCR) of passengers coming from the states where Covid-19 cases are increasing, at all airports, railway stations, interstate bus terminals (ISBTs) and other alighting points (for private buses) in NCT of Delhi."

When asked about the week's delay -- the order came on March 23 -- in deploying health teams for random tests at the airport, a senior district official said getting passes for teams and approvals for a space to operate from inside the airport took time.

"We are randomly requesting people to undergo RT-PCR tests. If anyone is not willing, we are not forcing them. At present, we are not able to test on the basis of states having a high Covid caseload as the space we have been allotted is not where people immediately deboard from the aircraft. The only way that can be done is by asking people to show their boarding pass -- we do not know how many will be comfortable showing us these," said the official, asking not to be named.

If any of the 660 samples are positive, it will be sent for genome sequencing as well and the person will have to undergo a 10 -day mandatory isolation at their scheduled place of stay or an institutional quarantine facility in the city, the official said.

"At T3, we have two teams deployed in the area before the luggage collection zone. At T2, our space is beyond where the passengers collect their luggage, closer to the exit gates," the official said.

AT RAILWAY STATIONS

At the New Delhi and Old Delhi railway stations, the district teams said they are conducting around 2,000 tests daily on inbound passengers. Data of the district, seen by HT, showed that on March 28, the positivity rate among the 2,000-odd incoming passengers at the two railway stations was 1.04%.

"Whosoever is coming, we are testing them. Nobody is being denied a Covid test," said a district official engaged in Covid tests at the New Delhi railway station and the Old Delhi railway station.

A second district official said random testing at the Kashmere Gate ISBT has been ongoing for almost three months. "We have not been provided with a list of states based on which we would segregate passengers and test them. No such direction was issued," said the official, asking not to be named.

AT ANAND VIHAR ISBT

At Anand Vihar, a common test camp, located between the ISBT and the Metro station, caters to passengers using either of the three modes of transport -- bus, railways or the Metro. The scene was similar at that camp as well.

"No new camp has been set up. This camp has been operational for several months now. On average, we are testing 1,500 people every day. But these tests are not happening based on the state of origin of travellers. It is voluntary, so whoever comes, we test them," said the official involved in the Anand Vihar ISBT testing camp.

"Those who are tested through the rapid antigen test get the results on the spot, while those undergoing RT-PCR tests are asked to leave after recording their address and phone number. If their results come positive the next day, the district administration is informed and officials there take the necessary steps thereafter," the official said.

When asked, the Delhi government did not comment on the matter.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 11 -- India and Russia have concluded an air bubble agreement that will become effective from February 12 and airlines from both sides will be allowed to carry stranded citizens of the two countries, seamen and a few other categories of travellers.

A statement issued by the Russian embassy on Thursday said the "entry of tourists from Russia is not yet possible".

India and Russia will be allowed to operate direct flights under the air bubble. Flights from India to Russia can carry stranded citizens of Russia, any national of India, Nepal or Bhutan holding a valid Russian visa and seamen planning to work in Russia, the statement said.

Flights from Russia to India can carry nationals of India, Nepal or Bhutan stranded in Russia, all Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) cardholders and Person of Indian Origin (PIO) cardholders holding passports of any country, seamen from Russia, and Russian nationals intending to visit India for any purpose, including their dependents, except tourism.

Russia had announced on January 30 that it would resume issuing visas for all categories of Indian citizens planning to travel to the country by air and to those possessing residence permits. The move was in line with a decision made by the Russian Covid-19 Emergency Response Centre on January 16.

The Russian embassy said earlier that flights between Moscow and New Delhi are expected to be operated twice a week.

The issuance of e-visas, however, has been temporarily suspended.

The Indian government has extended the ban on international commercial flights till February 28. The ban on scheduled overseas flights, imposed 10 months ago, was earlier set to end on January 31.

Flights under bilateral air bubble agreements with select countries are allowed by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation. India currently has such agreements with 25 countries.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 2 -- State governments were on Friday putting in place protocols and guidelines to receive millions of migrant workers who were likely to take trains back to their hometowns after the Centre allowed their movement in a controlled manner amid the Covid-19 outbreak.

The Union home ministry allowed on Friday interstate movement of labourers, students, pilgrims and others stuck across the country by special trains, widening the scope of a previous order that said such transportation can happen only by buses.

Following demands of the state governments to run special trains, the Indian Railways said it decided to run 'Shramik Special' trains to move stranded migrants. The railways said the Shramik Special trains were meant for "nominated people" identified by state governments.

The first train from Lingampally in Andhra Pradesh was expected to reach Jharkhand's Hatia station late on Friday after it departed from its origin station earlier in the day. The other special trains to run on Friday were from Aluva in Kerala to Bhubaneswar, Nasik to Lucknow, Nasik to Bhopal, Jaipur to Patna and Kota to Hatia. These trains were scheduled to run non-stop and cover the distance to the destinations in 12 to 24 hours.

According to the railway ministry, it is the responsibility of the state governments to arrange transport for stranded people to reach railway stations. Similarly, at the destination station, the local administration will have to arrange for medical check-ups of passengers and their onward travel.

On arrival at Hatia, where the first train was expected to reach late on Friday, the passengers were to be first scanned for body temperature and then taken in sanitised buses to their villages, where they will be quarantined at home or government schools and primary health care centers.

"On their arrival in respective districts, all of them would go through medical screening. Depending on their condition, they will be put in home quarantine or institutional quarantine accordingly," a state government official said on condition of anonymity. He added that all passengers will be served packed dinner at Chakradharpur station after entering Jharkhand.

Jharkhand chief minister Hemant Soren welcomed the Centre's decision to allow trains to ferry workers and said that such a decision should have been taken earlier. "At this point, I will say better late than never. We should look forward rather than fight over the past," he said.

Bihar's minster of building construction department, Ashok Kumar Chowdhary, said on Friday that the Centre heeded the demand of the state government. "We thank the government of India for heeding our request and a strategy is being finalised to give shape to their (migrants) return," he said.

The minister maintained that the state was fully prepared to take care of migrants, close to 250,000, who were willing to come back. The state government appointed principal secretary, Pratyaya Amrit, as the nodal officer to facilitate the return of migrant workers.

Kerala, from where a special train was to leave late on Friday from Aluva in Ernakulam district to Odisha, has asked district collectors to prepare a list of priority workers. There are around 360,000 stranded migrants in Kerala, mainly from Wet Bengal, Assam and Odisha. The railways could be looking at running five special trains from Kerala every day. A government spokesperson said the workers have been told not to leave the camps to prevent overcrowding at the stations.

Chhattisgarh chief minister Bhupesh Baghel on Friday requested Prime Minister Narendra Modi to run special trains to bring back workers of Chhattisgarh stranded in other states. "In the present situation, point-to-point special trains could be run to ensure safety, convenience and hygiene of these workers," the CM said, adding that the state's request for special trains was pending with the home ministry.

Uttar Pradesh, which was the first state to bring back stranded students from Kota and then workers from Haryana in government buses, has earmarked special quarantine centres near major railway station for workers coming back.

"Nothing new is being done. We have already set up quarantine centres in major cities for stranded workers who are being brought back in buses. More, if required, will be created," said a UP government official who asked not to be named. He said buses have been arranged to take the passengers to their villages.

Maharashtra, where about half a million workers from other states are housed at 4,600 shelters, has started allowing workers to go back and has appointed nodal officers to facilitate their travel. "We have no information about the places from where the special trains will run," said a state government official, who was not willing to be named.

"The number of Maharashtrians stuck in other states is too little compared to the people from other states in Maharashtra. We have started taking the requests in stipulated formats from the migrants stuck in Maharashtra. District collectors in rural areas and police commissioners in urban areas will issue the passes," said IA Kundan, secretary, Maharashtra government.

The first special train to take back students was to leave Kota on Friday night, taking around 1,000 coaching students to Jharkhand.

Till now, 27,000 students of 11 states and four Union territories have been taken back by their respective states in the past month, officials said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 14 -- Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the World Health Organisation director general who has been blocking darts hurled at him over the global health agency's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, has landed himself at centre of another bout of shadow boxing between the United States and China over letting Taiwan attend next week's World Health Assembly as an observer.

The self-ruled island, which Beijing considers a wayward province awaiting reunification, has been excluded from WHO membership due to objections from China.

Taiwan attended the World Health Assembly as a non-voting observer from 2009 to 2016. But Beijing has blocked Taipei's representation at the event after a China skeptic, Tsai Ing-wen was elected president in 2016. She was re-elected this year and is due to begin her second term on 20 May, two days after the WHA's 18 May meet.

More than a dozen countries have proposed resolutions for the WHO to let Taiwan attend the World Health Assembly as an observer, arguing that the world needed to hear Taiwan that has been held up as a model in fighting the virus first detected in central China's Wuhan last year.

The disease has since then killed 2,97,000 people, infected over 4 million, grounded the world economy and set off a back and forth between the United States, China and WHO's Tedros.

Taiwan has had just about 400 cases and 7 deaths.

To be sure, this will not be the first time that an attempt has been made to restore Taiwan's observer status for the World Health Assembly.

Fourteen member states had proposed Taiwan's inclusion as an observer at WHO's last annual meet on 28-29 May 2019. The WHO had then cited "procedure followed in previous years" to let two of them speak in favour of the resolution and two against before the general assembly delivered its ruling.

Apart from China, Cuba had opposed Taiwan's inclusion. Eswatini in southern Africa and Honduras in central America had spoken in favour.

Diplomats in Geneva and Washington told Hindustan Times that the effort this time was to lobby for other countries to speak too. The chorus is growing, one of them said.

Already, fence-sitter Canada has backed Taiwan's claim to be allowed to participate at the WHA meet apart from other countries such as Australia, Japan, Germany, France, the UK, Australia, New Zealand and the US that is fronting this campaign.

A report in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's CBS News said Canada had, for the first time, even gone to the extent of issuing a verbal demarche to two senior WHO executives asking that Taiwan be admitted as an observer to the Monday meeting because its input would be "meaningful and important."

Chinese diplomats have been on an overdrive over the coronavirus diseases, initially to play down the havoc that the Sars-CoV-2 virus could wreck on the world. And later when the situation became manageable back home, to even jeer at countries that were struggling with containing its fallout if they underscored transparency and accountability from the WHO or Beijing.

Where it could, it has also penalised critics. Like when Australia supported the US call for a probe into the origin of the virus, Chinese authorities threatened to impose heavy duties on barley imports and went ahead to suspend beef imports from four Australian suppliers.

Indian hasn't taken a stand on Taiwan's inclusion yet. But one government official noted how Beijing, that wants the world to acknowledge its 'one China' principle, didn't demonstrate respect for India's sovereignty when it comes to Kashmir, or building the China Pakistan Economic Border through Indian territory occupied by Islamabad.

It is not clear if senior minister Nitin Gadkari's comment in an interview to NDTV that the virus that causes coronavirus disease was an off-the-cuff remark or an indicator that the government has an open mind on the origin of the disease. Gadkari told the news channel that the virus that causes Covid-19 wasn't a natural virus but created in a laboratory, echoing a charge that has been repeatedly made by Washington.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 20 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order? That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff:

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the violent brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "premeditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack:

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyberattack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure, and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack, adding that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef. India and Australia have also spoken about working together to shape the post-Covid world order.

South China Sea:

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China. Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea. Last year, Chinese vessels repeatedly operated in areas close to the waters where state-owned ONGC Videsh is engaged in oil and gas production.

Senkaku Islands:

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation. Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral security dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Hong Kong:

China has never been happy with the "one country, two systems" principle put in place for governing the special administrative region of Hong Kong when it was returned by the UK in 1997. After Hong Kong was roiled by protracted and widespread protests last year over the local administration's efforts to push a bill that would allow people to be extradited to mainland China for trial, Beijing has moved amid the Covid-19 crisis to draft a new national security law for the region that analysts say will undermine the semi-autonomous region's systems. The draft law, submitted to a standing committee of the National People's Congress this week, covers secession, subversion of state power, terror activities, and foreign interference.

India, in line with its long-standing policy of not speaking on the domestic and internal politics of China, has not publicly commented on last year's protests or the new draft law.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Gurugram, March 11 -- Members of the district rapid response team on Wednesday visited the Indian Army's quarantine facility at Manesar, where 83 evacuees - 74 Indians and nine of Indian origin - from Italy arrived early morning.

"The evacuees have been screened at the airport and in the camp, as informed by the health staff deployed at the camp," a member of the response team said.

"Evacuees were assigned barracks, considering the safety measures. They were also counselled to take precautionary measures that would help in preventing the Covid-19 contagion to spread. The evacuees would be examined daily," the team member, who interacted with the doctor at the camp, said.

According to the district health department, since the evacuees have been brought to Haryana, therefore, it was mandatory for them to visit the camp.

Rajiv Arora, state's additional chief secretary, said, "We are in contact with the team at the army camp. However, the army will be taking care of the evacuees, from their screening to sample testing."

Of the 83 evacuees, 40 are male, 26 female, 16 children, and one infant. A team of doctors and staff members will monitor the evacuees. If any individual is suspected to be infected, he/she will be shifted to an isolation facility.

The evacuees will be allowed to leave after 14 days with their detailed documentation sent to the district or state surveillance units for further surveillance. Those found infected will be shifted to the isolation ward at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for further medical exams and recovery.

In February, more than 200 evacuees from Wuhan were also shifted to the quarantine facility.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 21 -- Passengers boarding domestic flights beginning Monday will have to report at least two hours before departure, declare their health status at the airport, and have to complete the check-in process online, according to the government's guidelines.

Passengers will also be given a safety kit that will include a three-layered mask, face shield and sanitizer near the boarding gate, the guidelines issued on Thursday said. The rules advised passengers to travel light - just one cabin baggage and one check-in baggage allowed - and said there will be no meal on board.

The guidelines advised "very elderly, pregnant ladies, passengers with health issues" to avoid air travel. However, a person residing in a containment zone or those who have contracted Covid-19 will not be allowed inside the airport. Flyers are "expected to certify the status of their health through the Aarogya Setu app or a self-declaration form".

From origin to airport

According to the guidelines, passengers will have to reach the airport two hours before departure, follow social-distancing measures and should "travel to the airport in an authorised taxi/personal vehicle following the norms" specified by the Union home ministry.

A traveller will have to do web check-in and obtain a boarding pass, and download the baggage tag and baggage identification number. "In the initial stage, passengers will be entitled to carry maximum of one hand baggage and one checked-in baggage as per the specifications by the airline of his travel," the guidelines said. Before entering the terminal, passengers must wear a protective gear, and they will continue wearing a mask throughout the journey.

"A passenger will print the baggage tag and affix it on the bag at a prominent place," the guidelines said. In case that is not done, s/she will have to write the PNR (Passenger Name Record) number and name on a piece of paper and paste that on the baggage. Flyers were also advised to travel light as "trolleys would be permitted sparingly".

Entering the terminal building

At the airport, passengers will have to reach the thermal screenings facility near the entry gate. A designated staff will check temperatures of passengers. The status of the Aarogya Setu app should be displayed to the staff. In the absence of a compatible device, passengers will have to fill up a self-declaration form.

"In case of non-availability of Aarogrya Setu, the passenger should be facilitated to go a counter provided by the airport where Aarogrya Setu can be downloaded. Children below fourteen years of age would be exempt from this requirement," the guidelines said.

After completing the formalities, a passenger can proceed to the CISF (Central Industrial Security Force) counter at entry checkpoint and display the identity card and boarding pass. CISF staff, on confirming the identity of the person, shall allow entry. The passenger will then proceed to the baggage drop counter.

Security

Arrangements have been made at airports to guide passengers to walk through the pre-embarkation security screening. "Passengers should divest of all metal on their body to facilitate the security screening. Also, bring only one hand luggage as per specified size allowed by the airlines," the guidelines said.

Security staff will practice a "minimum touch" concept to reduce physical contact with the passengers.

Movement inside airport

Passengers will proceed to security hold area after security screening. While waiting in the security hold area, they should maintain social distancing and sanitization protocols. Chairs marked "Not For Use" should not be occupied.

Boarding

Passengers will have to collect the safety kit provided by airlines, should wear mask and sanitize their hands before proceeding to the boarding gate for scanning of the boarding pass. Check-in of the boarding pass will be done by the passenger by self- scanning of e-boarding pass. Passengers will have to board the aircraft in a sequential manner.

Inside the aircraft

Face-to-face interaction should be minimised, the guidelines said. "Passengers are advised to minimize use of lavatory and to avoid any nonessential movement in the aisles," it said. No queuing at lavatories and only one companion for children and the elderly will be allowed. No meal services will be allowed in the aircraft but water bottles will be available. Air crew will be in protective gear. "lf any passenger feels uncomfortable, fatigued or have cough, it should be bought to the notice of the crew for handling the passenger," it said.

Exit from airport

Passengers should use only authorised taxis maintaining the prescribed hygiene protocols. Only these vehicles will be allowed for taking the passenger from the airport. On arrival at the destination, a passenger will have to adhere to such health protocols as are prescribed by the destination State/ Union Territory.

At a press conference on Thursday, civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri, however, said passengers taking short distance flights will not need to quarantine upon reaching the destination state.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 22 -- omplaints of botched online shopping experiences have risen to unprecedented levels, as millions o urban Indian households take to online shopping in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic.

E-commerce disputes raised by buyers through the national consumer helpline (1800-11-4000) have outstripped complaints with regard to offline purchases, data from the consumer affairs ministry shows.

Frm April 2020 to February 2021, consumers logged 188,262 disputes or claims related to e-commerce transactions. At 22%, this share was the highest among five segments including banking, telecom, electronic products and consumer durables.

For the April 2019-March 2020 period, the number stood at 1,54,122, as against 1,03,364 during April 2018-March 2019, showing a sequential rise.

The Central Consumer Protection Authority has so far issued 37 show cause notices, including to e-tailers and travel portals. The authority has also issued 135 notices for violation of package commodity rules, including display of a misleading country of origin.

In July 2020, the government had notified a slew of new e-commerce rules, known as the Consumer Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, as part of its amended Consumer Protection Act, 2019.

According to consumer affairs secretary Leena Nandan, the concept of "convergence companies", or sellers and firms already integrated with the national consumer helpline, has helped quicken redressal.

Such companies, who are automatically directed to complaints made through the national helpline, now stand at 647, up from 506 in 2019.

Consumers can now also file online complaints through the "e-daakhil portal", Nandan said. This facility is functional in 17 states.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 31 -- Several members of the Indian community in the UK engaged in the response to the Covid-19 pandemic have been named in the New Year Honours List 2021 released on Thursday, with Prime Minister Boris Johnson hailing their contribution as "outstanding".

Indian-origin individuals named for some of the highest civilian honours such as OBE, MBE and BEM include popular actor Nina Wadia, who played various characters in films and TV programmes over the years, including Goodness Gracious Me, and singer-songwriter Steven Kapur, better known as 'Apache Indian'.

Johnson said, "In a year when so many have made sacrifices to protect our National Health Service (NHS) and save people's lives, the outstanding efforts of those receiving honours today are a welcome reminder of the strength of human spirit, and of what can be achieved through courage and compassion."

"The 2021 New Year Honours offer us an opportunity to salute their dedication and recognise many who have gone above and beyond in their contribution to our country. As we begin a new year and continue to come together to fight this virus, may their service and stories be an inspiration to us all," he added.

The awardees include Jan Thompson, acting British high commissioner in New Delhi for services to British foreign policy. She oversaw the repatriation of thousands of Britons in various parts of India on special flights as Covid-19 spread earlier in the year, among other challenges.

Those linked to the Covid-19 response include Manoj Varsani, founder of a company that supplied vital PPE in London; Mrunel Sisodia, for services to children and young people with special educational needs and disabilities, particularly during the pandemic, in Bedford.

Others honoured for their contribution to the response are Alka Surajprakash Ahuja, consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, for services to the NHS in Cardiff; Rabinder Nath Bhanot, for services to well-being and community action in Chigwell, Essex; and Avinash Dussaram of the Parliamentary Digital Service, for services to parliament, particularly during the Covid-19 response.

Harjinder Kaur Kandola has been named for services to mental health, particularly during the Covid-19 response in Bedfordshire; besides Asha Rani, day nurse in Leicestershire, Daljit Singh Grewal in west London, and Charandeep Singh, founder of the Sikh Food Bank, for services to charity during the pandemic in Renfrewshire.

Individuals named for OBE include Tanjit Singh Dosanjh, founder of a unique trust that provides eye care services in British prisons and helps rehabilitate prisoners by providing them training in making spectacles and helping them secure paid work with opticians upon release.

Diljit Singh Rana, Belfast-based prominent businessman and member of the House of Lords, has also been named for OBE, for his services to business and to the economy in Northern Ireland.

Aakash Odedra and Anand Bhatt, founders of a cultural enterprise in Leicester, have been honoured for services to dance and to the community, while London-based Chitra Sundaram has been named for services to south Asian dance, and Bhaven Pathak for services to business and British Hinduism in London.

Others from the Indian community in the list include Malini Nebhrajani, for public service, London; Usha Claire Goswami, for services to educational research, Cambridge; Preetha Ramachandran, for services to the unemployed, London; Dipanwita Ganguli, for services to adult education, London; Partha Sarathi Kar, for services to people with diabetes, Hampshire; Harnovdeep Singh Bharaj, for services to people with diabetes in the south Asian community, Greater Manchester; Anand John Chitnis, for services to the NHS, mental health and disabilities, West Midlands; Anita Goyal, for services to diversity and to female empowerment, Essex; Gary Grewal, for services to defence, London; Shravan Jashvantrai Joshi, for services to diversity and to the British Hindu community, London.

The list also named Ruchi Nanda, for services to trade, investment and to business support, Essex; Satyesh Parmar, for services to oral and maxillofacial cancer surgery, West Midlands; Vinaykant Ruparelia, for services to local enterprise, to tourism and to the community in Banffshire; Niraj Kumar Sharma, for public service, abroad; Sunita Ben Singal, for services to diversity and to inclusion, West Midlands; Sasi Srinivasan, for services to education, London; Anjuu Trevedi, for services to business innovation and to the economy in Leicestershire; Maya Joshi, for services to the vulnerable in Leicestershire; Sanjay Jayenedra Kara, for services to community cohesion and public and charitable service in the UK; and Harilal Narandas Patel, for services to community cohesion in Cardiff.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 14 -- Agra recorded the biggest spike in Covid-19 cases in a day on Monday as 35 people tested positive for the disease and took the district's tally to 138 even as officials attributed the sharp rise to aggressive testing and contact tracing as part of a containment model that the Centre has asked states to emulate.

The Centre on Saturday cited the model while instructing states to learn from it. Officials say the Agra Model has involved a proactive approach in identifying cases, conducting intensive testing, door-to-door surveys and implementing strict quarantine measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19

Officials said the 35 new cases include eight that are linked to the congregation at the headquarters of Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi that last month emerged as a Covid-19 hotspot. They added of the total 138, 60 are liked to the congregation.

"We are witnessing a sharp rise in the number of patients but soon it will start decreasing. The institutional quarantine is the only solution to such types of cases," said district magistrate Prabhu N Singh.

He added they have been shifting those who come in contact with Covid positive cases to quarantine centres before collecting their samples. Singh said they will continue with their model based on massive sampling, social distancing and institutional quarantine.

Officials said the virus has spread to a rural area of Fatehpur Sikri where a person infected 14 members of his family. They added these cases tested positive in a day. The other hotspots include a hospital in Agra where the staff and their contacts alone account for 20 Covid-19 patients.

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said some patients were undergoing treatment at the hospital and no new admissions of patients will be allowed there.

The other coronavirus hotspot is Ghatia Azam Khan area, where a private practitioner first tested positive and is later believed to have infected at least five people.

"One should not go by numbers at present because it is the outcome of our surveillance and proactive sampling with 2,264 samples having been tested in Agra till date. The cases coming positive are those whose origins are known to us and is part of Agra containment plan," said Vats.

"Till date, only one death has taken place that too of an aged lady who already had asthma. Other patients testing positive are kept under isolation and are getting cured." He added they are handling the challenge posed by major hotspots including the hospital. "We are aggressively getting their contacts tested."

Vats said the hotspot in Fatehpur Sikri has been sealed. "The in charge of a community health centre has been made the nodal officer for measures to be taken there for containment."

Dr Satish Verma, the chief medical superintendent of Agra's district hospital, said this month samples of 150 suspected Covid-19 patients have been tested daily on an average.

The Agra Model kicked in early in the Covid-19 outbreak cycle when six patients tested positive on March 3. At the time, the entire country had only 30-odd cases. Authorities drew up a list of people with foreign travel and identified their families and close contacts. The neighbourhood where patients lived were declared hotspots, with a three-km radius around them acting like containment zones and a five-km radius areas as the buffer zones.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Pune, March 21 -- A woman in Pune, who does not have a history of travel to foreign countries, has tested positive for Covid-19 disease, the National Institute of Virology (NIV) confirmed on Saturday, sparking concerns that this could be India's first case of community transmission of the highly contagious Sars-Cov-2 virus that has killed four in the country and infected 258 people.

A central government team has visited the hospital where the woman is admitted to decide on whether the case is of local transmission or community transmission, said Pune divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar on Saturday.

The 41-year-old woman, who attended a wedding at Navi Mumbai earlier this month, is a resident of Sinhgad road area, where Pune's first two cases were reported. Pune accounts for 23 of the 63 cases in Maharashtra.

Mhaisekar said, "Four family members who came in direct contact with the patient have been isolated at their homes, while the driver of the taxi she hired has been quarantined at Naidu Hospital."

The case in Pune surfaced close on the heels of reports of a 20-year-old Delhi resident, who too did not have any history of travel abroad, testing positive for the coronavirus in Tamil Nadu. The government is yet to establish the source of infection.

"We have already traced over 100 people who had come in contact with the Pune patient and are also contact tracing those who came in contact with the four family members of the patient. This number may run in hundreds. A central government team has visited the hospital where the woman is admitted to decide on whether the case is of local transmission or community transmission. Officials believe that it could be due to local transmission if the patient came in contact with any positive patient, unknowingly," Mhaisekar said.

With this case, the city has recorded a total of 23 positive cases. A 25-year-old man who returned from Dublin, Ireland, also tested positive, health officials said, expressing apprehensions that the woman's case may take state into next stage of India's fight against Covid-19.

There are four main stages of the deadly outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported, without any local origin. Stage II is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission, which takes place when the source of an individual's infection can't be traced and isolated. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

The Union health ministry maintains that there is no evidence of community transmission of the infection so far. According to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), India is still at stage II of the disease.

Doctors treating the woman said she is critical and on ventilator in an intensive care unit (ICU) at Bharati Hospital. She does not have travel history to a foreign country, but visited Vashi in Navi Mumbai for a wedding on March 3, district collector Naval Kishore Ram said.

"We are investigating the case... She must have come in contact with someone who had foreign travel history," Ram said, adding that the case has been referred to higher authorities.

The woman tested positive for the infection after her throat swabs were sent to NIV to check for possibility of swine flu (H1N1), he said.

The patient, brought to Bharati Hospital on March 16, is in a serious condition and was put on ventilator on Friday afternoon, Sanjay Lalwani, medical director of the health facility, said.

She is undergoing treatment in accordance with the recommendations of ICMR and the state government, Lalwani added.

Archana Patil, state health director, said ICMR recommendations suggest giving HIV (human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS) drugs to critical Covid-19 patients.

"As the patient is too serious, she is not being moved to the government quarantine facility at Naidu Hospital... we have demanded safety gears for our staff," Lalwani said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday it was premature to launch an investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic, hours after more than 100 countries including India and ally Russia backed an international probe into the outbreak which emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at the regular ministry briefing on Monday that the vast majority of countries in the world believe the pandemic is not yet over.

China has been pushing back international demand for a probe, saying that the US and Australia, which has been in the forefront in demanding a probe, were politicising the issue and could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The resolution, drafted by the European Union, has been put up to the World Health Assembly (WHA), the annual meeting of the WHO. The foreign ministry statement came hours before the UN's global health agency's two-day virtual meet begins on Monday.

The resolution does not single out China or any other country but calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the (WHO)-coordinated international health response to Covid-19."

"Initiate, at the earliest appropriate moment, and in consultation with Member States, 1 a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, 2 as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19," the draft resolution said.

Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said on Monday Australia wants the resolution to stipulate that the inquiry be "impartial, independent and comprehensive."

In a separate statement, the Chinese foreign ministry announced that President Xi Jinping will address the World Health Assembly's opening ceremony via videolink later on Monday. President Xi had not been listed as a speaker in the schedule circulated by the WHO earlier. The foreign ministry said President Xi had been invited to speak by WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

After emerging in China, the virus had rapidly spread around world, killing more than 315,000 people and infecting at least 4.7 million.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- Even otherwise, Juan Ferrando would possibly have been working from home. That's how coaches in the Indian Super League (ISL) operate at this time of the year, three months prior to pre-seasons. Ferrando says he is getting ready to be Sergio Lobera's successor at FC Goa like he would in "normal times".

Ferrando is linking up with the fitness coach every morning, getting the team doctor on WhatsApp to inquire about previous injuries, watching games to understand the Indian Super League (ISL) and preparing individual programmes for players who can train outside. "This is a moment to learn," he says.

Also Read | Premier League clubs agree to return to small-group training from Tuesday

If that sounds like a lot of work in the time of lockdown, it is. After all, Ferrando is replacing someone who took FC Goa to two ISL semi-finals, one final and a Super Cup title in three seasons. In 2020-21, FC Goa will also be the first team from India in the main round of the Asian Champions League by topping the league phase of ISL 6.

"I go for a run for one or two hours every day to take my mind off football. The rest of the day is about programme, planning and players," says Ferrando, 39, on a Zoom call, from his home in Barcelona.

Then he lowers his glasses, looks into his screen as if to digitally lock eyes with the questioner, and says: "But this is not really football. One month without it is okay but two months is so hard. and you can't see Espanyol play at home."

Also Read | The 10 youngest debutants in 21st century in LaLiga history

Uncertainty in the time of Covid-19 also isn't helping the new coach "close" his squad - especially new foreign players - by August-September for six or eight weeks of pre-seasons assuming ISL 7 would begin in late October. "The pre-seasons prepare muscles and players' psychology because the next season would be a hard season," says the man who has a doctorate from the University of Zaragoza's department of medicine. Ferrando's thesis was on how body vibration training helps spot jumps of professional footballers. He has also been fitness, tactical and technical coach at Espanyol's football school.

Ferrando's interest in sports science - he has degrees and diplomas from University of Barcelona - took him to Arsene Wenger's Arsenal and to Brighton when Gus Poyet was manager. It was an opportunity to learn coaching, says Ferrando who was also the personal trainer of Cesc Fabergas and Robin van Persie.

A coach since he was 18, Ferrando has also learnt from Marcelo Bielsa - "crazy coach but an inspiration about lot of things," he says about the Argentinean - Pep Guardiola, Thomas Tuchel, Manuel Pellegrini and Antonio Conte who "was perfect at Chelsea (in 2016-17)."

Intensity, innovation, verticality, the importance of possession and attacking football unite those famous names. Statements such as "protecting the ball is good," and "keeping the ball is important" followed from Ferrando.

"If the focus is positive, of course, you can lose but maybe you will have more options to win," he says. It's an idea Lobera, who like Ferrando spent time at FC Barcelona, wedged deep in FC Goa; one he fine-tuned with increased defensive discipline in 2019-20 before the sudden departure.

"There are, however, certain tactical details I would want to change but let that stay a secret," says Ferrando.

Now with Mumbai City FC, Lobera sealed a 2021 Champions League berth for FC Goa. Indians clubs have done poorly in Asia last season and that was in the AFC Cup, the continent's second-tier competition. "Our mentality will be competitive," says Ferrando.

Will ISL allowing five imports in the playing 11 and the continent following the 3+1 rule, including one player of Asian origin, add to his squad-building problems? "We will take the best three players who can help the team. In this moment, we are in that position," says Ferrando the fifth Spanish coach in the 10-team ISL.

As assistant-coach Ferrando was part of Moldova's FC Sheriff campaign in Europe. His biggest moment as a coach though came in Greece when Ferrando helped Volos NFC win successive promotions and move from third to first division between 2017 and 2019 before leaving because of an eye problem. "We had players hungry about their future and players with experience. There was also a good feeling in the dressing room," he says.

To create that feeling of team spirit, it is crucial that everybody enjoys what they are doing, he says. "You need to find exercises to enjoy. I am not a military type coach like many Serbians and Russians," says the polyglot who can speak Spanish, English, Russian, Greek and Catalan.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 8 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

PM Modi hails demonetisation on anniversary, Congress observes betrayal day

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday hailed his government's demonetisation move four years ago, claiming that it gave a boost to transparency. In a tweet on Sunday, Modi said that the move helped reduce black money, increase tax compliance and formalisation and gave a boost to transparency and that the outcomes have been beneficial for the country's progress. Read more

PM Narendra Modi to initiate projects worth Rs 614cr in Varanasi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will inaugurate and lay the foundation of 30 projects worth Rs 614 crore in Varanasi via video conference on Monday, a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader said on Sunday. Read more

Kamala Harris' ancestral village celebrates her win with crackers, rangoli

A village in southern India also erupted with joy as Kamala Harris became the first woman vice president-elect of the United States. Harris traces a part of her ancestral roots to India. Read more

'Babar has done better': Mohammad Yousuf weighs in on the Virat Kohli-Babar Azam debate

When it comes to the finest batsmen in the world, the names Virat Kohli and Babar Azam are right up there. There was a time when Kohli, the India captain, used to be compared with Australia's Steve Smith, but lately, his comparison has shifted away from the former Australia captain and moved more towards Babar, Pakistan's limited-overs captain. Read more

Supernovas' Chamari Atapattu reveals eating these Indian dishes and defeating Trailblazers in Women's T20 Challenge

The last-ball thriller by Supernovas in the nailbiting match with the Trailblazers at the Women's T20 Challenge in Sharjah, UAE, garnered massive praises for Sri Lankan women cricket team captain Chamari Athapaththu. The left-handed opener Atapattu smashed five fours and four sixes to notch up 67 runs off 48 balls aggressively. Read more

Bengaluru cinemas-theatres face revenue loss, forced to close due to lack of footfall amid Covid-19

The Covid-19 pandemic has left a substantial impact on the film industry in 2020, film theatres in Bengaluru have been forced to close down due to a lack of revenues. Read more

Charlie Hunnam says he had Covid-19 earlier this year: 'I just lost my sense of taste and smell'

Actor Charlie Hunnam says he had contracted coronavirus "earlier this year". The 40-year-old actor said he had the virus at a time when loss of taste hadn't "really come to light as a symptom of mild Covid". Read more

Jennifer Lawrence dances in pyjamas, Spike Lee pops champagne with New Yorkers to celebrate Biden-Harris win

Hollywood celebrities such as Jennifer Lawrence, Chrissy Teigen, John Legend, Spike Lee and multiple others took to the streets to celebrate Joe Biden and Kamala Harris' US elections win on Saturday. While some danced in the streets, others joined the crowd to cheer for their favourite candidate. Read more

'Biden govt will be weak...': Decoding new US administration's India view

After 4 days of suspense, Democratic party leader Joe Biden was announced the winner of the 2020 US Presidential election. While there is excitement in many quarters in India regarding Vice President-elect Kamala Harris, who is of Indian origin, there are some concerns too. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday gave in to mounting international pressure for a probe into the origin of Covid-19 and a review of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic. President Xi Jinping told the World Health Assembly that China had acted with 'openness, transparency and responsibility' when the disease, which has impacted billions of people across the world, first broke out.

President Xi, who had been invited to speak at the opening ceremony after the European Union-drafted resolution to push for a probe was supported by more than a 100 countries, said Beijing supported calls for a comprehensive review of the global response but felt this exercise should be carried out after the world gets a grip on the situation. The world's immediate priority should be saving people.

"China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to COVID-19 after it is brought under control to sum up experience and address deficiencies," President Xi told the assembly, the UN global health body's policy making body.

China had previously opposed calls for such investigations from Washington and Canberra.

The health assembly is expected to formally take up the resolution backed by over 120 countries tomorrow. "It is a formality now. No one is objecting to it now," a diplomat in Geneva told Hindustan Times.

President XI's argument at the assembly mirrored the one presented by World Health Organisation director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus after a barrage of criticism, much of it emanating from the United States in the initial days.

Tedros has been blamed for backing Beijing's narrative and showering praise on President XI for his handling of the disease around the same time that there was growing evidence of efforts to play down the spread of the disease in January. He was seen standing with Beijing again when the United States restricted flights from China.

There is no need for measures that "unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", the WHO chief said on February 3.

At Monday's World Health Assembly, President Xi reciprocated, telling the 194-member body that the WHO's contribution under Dr Tedros had been applauded by the international community.

"At this crucial juncture, to support WHO is to support international cooperation and the battle for saving lives as well," President Xi said.

The draft resolution that had been pushed by Australia and the European Union had proposed an inquiry into the animal to human transmission of the Sars-CoV-2

President Xi's comments, made during a video speech to the World Health Assembly, come as a resolution pushed by the European Union and Australia calling for a review of the origin and spread of the coronavirus disease picked up momentum.

By the time the truncated virtual meet started, the 54-nation Africa Group also extended support. This includes Ethiopia, home to Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus who made history in 2017 when he was elected WHO chief.

Tedros was not just the first African to hold the post but also the first WHO chief not to be a medical doctor. The former Ethiopian minister holds a masters in immunology of infectious diseases and a Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in community health.

Tedros, who spoke minutes after President XI, said the inquiry would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and provide recommendations for future preparedness.

"We all have lessons to learn from the pandemic. Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience. WHO is committed to transparency, accountability and continuous improvement," Tedros said.

The review must encompass responsibility of "all actors in good faith," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- The Sars-CoV-2 viruses causing coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has three major strains, but no key mutation specific to India has been found that affects infectiveness or disease severity, said Minister of Health and Science & Technology Dr Harsh Vardhan in his first interview after Covid-19 cases crossed 100,000 in India on Monday.

He said calibrated lockdowns and public health measures have delayed the peaking of the curve in India and prevented the dramatically high numbers predicted by several modelling studies, but warned that how the pandemic progresses now will depend on how closely people follow mobility restrictions, social isolation and personal hygiene norms. Edited excerpts:

When is the pandemic expected to peak in India?

We have successfully managed to delay the peaking of the curve by imposing lockdown and other public health measures in a timely manner. There are several mathematical models which are predicting the course of the pandemic in India, but till now, we have managed to avoid the dramatically high numbers that they predicted. Right now, with the calibrated lockdowns being implemented, we have tried to contain the spread of infection. It is difficult to predict numbers as they will depend on the adherence of restrictions on mobility and intermingling, observance of personal hygiene, and prevention of exposure to infection by people in different areas. Additionally, it will also depend on the proportion of those infected among migrants and travellers from outside and within.

Has community transmission begun in India?

The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined four stages of Covid-19 outbreak: Countries with no cases, countries with sporadic cases; countries with clusters; and countries experiencing larger outbreaks of local transmission (community transmission). How large is an outbreak that constitutes a community transmission has not been defined by WHO, so what people refer to as community transmission differs from country to country.

In India, the virus has come from foreign sources through travellers coming from outside. We generally consider a case to be a 'case of community transmission' when there is no clarity on the source of origin of the infection in a new community. Let me explain again. Community spread in India would mean that cases are occurring in people who did not have any known contact with travellers from overseas infected countries. However, this is not happening, implying that there is no community transmission in India.

Although there are some clusters of local spread, the numbers being reported are not indicative of community transmission, which would have likely resulted in a larger number of cases given the expanded testing. Central teams have been deployed in 10 states witnessing a high burden of cases to investigate the sites with higher transmission. In addition, 69 districts will be brought under surveillance to understand the burden and disease trends in greater detail.

Is India prepared for the projected rise in cases after work and travel restrictions end?

India has massively scaled up all aspects of preparedness. There are around 535 laboratories across the country, more than one lakh samples are tested per day, and 24,04,267 people have been tested. The testing strategies are constantly being examined in light of emerging evidence. India has also developed ELISA-based antibody testing kits, which will provide testing alternatives.

India now has the capacity to produce over 250,000 PPE units every day. This expansion of capacity is a real success story as we were entirely dependent on imported PPEs in the pre-pandemic period. We have also scaled up the availability of hospital beds, and oxygen supply linked beds, to enable supportive treatment of Covid-19 patients. While there are sufficient ventilators, our goal is to prevent patients from going on ventilators because the global experience shows that once patients go on ventilators, the mortality rate is very high.

Overall, we are focusing on preparedness in the community (physical distancing, phased relaxation of lockdown), augmenting healthcare facilities (more beds, oxygen support, ICU) and public health management measures (surveillance, testing) to ensure that a holistic plan is in place to combat the threat of resurgent infections once the lockdown is lifted in a phased manner at varying levels in different districts.

How many genomic sequences of SARS-CoV2 has India submitted to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID)?

India has contributed around 226 genomic sequences of SARS-CoV-2 so far to the around 25,000 sequences of SARS-CoV-2 that have been shared with unprecedented speed via GISAID. A 1,000-genome sequencing initiative has been launched by Department of Biotechnology (DBT), and 500 are being sequenced by the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR).

What are the findings? Are there any key mutations in the SARS-CoV2 virus causing disease in India?

The key mutations in SARS-Cov-2 virus have been found in spike glycoprotein (D614G, G1124V), nucleocapsid (R203K, G204R), RNA dependent RNA Polymerase (P323L) . The circulating viruses in India belong to three major strains. The majority of our samples belong to A2a and about 15% to A3 genotypes. There are a few samples belonging to genotypes B, B1, B4, and A1a. They do not have any mutation that has been reported to be associated with any disease progression or acquisition so far. So, despite the fact that no key mutation specific to India has been found in the virus and it still continues to be an imported virus strain, we cannot afford to be complacent. We have to remain vigilant and continue tracking the virus to identify emerging quasi-species or strains.

How many states have the SARS-CoV2 genetic samples been sequenced from? Is there any difference in the strains causing infections across states?

Sequences are currently mostly from Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh -- most belong to A2a clade, while some belong to A3 and B1 clades. It is too early to detect major differences. We are trying for a systematic study of viral RNA sequence from different zones of India and correlate with disease severity.

What has been the role of government institutions in the Covid-19 response, including diagnostic, drug and vaccine development?

The focus is on self-reliance. We have ramped up our capacity for developing Indigenous testing kits. From being completely dependent on imports, we now have over 20 indigenous manufacturers with a diagnostic kit production capacity of nearly 50 lakh kits per month getting ready by the end of May. This includes indigenous components and reagents.

The government's role has been very proactive in supporting innovation for vaccine development, development of cost-effective diagnostic equipment , as well as drug discovery and repurposing. The Covid Consortium, under DBT-BIRAC (Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council), has supported 70 projects under various categories of vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics. Support has been also given to medical devices such as ventilators and equipment such as PPEs, N-95 masks etc, and for drugs and vaccine development. Funding start-ups that offer immediate solutions has been fast-tracked to address the Covid challenge.

Some US studies have found hydroxychloroquine to be ineffective against Covid-19? What is India's experience?

The recent study from New York which failed to find any mortality benefits associated with the use of hydroxychloroquine is a retrospective cohort study. There are several caveats in the study which need to be accounted for. First, the design of the study precludes attribution of the causal effect of the use of hydroxychloroquine on the disease outcomes. Second, the recipients of the drug were already suffering from severe disease, thus making the comparative sample groups unfair. Third, the best effect of hydroxychloroquine based strategy is seen when initiated in the mild to moderate disease stage. Several clinical trials are underway, and once their results are declared, we shall have definite evidence of the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine.

Several studies are also underway in India, and as the results emerge, we shall be able to provide more insights into the experiences locally. However, early reports from the pharmacovigilance programme indicate that there are no unexpected spikes of adverse reactions from the use of hydroxychloroquine in the country.

What is the progress on the WHO Solidarity Trial in India?

In India, we plan to randomise at least 1,500 Covid-19 patients over five to six months. The trial has been initiated with 46 randomised Covid-19 patients, symptomatic adults who have been recently hospitalized and have not yet received hydroxychloroquine. We are not enrolling any asymptomatic Covid-19 patients. The nature of care proposed as part of the randomized trial include providing only local standard of care, administering Remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, Lopinavir / Ritonavir or Lopinavir / Ritonavir with Interferon Beta-1a. So far, around 2,500 people have been randomized globally. Being a five-arm study, large numbers (&gt; 10,000) are required, although there is no cap on sample size. It's not possible to give timeframe for outcomes as the analysis resulting from these trials is global.

Is the effect of BCG vaccination being studied in India?

BCG vaccination has been found to be an immunomodulator in malignancies and also protects against certain infectious diseases. Several high-income countries, which do not have routine BCG vaccination in childhood, have initiated clinical trials of BCG in high-risk groups, especially in healthcare workers. Currently, there are two ongoing clinical trials in India. Serum Institute of India (in Pune) is conducting a trial of VPM1002 and Cadila is conducting a trial using mycobacterium indicus pranii. However, we have to keep in mind the fact that India has very high rates of BCG vaccination at birth, and this could be an effect modifier or confounder in the results.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 27 -- External affairs minister S Jaishankar on Friday began a two-day visit to Seychelles, part of India's renewed focus on security and development cooperation with its Indian Ocean neighbours in the face of China's aggression across the region.

Seychelles is the last leg of Jaishankar's three-nation tour that also took him to Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, and his main objective in the capital Victoria is to meet newly elected President Wavel Ramkalawan and present a letter from Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Jaishankar is set to be the first senior foreign leader to meet Indian-origin Ramkalawan - who in October became the first opposition candidate to be elected president of the archipelago since 1977 - as Seychelles is under strict quarantine norms. Seychelles made a special exemption for the visit.

Also read | S Jaishankar meets UAE counterpart; discusses Covid-19, strategic cooperation

The visit coincides with Seychelles joining Bangladesh and Mauritius as observers for a meeting of the trilateral maritime security cooperation dialogue between India, the Maldives and Sri Lanka in Colombo. India is being represented at the talks, which are being held after a gap of six years, by National Security Adviser Ajit Doval.

"The meeting in Sri Lanka and the external affairs minister's visit to Seychelles are part of efforts to ramp up security and development cooperation across the Indian Ocean, especially for maritime domain awareness," said a person familiar with developments who declined to be named.

"The Indian side also wants to understand President Ramkalawan's development priorities to strengthen bilateral cooperation. India has tried to broad-base its relationship through assistance in the form of grants and concessional loans," the person said.

Though development cooperation will top the agenda - India is currently helping Seychelles build a new Government House, police headquarters and attorney general's office at a total cost of almost $91 million - the Indian side is also expected to discuss the stalled move to build naval facilities on Assumption Island, located about 1,100 km from the main island of Mahe.

Though the two sides signed two agreements for this in 2015 and 2018, the construction couldn't begin because of protests by Opposition parties. Ramkalawan had led the opposition to the project and political parties had refused to ratify the agreements despite the second one incorporating specific clauses to address concerns expressed by some quarters in Seychelles.

While China has provided two light aircraft and two warships and financed the building of Seychelles' Parliament, India has gifted the archipelago three naval boats and two maritime surveillance aircraft and established six coastal radar stations.

Experts say such cooperation is crucial for patrolling the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of Indian Ocean states and track the movement of vessels, including Chinese warships.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 3 -- A team of experts from the World Health Organization (WHO) visited China's most advanced virus research lab in Wuhan on Wednesday as part of their ongoing probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic, reports from the central Chinese city said.

Scientists at the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) research on some of the deadliest pathogens found in the world including the bat-hosted coronavirus.

One theory - so far unproven and consistently rejected by China - says that the initial outbreak in Wuhan may have been triggered by an accidental virus leak from the bio-safety lab.

Questions also remain about a possible spillover - or a zoonotic event - where the virus could have jumped from an animal host to humans.

"I am looking forward to a very productive day, meeting the key people here and asking all the important questions that need to be asked," team member Peter Daszak, who is the president of the EcoHealth Alliance, said from his car as it drove into the institute, a Reuters report from Wuhan said.

Peter Ben Embarek, a scientist leading the WHO team, told the tabloid Global Times that the international experts will meet Shi Zhengli, a leading Chinese virologist.

Shi has been dubbed as China's "bat woman" because of her intensive research on bats and the viruses they host.

In a social media post on Tuesday, Daszak said the WHO experts met "with key staff in charge of livestock surveillance in Hubei Province", and toured lab facilities and held in-depth discussions on Tuesday when the team visited an animal health facility.

On Sunday, the WHO team went to the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, which was linked to the first cases of Covid-19 in late 2019, described by Daszak in a tweet as a "critical" stop.

Meanwhile, China on Wednesday reported the fewest number of new Covid-19 cases for a single day in more than a month, the national health commission (NHC) said.

A total of 25 cases were reported in the mainland on February 2, the NHC said, of which 15 were locally transmitted infections.

The total number of Covid-19 cases reported in mainland China now stands at 89,619, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 1 -- India recorded 11,427 new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Monday, on a day when finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman will present the Union Budget. With this, the nationwide tally reached 10,757,610, according to Union health ministry update.

The number of active cases of the disease went down to 1,68,235, the health ministry update at 8 am showed. The recoveries stood at 10,434,983.

India also recorded 118 fresh fatalities due to the disease in the said period which took the death toll to 1,54,392. On Sunday, India had recorded 127 fatalities linked to Covid-19.

The health ministry had said on Saturday that the country's recovery rate has reached nearly 97 per cent (96.98 per cent), adding that it is one of the highest globally.

Addressing the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (BAPIO) Wales at their annual conference via video link on Saturday night, health minister Harsh Vardhan said on Saturday that India was able to fight the Covid-19 pandemic much better than other countries because of its "whole of government" and "whole of society" approach.

"India was the first country to respond within an hour when WHO declared Covid-19 a pandemic. Planning started on January 8 and guidelines were drafted by 17th. Massive surveillance started on the same day with meticulous contact tracing unparalleled in the world," Vardhan said.

India has also been witnessing a nationwide vaccination programme to combat the Covid-19 infection. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has termed it the world's biggest vaccination programme.

"Globally, India stands at the fifth position (as on 29th January, 2021) in terms of the number of vaccine doses administered within the country. This is despite the fact that many countries had initiated their vaccination campaign before India," the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday.

Addressing the nation on his monthly address Mann Ki Baat, PM Modi had said that India is the fastest in vaccinating its citizens.

"Just as India's war against coronavirus became an example to the world, similarly our vaccination programme is also becoming an example to the world. India is conducting the biggest vaccination drive in the world. Do you know what is an even better matter of pride? We are not only running the world's biggest vaccination drive but we are also the fastest in vaccinating our citizens," the Prime Minister said.

"In merely 15 days, India has vaccinated more than 30 lakhs Covid-19 warrior, while a rich country like the US has completed the same target in 18 days and the UK in 36 days. The Made in India vaccines are not only a symbol of Atmanirbhar Bharat but they are also a symbol of self-pride," he added.

The number of healthcare workers vaccinated against Covid-19 has crossed the 37 lakh mark on the 15th day of the vaccination program, according to health ministry.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 11 -- The US embassy in China issued a security alert on Saturday for African-Americans living and working in the southern metropolis of Guangzhou after several reports said members of the large black community in the city were being targeted and harassed amid Covid-19 fears.

Diplomats from several African countries have also taken up the matter of their citizens being harassed with the Chinese embassies.

Reports of Africans being targeted in Guangzhou comes in the backdrop of rising number of imported Covid-19 cases in China.

On Saturday, health authorities said it had received reports of 46 new confirmed Covid-19 cases on the Chinese mainland Friday, of which 42 were imported.

Three deaths, all in Hubei, and eight new suspected cases, all imported ones, were reported Friday on the mainland.

As of Friday, the mainland had reported a total of 1,183 imported cases, the national health commission (NHC) said Saturday in its daily report.

The overall confirmed cases on the mainland had reached 81,953 by Friday with 3,339 deaths.

The US Embassy security alert on Saturday said that "police ordered bars and restaurants not to serve clients who appear to be of African origin" and local officials have launched mandatory testing and self-quarantine for "anyone with 'African contacts.'"

That's in response to a rise in virus infections in Guangzhou, the US said, adding that "African-Americans have also reported that some businesses and hotels refuse to do business with them."

According to CNN, which said it interviewed more than two dozen Africans living in Guangzhou, many had been left without a home, being subject to random testing for Covid-19, and being quarantined for 14 days in their homes, despite having no symptoms or contact with known patients.

There are about 80,000 foreign nationals living in Guangzhou, capital of south China's industrial powerhouse Guangdong province.

According to official numbers, there were 15,000 Africans living in the city. However, thousands more travel in and out of the city. Egypt, Mali, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are the major sources of African expatriates. Most are engaged in trade or study in the city.

Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian on Thursday told reporters that China's most urgent task is to prevent "overseas imports" of the virus but acknowledged that "there might be some misunderstandings in the implementation of measures."

China treats all foreigners equally, Zhao said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 17 -- (Bloomberg) -- Facebook Inc. Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said that as the social network gets more aggressive in policing misinformation about the coronavirus, even politicians, celebrities and those posting in private groups aren't exempt from the rules.

Earlier this month, the company said it would remove false content and conspiracy theories about Covid-19 that health authorities flagged as harmful. On Monday, Sandberg said Facebook -- which has a policy of not fact-checking political ads -- would apply the rules even to the platform's most powerful voices. "We are taking down any harmful misinformation on the coronavirus," she said in an interview on Bloomberg Television.

Also read: Facebook promises $20 million to fight COVID-19

So far, Facebook hasn't reported any major takedowns, even as some politicians downplay the potential severity of the virus, and some celebrities spread conspiracy theories about its origins. The kind of content that would be taken down is more severe, such as posts that give people false information on how to protect themselves against the virus, Facebook said. Sandberg said Facebook is sharing high-quality information with celebrities, like the proper technique for hand-washing, in the hopes that they will share it with their fans.

Medical misinformation tends to thrive in Facebook's private groups, which are more difficult to monitor. But Sandberg said even those communities would be subject to the rules "as soon as we can find it.

Sandberg's interview coincided with the announcement of a multimillion-dollar donation by her and other technology executives to a local food bank in the San Francisco Bay Area, where school closures are threatening hungry families.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 22 -- A 41-year-old woman in Pune tested positive for the coronavirus disease or Covid-19 on Saturday, becoming the second patient in India with no history of foreign travel or documented contact with previous cases and fuelling fears that the country had slipped into the deadly third phase of the infection when the contagion spreads rapidly.

At this stage of the outbreak , known as the community transmission phase, the origin of any individual patient's infection cannot be pinpointed to travel to a global hotspot of the disease, or documented contact with a previously infected person. This means that the virus is freely circulating in the community, making it tough for authorities to control its spread or enforce containment measures.

In countries worst-hit by the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19, such as China, Italy, Iran or South Korea, the number of infections and fatalities rose sharply once the country moved into the community transmission phase.

Late evening, authorities in West Bengal reported that a 57-year-old man, who had not travelled abroad and had no documented contact with a previous patient, had tested positive for Covid-19 - indicating that more cases of people with no obvious origin of infection were showing up across the country. The case was confirmed by two state government laboratories but not by the NIV, the national nodal authority, at the time of going to print.

GOVT DISMISSES

The government dismissed claims of community transmission, and said the two cases simply represented a failure of contact tracing, a process by which authorities identify everyone a coronavirus patient has come in contact with. This is crucial in figuring out how many people a particular patient might have potentially infected.

"Right now we are focussing our efforts on tracing the contacts of all the positive cases. Contact tracing is not a simple exercise -we are currently monitoring over 7,000 people who have come in contact with those who tested positive. So far, there is no evidence of community transmission," said Lav Agarwal, joint secretary, Union health ministry.

But experts point out that having no obvious source of an infection, or not being able to immediately trace an infection to either foreign travel or direct contact was a clear indication of community transmission. Moreover, because of a paucity in testing - India has tested just 16,911 samples so far ,one of the lowest testing rates in the world - experts had no clear idea if community transmission was occurring among patients.

IN DENIAL?

"We need to expand testing to identify the infected early and treat them effectively and delay their getting into a critical stage...just the same strategy as we followed for HIV AIDS.... Yes, it (the possibility of community transmission) has been worrying me for over a week," said Sujatha Rao, former health secretary, ministry of health and family welfare, and former director general, National AIDS Control Organisation, India's apex body for preventing HIV in India.

"We have wasted time being in denial, exactly the way we were with HIV AIDS. We haven't learnt lessons."

A senior health ministry official said that community transmission could only be confirmed when national surveillance network picks up a high number of positive cases. "Or we start reporting 200 or 300 cases and don't know the source of a high number - 50 to 60 of these cases," he added, suggesting that two or three cases that can't be explained do not confirm community transmission.

There are four stages of an outbreak. Stage I is when cases are imported by travellers from other countries, Stage II is when these travellers then pass on the infection locally to people living or working around them, Stage III is when community transmission happens and the health care workers are unable to trace the source of infections, and the last Stage IV is when the disease is widespread in a population.

India is currently in the Stage II of the outbreak, according to the health ministry.

"Yes, there are cases where we haven't been able to pinpoint the source of the infection. However, I will consider this to be the failure of our contact tracing efforts rather than community transmission," said the Union health ministry official.

Knowing whether there is community transmission is important as people with undetected infection could lead to an explosion in cases like in Italy, where Covid-19 cases and related fatalities shot up suddenly when community transmission began. "I think it is just a matter of time that India sees an explosive rise in the number of cases," said Lalit Kant, former head of epidemiology and communicable diseases at ICMR. The Pune woman was brought to the government-run Bharati hospital on March 16 with complaints of fever and breathlessness.

"As per the information from her family, she started developing initial symptoms on March 3. After that, she took public transport to travel to an anganwadi and also attended a wedding in Navi Mumbai," said Sanjay Lalwani, medical director of the hospital.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said four of her family members were isolated at their homes while the driver of taxi she had hired was quarantined.

"We have already traced over 100 people who came in contact with the patient and also contact tracing those who came in contact with the four family members. This number may run in hundreds. A central government team has visited the hospital to decide on whether the case is of local transmission or community transmission," he added.

The case came a day after the government said it was yet to trace the origin of infection of the 20-year-old Delhi man who travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai on March 17.

In the Bengal case, the man, a resident of Dum Dum on the northern fringes of Kolkata, was admitted in a private hospital on March 16 after being ill with fever, accompanied by a dry cough, since March 13, a top state health department official said. His condition deteriorated on March 19 with the onset of acute respiratory distress syndrome and he was put on ventilator, the official said on condition of anonymity

TRACING DIFFICULTIES

Authorities argue that contact tracing becomes incredibly difficult, especially when people travel in public transport like in the case of a 46-year-old Delhi man who took the Metro for days before testing positive. Delhi authorities said they were able to trace his contacts in the neighbourhood where he lived and at his workplace, but there was no way of tracing the people on the metro.

The same was true of one of the three initial cases in India.

"If you remember the first three cases of Covid-19 in India, one of them had taken multiple flights, trains and other public transport. Do you think we were able to trace all of the people on those vehicles? No. And, someone else might very well contract the infection in transit and we will not know the source. But, does it suggest community transmission? No," the health ministry official said.

To detect community transmission, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex health research body, has been conducting surveillance testing by lifting random samples of patients suffering from severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), including severe pneumonia.

These samples are taken from people with no travel history or contact with a positive patient. All 826 samples collected during the second round of community testing in March returned negative for Covid-19, according to ICMR. With the ICMR expanding its testing criteria to include all patients hospitalised with SARI Friday onwards, early detection of community transmission is likely.

"The ICMR says that there is no community transmission as of now, but my feeling is we just haven't been able to pick up. Initially, we were just testing symptomatic people who had travelled abroad and those who came in contact with them, how would we then be able to detect if anyone among the 1.3 billion people have it? The revised criteria that allows for testing all patients with SARI will help in picking up community transmission," said Dr Kant.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
London, Oct. 3 -- The introduction of ultra-low emission zone (ULEZ) in central London earlier this year and other measures have led to "dramatic improvements" in London's air quality since 2016, according to a report that was released on Saturday.

Some challenges remain, but new modelling by experts from the Environmental Research Group at Imperial College of pollution in 2019 shows that, even before lockdown, measures implemented by mayor Sadiq Khan since 2016 have helped transform London's air quality.

The number of Londoners living in areas exceeding the legal limit for NO2 (nitrogen dioxide) fell from over 2 million in 2016 to 119,000 in 2019, a reduction of 94%. However, the challenges include most residents still facing particulate matter exceeding the limit set by the WHO.

Besides, research shows that those exposed to the worst air pollution are more likely to be from Black, Asian and minority ethnic communities. There is also emerging evidence linking air pollution with an increased vulnerability to the most severe impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, officials said.

The ULEZ charge of &#163;12.50 per car levied since April applies to pre-2015 diesel and pre-2006 petrol cars that fall foul of Euro 6 and Euro 4 standards, respectively. The ULEZ charge for heavier vehicles, including lorries and buses, is &#163;100 per day.

The report is likely to lead to the ULEZ being expanded to cover more areas because 24% of roads in inner London still exceed the legal limits for NO2. The challenge is greater for particulate matters since most of London does not meet WHO limits.

The mayor's office said that the ULEZ had contributed to a reduction of 44% in roadside NO2 in the central London zone. There are now 44,100 fewer polluting vehicles being driven in the central zone every day with 79% of vehicles in the zone now meeting ULEZ emissions standards.

Khan, who faces the next mayoral election in 2021, said, "I was elected (in 2016) on a mandate to deliver hard-hitting measures to tackle our toxic air crisis. Today's report confirms the transformative impact that my policies have had in just four years."

"However, air pollution remains a major public health challenge and it's time for the government to step up, set ambitious national targets, and provide the powers and funding we need to consign air pollution to the history books," he added.

Deputy mayor for environment, Goa-origin Shirley Rodrigues, said, "The ULEZ is the centrepiece of our plans to clean up London's air. We have and are implementing the boldest plans of any city on the planet and the ULEZ is exceeding expectations."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 15 -- It is a season that should have marked a happy occasion for Formula One, 2020 being its 70th anniversary, a time to recall its origins when Italy's Giuseppe 'Nino' Farina went from pole to flag at Silverstone in the first ever race in 1950.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has put such celebrations on hold, throwing the season into uncertainty. F1 CEO Chase Carey recently said there is a danger of the season not happening at all if the situation didn't improve.

Seven of the 22 races have already been cancelled, including the Monaco Grand Prix-it will be the first time since 1954 that the race won't wind through the narrow streets of the principality. Azerbaijan, Japan and Singapore joined the list on Friday while many others have been postponed or unlikely to happen.

The return of European top-flight football though has given hope. With the Bundesliga, Serie A and La Liga resuming behind closed doors and Premier League scheduled to restart on Wednesday, professional sport appears to dig deep into its resources and organisational capabilities for a revival.

F1 too is now preparing an initial list of eight races-all in Europe. The season is expected to finally start with the Austrian Grand Prix in Spielberg on July 5 followed by the Styrian GP-named after the Austrian state where the venue is-a week later. Both the closed-doors races will be held at the Red Bull Ring circuit.

Hungary will stage a race in July before the season moves to England with Silverstone hosting two races-British GP and 70th Anniversary GP-on August 2 and 9. It will be followed by races in Spain, Belgium and Italy. Like European football, all races will miss the buzz of the fans, especially at a venue like Silverstone that sees an overall weekend attendance of 350,000.

Though not finalised yet taking the health issues into consideration, F1 then intends to move to Russia, Asia (Vietnam and China) and the Americas (Canada, United States, Mexico and Brazil) to host postponed races. The organisers aim to end with races in Bahrain and Abu Dhabi in late December or early January.

That plan will heavily depend on air travel and quarantine restrictions easing, countries opening their borders and other logistical factors. It could see more European races, to achieve F1's target of 15-18 races this season. That would still be a world of improvement for race drivers stuck to virtual racing.

"We have made significant progress with existing and new promoters on the revised calendar and have been particularly encouraged by the interest that has been shown by new venues in hosting a Formula 1 race during the 2020 season," an F1 statement said on Friday.

There are reports that old venues like Hockenheim (Germany) and Imola (Italy) are close to sealing deals to host races. Imola, which last held a race in 2006 when Michael Schumacher won, have renewed their FIA Grade 1 licence, needed to host a race.

Venues like Portimao (Portugal) and Ferrari-owned Mugello (Italy), which are yet to stage F1, are also in contention with more double-headers like Austria and Britain also not being ruled out. "There is a contingency to have an extended European season with another one or two races if needed," F1 motorsports chief Ross Brawn told F1.com last week. "There are a number of good European tracks where we could add another one or two races on to make sure we have a comprehensive season."

Sticking to Europe is logistically and economically convenient as most F1 teams are based there. Also, with several European countries lifting curbs and border restrictions, visas won't be an issue as the Schengen Area covers 26 countries.

GO EAST

The real expansion of F1 into a global sport only happened in the last 20-25 years as a result of former F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone's 'go east' policy. Asian races introduced under him like Singapore, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi (all night races) have become permanent, even at the cost of traditional races like Germany and France. Other races in Malaysia, India and South Korea have stopped.

In F1's inaugural season, six of the seven races were held in Europe. It began to move out gradually-South America in 1953, Africa in 1958 and Asia in 1976.

Even in 1999, Europe hosted 11 of the 16 races-a share of 68.75 %. But in 2019, Europe only held 10 of 21 GPs, less than 48 percent-also indicating the spread of global wealth.

Asia hosted only one race (Japan) until 1999 when Malaysia was introduced. The number touched five last year-without adding transcontinental Azerbaijan-before Vietnam was included from this year.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has at least temporarily halted the 'look east' approach with four out of the seven races cancelled this year being outside Europe and more likely to follow.

GETTING STARTED

Following a long shutdown, F1 teams are slowly opening their shutters. Reigning champions Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes have started preparations, testing their 2018 car ahead of next month's season opener.

"I didn't feel like I've ever left the water, so that's a positive," Hamilton said, having driven a F1 car after more than 100 days. "Every time you take a big break you always wonder whether you can still drive. So, it's a good feeling to know of course I can, I'm ready, I feel fit."

Racing Point, Ferrari and Renault have scheduled testing in the coming weeks.

NEW NORMAL

The pandemic has forced organisers to introduce new non-racing rules to protect F1 personnel like no podium celebrations, pre-race driver parades or assembling for the national anthems.

"The practices we have had in the past just can't be done," Brawn said. "The podium procedure can't happen, but we're looking at doing something on the grid after the race. We can't present the trophies, as you can't have someone in close proximity presenting a trophy, (but) we have plans and procedures. We're looking at how we can present it on TV."

Teams will be kept in 'bubbles', staying in isolation with no contact with the surrounding community.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 30 -- The United States will end its relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO) over the world body's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, US President Donald Trump said on Friday.

Trump's decision to sever ties with the Geneva-based body also comes amid growing tensions between the US and China over the coronavirus pandemic.

The virus first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year and has killed more than 3.64 people worldwide and affected over 5.9 million.

"Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and will be redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent public health needs," Trump said at a news briefing.

Also read| 'World needs answers': Donald Trump renews attack on China over Covid-19 pandemic

Trump had sent a list of reforms that the United States wanted the world body to carry out.

"The only way forward for the organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China," he had written in a four-page letter to WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus last week.

He had given the WHO, which the US joined in 1948, 30 days to respond.

Here's what he wrote in that letter:

On April 14, 2020, I suspended United States contributions to the World Health Organization pending an investigation by my Administration of the organization's failed response to the COVID-19 outbreak.

This review has confirmed many of the serious concerns I raised last month and identified others that the World Health Organization should have addressed, especially the World Health Organization's alarming lack of independence from the People's Republic of China. Based on this review, we now know the following:

* The World Health Organization consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019 or even earlier, including reports from the Lancet medical journal. The World Health Organization failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself.

* By no later than December 30, 2019, the World Health Organization office in Beijing knew that there was a "major public health" concern in Wuhan. Between December 26 and December 30, China's media highlighted evidence of a new virus emerging from Wuhan, based on patient data sent to multiple Chinese genomics companies. Additionally, during this period, Dr. Zhang Jixian, a doctor from Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, told China's health authorities that a new coronavirus was causing a novel disease that was, at the time, afflicting approximately 180 patients.

* By the next day, Taiwanese authorities had communicated information to the World Health Organization indicating human-to-human transmission of a new virus. Yet the World Health Organization chose not to share any of this critical information with the rest of the world, probably for political reasons.

* The International Health Regulations require countries to report the risk of a health emergency within 24 hours. But China did not inform the World Health Organization of Wuhan's several cases of pneumonia, of unknown origin, until December 31, 2019, even though it likely had knowledge of these cases days or weeks earlier.

* According to Dr. Zhang Yongzhen of the Shanghai Public Health Clinic Center, he told Chinese authorities on January 5, 2020, that he had sequenced the genome of the virus. There was no publication of this information until six days later, on January 11, 2020, when Dr. Zhang self-posted it online. The next day, Chinese authorities closed his lab for "rectification." As even the World Health Organization acknowledged, Dr. Zhang's posting was a great act of "transparency." But the World Health Organization has been conspicuously silent both with respect to the closure of Dr. Zhang's lab and his assertion that he had notified Chinese authorities of his breakthrough six days earlier.

* The World Health Organization has repeatedly made claims about the coronavirus that were either grossly inaccurate or misleading.

- On January 14, 2020, the World Health Organization gratuitously reaffirmed China's now-debunked claim that the coronavirus could not be transmitted between humans, stating: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) identified in Wuhan, China." This assertion was in direct conflict with censored reports from Wuhan.

- On January 21, 2020, President Xi Jinping of China reportedly pressured you not to declare the coronavirus outbreak an emergency. You gave in to this pressure the next day and told the world that the coronavirus did not pose a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Just over one week later, on January 30, 2020, overwhelming evidence to the contrary forced you to reverse course.

- On January 28, 2020, after meeting with President Xi in Beijing, you praised the Chinese government for its "transparency" with respect to the coronavirus, announcing that China had set a "new standard for outbreak control" and "bought the world time." You did not mention that China had, by then, silenced or punished several doctors for speaking out about the virus and restricted Chinese institutions from publishing information about it.

* Even after you belatedly declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30, 2020, you failed to press China for the timely admittance of a World Health Organization team of international medical experts. As a result, this critical team did not arrive in China until two weeks later, on February 16, 2020. And even then, the team was not allowed to visit Wuhan until the final days of their visit. Remarkably, the World Health Organization was silent when China denied the two American members of the team access to Wuhan entirely.

* You also strongly praised China's strict domestic travel restrictions, but were inexplicably against my closing of the United States border, or the ban, with respect to people coming from China. I put the ban in place regardless of your wishes. Your political gamesmanship on this issue was deadly, as other governments, relying on your comments, delayed imposing life-saving restrictions on travel to and from China.

Incredibly, on February 3, 2020, you reinforced your position, opining that because China was doing such a great job protecting the world from the virus, travel restrictions were "causing more harm than good." Yet by then the world knew that, before locking down Wuhan, Chinese authorities had allowed more than five million people to leave the city and that many of these people were bound for international destinations all over the world.

* As of February 3, 2020, China was strongly pressuring countries to lift or forestall travel restrictions. This pressure campaign was bolstered by your incorrect statements on that day telling the world that the spread of the virus outside of China was "minimal and slow" and that "the chances of getting this going to anywhere outside China [were] very low."

* On March 3, 2020, the World Health Organization cited official Chinese data to downplay the very serious risk of asymptomatic spread, telling the world that "COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently as influenza" and that unlike influenza this disease was not primarily driven by "people who are infected but not yet sick." China's evidence, the World Health Organization told the world, "showed that only one percent of reported cases do not have symptoms, and most of those cases develop symptoms within two days." Many experts, however, citing data from Japan, South Korea, and elsewhere, vigorously questioned these assertions. It is now clear that China's assertions, repeated to the world by the World Health Organization, were wildly inaccurate.

* By the time you finally declared the virus a pandemic on March 11, 2020, it had killed more than 4,000 people and infected more than 100,000 people in at least 114 countries around the world.

* On April 11, 2020, several African Ambassadors wrote to the Chinese Foreign Ministry about the discriminatory treatment of Africans related to the pandemic in Guangzhou and other cities in China. You were aware that Chinese authorities were carrying out a campaign of forced quarantines, evictions, and refusal of services against the nationals of these countries. You have not commented on China's racially discriminatory actions. You have, however, baselessly labeled as racist Taiwan's well-founded complaints about your mishandling of this pandemic.

* Throughout this crisis, the World Health Organization has been curiously insistent on praising China for its alleged "transparency." You have consistently joined in these tributes, notwithstanding that China has been anything but transparent. In early January, for example, China ordered samples of the virus to be destroyed, depriving the world of critical information. Even now, China continues to undermine the International Health Regulations by refusing to share accurate and timely data, viral samples and isolates, and by withholding vital information about the virus and its origins. And, to this day, China continues to deny international access to their scientists and relevant facilities, all while casting blame widely and recklessly and censoring its own experts.

* The World Health Organization has failed to publicly call on China to allow for an independent investigation into the origins of the virus, despite the recent endorsement for doing so by its own Emergency Committee. The World Health Organization's failure to do so has prompted World Health Organization member states to adopt the "COVID-19 Response" Resolution at this year's World Health Assembly, which echoes the call by the United States and so many others for an impartial, independent, and comprehensive review of how the World Health Organization handled the crisis. The resolution also calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, which is necessary for the world to understand how best to counter the disease.

Perhaps worse than all these failings is that we know that the World Health Organization could have done so much better. Just a few years ago, under the direction of a different Director-General, the World Health Organization showed the world how much it has to offer. In 2003, in response to the outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in China, Director-General Harlem Brundtland boldly declared the World Health Organization's first emergency travel advisory in 55 years, recommending against travel to and from the disease epicenter in southern China. She also did not hesitate to criticize China for endangering global health by attempting to cover up the outbreak through its usual playbook of arresting whistleblowers and censoring media. Many lives could have been saved had you followed Dr. Brundtland's example.

It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China. My Administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organization. But action is needed quickly. We do not have time to waste. That is why it is my duty, as President of the United States, to inform you that, if the World Health Organization does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership in the organization. I cannot allow American taxpayer dollars to continue to finance an organization that, in its present state, is so clearly not serving America's interests.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 6 -- Hinting towards a faster pace of recovery, India's active Covid-19 caseload has been steadily declining and the recoveries from the viral disease have been on the rise. As of Saturday, there were 148,590 active cases in the country while the number of people who have recovered from the coronavirus disease has gone up to 10,510,796.

The cases worldwide have shot up to 10,510,796 and 2,299,388 fatalities have been recorded due to the disease, according to Johns Hopkins University's virus tracker.

Follow latest updates on Covid-19 here

Here's a look at the Covid-19 situation in countries across the world

India: Covid-19 cases in India are steadily declining with only 11,713 fresh cases recorded in the past 24 hours. The daily toll from the disease fell below 100 on Saturday. With 95 related deaths, a total of 154918 people have died of the disease.

As India is conducting the world's largest vaccination drive, as many as 54,16,849 health and frontline workers have so far been administered the jab in the first phase. Union health minister Harsh Vardhan has said that the vaccination for first recipients among the general public is likely to begin in March.

China: A team of the World Health Organization (WHO) is currently probing the origins of the virus that causes the coronavirus disease in China's Wuhan. "We were asked where we wanted to go. We gave our hosts a list ... and you can see from where we've been, we've been to all the key places," Peter Daszak, part of the WHO expert team, told The Associated Press.

Meanwhile, Mainland China reported 12 new Covid-19 cases on February 5, down from 20 cases a day earlier and the lowest daily increase since December 17, the national health authority said on Saturday. This takes mainland China's infection tally to 89,681, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

United States: The US, worst-affected country due to the pandemic, has recorded 26,808,454 infections. The death toll from the disease now stands at 2,299,388. As the country suffers a major economic setback, President Joe Biden said he didn't think his proposed increase in the federal minimum wage to $15 per hour will survive congressional negotiations to pass his broader coronavirus-relief bill.

New Zealand: New Zealand health authorities said on Saturday they were investigating a new community coronavirus infection, the fourth in two weeks among people who completed mandatory isolation at an Auckland quarantine facility for returned overseas travellers.

The new case was diagnosed in a person self-isolating at home in Hamilton, who was released from a two-week hotel quarantine on January 30 after testing negative twice for the virus, reported news agency Reuters.

Israel: Israel, which has vaccinated the maximum number of people against Covid-19 in the world, has found it took three weeks for the Pfizer Inc.-BioNTech SE shot to start curbing new cases and hospitalisations, according to news agency Bloomberg.

Improvement in the number of new cases and hospitalised patients occurred 21 days following the vaccination campaign, the scientists said, noting that the real-life effect of vaccines may take longer than what was demonstrated in clinical trials.

United Kingdom: The UK said it plans to offer all over-50s the first dose of coronavirus vaccine by May, the first time that Boris Johnson's government has set a target for the next stage of its vaccination program.

The country is currently in the third national lockdown and Johnson hopes the vaccination rollout will allow ministers to start lifting restrictions from March 8, starting with the reopening of some schools, reported Bloomberg.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 15 -- The first breakdown of underlying health conditions among the victims of coronavirus in England shows that a quarter of 22,332 people who passed away since March 31 were diabetic, reinforcing initial data that the disease makes recovery more difficult.

The data from NHS England released on Thursday shows that people with dementia or lung problems are also among those most at risk of dying after contracting the virus. Health officials consider people of Indian and Asian origin in the UK particularly prone to diabetes.

Click here for full Covid-19 coverage

Of the 22,332 people who died in England hospitals between March 31 and May 12, 5,873 (26%) suffered from either type 1 or type 2 diabetes, the figures reveal, adding that the number of dead categorised as 'Indian' rose to 665.

Partha Kar, NHS England's special adviser on diabetes, said: "It is clear that people with diabetes are more at risk of dying from Covid-19. More detailed analysis is currently underway to understand the link between the two, although initial findings indicate that the threat in people under 40 continues to be very low."

The NHS England data complements that of the Office for National Statistics (ONS) released last week, showing "significantly higher" risk of death from the virus among Indian and other non-white communities than the white community.

The ONS said Indian and other non-white males are 4.2 times more likely to die from a Covid-19-related death and non-white females are 4.3 times more likely than white ethnicity males and females. The UK's Indian-origin population is estimated to number 1.5 million.

The ONS said: "People of Bangladeshi and Pakistani, Indian, and mixed ethnicities also had a statistically significant raised risk of death involving Covid-19 compared with those of White ethnicity".

According to Kamlesh Khunti, a medical expert at the University of Leicester, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the statistics, despite accounting for only 14 per cent of the UK population, include many coming from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, working in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 16 -- India's merchandise exports slumped by a record 34.6% in March while imports declined 28.7% as countries sealed their borders to combat the covid-19 outbreak.

In February, merchandise exports had rebounded 2.9% after falling for six months in a row.

Of the 30 major items each in India's export and import baskets, 29 saw a contraction in March, signalling the severity of the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on the global demand and trade.

Only iron ore exports (58.4%) and import of transport equipment (11.9%) recorded a growth during the month.

Engineering Export Promotion Council chairman Ravi Sehgal said the sharp drop in merchandise exports in March was not a surprise with major economies of the world in a state of lockdown.

"April would be worse as international trade excepting medicine and essential supplies has come to a near halt. Exporters are facing a question of survival," he added.

During FY20, India's exports contracted 4.8% to $314.3 billion while imports shrank 9.1% to $467.2 billion, leaving a trade deficit of $152.9 billion.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) has projected global merchandise trade to plummet between 13% and 32% in 2020 due to the covid-19 outbreak.

"The wide range of possibilities for the predicted decline is explained by the unprecedented nature of this health crisis and the uncertainty around its precise economic impact. But WTO economists believe the decline will likely exceed the trade slump brought on by the global financial crisis of 2008?09," it said last week.

Sharad Kumar Saraf, president, Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO), said with cancellation of over 50% of orders, gloomy forecast, major job losses and rising bad loans amongst exporting units, the government should immediately announce a relief package for exporters as any further delay would be catastrophic.

"The huge support given by various economies to exports will put Indian exports in further difficulties as when the size of the cake reduces, competition intensifies with focus on prices," he added.

World Bank in its latest South Asia Economic Focus said reduced external demand for manufacturing as well as services exports will impact India.

"One of India's largest exports is business and professional services, consisting of business process outsourcing (BPO) such as technical support and call centers largely based in India. This sector is severely affected," the Bank noted.

" Lockdown measures, both in origin and destination countries, have forced offices to close as their infrastructure is heavily geared towards in-office working. There is also a concern that external demand will drop precipitously even beyond the lockdown period, as clients cut costs," it said in the report. "This situation will certainly mean fewer new projects, as well as the scaling back of existing ones," World Bank added.

However, the Bank said India's balance of payments position is expected to improve.

"Weak domestic demand, low oil prices and covid-19-related disruptions are expected to narrow the current account deficit to 0.2% in FY21 and to keep it low in the following years," it added.

India's current account deficit declined to 1% of GDP during the first three quarters of FY20 compared to 2.6% during the same period in FY19 due to reduction in the trade deficit and an improvement in net services exports.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 31 -- Mindless and incessant forwarding of WhatsApp messages without verifying the correctness of such messages is leading to spread of fake news and many a time such messages assume racial and religious overtones, Supreme Court judge Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul said on Sunday.

The top court judge also made a case for individual discretion and responsibility with respect to verifying and sharing fake news as regulation of social media could result in restricting free speech. "Regulating social media to counter such fake news could amount to violation of free speech and it is up to people to verify the correctness of the content of the message before spreading the same," Justice Kaul said.

"Any regulation of social media may impinge on free speech and right to privacy. The struggle is to regulate social media without affecting free speech, so it is everybody's responsibility to see that content is verified before it is sent," he said.

Justice Kaul was speaking on the topic 'Fake News and Misinformation' at an online lecture series organised by Madras Bar Association.

"There are a lot of messages about Covid (coronavirus disease) including its 'remedies', the origin, people who are 'helping spread of the virus' and so on. These messages can take religious and racial undertones," the SC judge warned.

Such information, Justice Kaul said, is many times the basis for petitions before the Supreme Court.

"Sometimes this misinformation leads people to believe in it so much so that there may be an Article 32 petition (petition filed directly in Supreme Court against violation of fundamental rights) to direct enforcement of a certain remedy for Covid," Justice Kaul said.

Distinguishing between responsibility shown by the press and social media in the times of fake news, Justice Kaul said that while the press can be held accountable for such incorrect news, the same may not be possible with social media.

"When the press is writing, they are accountable. Writing news is their bread and butter, and they write with a certain sense of responsibility. But others may not have anything at stake and no accountability, no system of checks and balances," he said.

Justice Kaul also pointed out that people are becoming increasingly intolerant of opinions that do not correspond with theirs and that differing opinions have to be respected in a democratic society.

"So people who hold opposing views may be called by each other as a 'Modi Bhakt' or an 'Urban Naxal' or other labels," he said, adding that bedrock of any democracy is freedom of speech and it is important to respect others opinions in a democratic polity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 8 -- The Tablighi Jamaat has been in the eye of a storm since last week, when hundreds of Covid-19 affected people across the country were found to have links with a congregation (ijtema) of indeterminate duration at the Jamaat's markaz headquarters in Delhi's Nizamuddin Basti in March.

Started as an Islamic reform movement, the Tablighi Jamaat traces its origins to the Mewat region, where it was founded by Islamic scholar Maulana Muhammad Ilyas in 1926.

Till today, Meo Muslims continue to form the core of the Jamaat movement, with a large majority of Meos subscribing to its tenets.

Meo Muslims are spread across the once contiguous belt of eastern Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. Culturally, this area spanning the three states is known as the Mewat region. Meos embraced Islam in various phases, between the 15th to the 17th century, and some of them continue to follow syncretic practices.

Siddique Ahmed Meo, community historian and author of books on Mewat's history, said the Jamaat's origins in Mewat could be traced back to a time when labourers from Mewat, now officially known as Nuh, commuted to Delhi in search of work.

According to the 2011 Census, the Nuh district's population was about 1.09 million, of which the majority were Meo-Muslims. According to Meo, around 80% of the present-day population of Nuh district is made up of Meo Muslims.

"People from Mewat would travel to Delhi for work and halt for lunch near the masjid in Nizamuddin, before proceeding ahead with the journey. Maulana Ilyas took notice of the labourers and enquired about them one day. Through conversations with the Meos, he realised that while they were Muslims, they did not have a good understanding of Islamic practices," said Meo.

Driven by his interactions with Meos in Nizamuddin, Maulana Ilyas visited Ferozepur Namak in Mewat for the first time in 1925. He started surveying the region and over subsequent visits, he came to the understanding that Meo Muslims needed to be introduced to Islamic practices and brought back into the fold.

"A panchayat was called in Nuh and a charter consisting of names of 103 people was shared. Some 31 proposals aimed at laying the groundwork for the Jamaat were passed in that panchayat. Finally, in 1926, the Jamaat started undertaking trips to reach out to people and spread the message of Islam," said Meo.

He added that more than 90% of the people in Mewat identified themselves as Tablighi and the organisation exercised considerable influence in the region. "The aim of the Jamaat is to ensure that Muslims become better Muslims. It seeks to get Muslims to adopt practices followed by the Prophet Muhammad. All Meos might not go for the chilla (40-day Islamic camp), but they owe allegiance to the Tabligh," said Meo.

Tablighi Jamaat, Meo said, was also involved in various social interventions in present-day Mewat.

"Tablighi Jamaat has been a strong proponent of eradication of practices like dowry in Mewat. Whenever they hold their ijtemas (Islamic congregations), they conduct mass nikah (marriage) ceremonies for people without any involvement of dowry. The Jamaat also seeks cooperation of imams in promoting polio eradication drives or preventing alcoholism and drug abuse in Mewat," said Meo.

Shail Mayaram, author of "Resisting Regimes: Myth, Memory and the Shaping of a Muslim Identity", which discusses the Tablighi Jamaat, said it was a non-political outfit whose foundation was laid in Mewat. "Tablighi Jamaat's aim is not to capture political power. They are only driven by the goal of making Muslims better Muslims. They focus on religious practice, one that is often seen as being conservative in nature," said Mayaram, who is also a professor at the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies.

Mayaram said the Jamaat was hugely popular in Mewat and Meos played an important role within the organisation of the outfit.

"Mewatis have a significant role in the Jamaat administration. Over the years, Mewatis both in India and Pakistan have become closer to the Jamaat," she said.

Mayaram added that the support of the Meos to the Jamaat in the decades after Partition was significantly influenced by excesses that Meos faced during the Partition.

"In my view, the belief in the Jamaat can also be explained by the violence that Mewatis experienced during Partition. It led to a shift in the identities and how they navigated their ways in the changing landscape. The circumstances led to a strengthening of the Jamaat's case in the region," said Mayaram.

According to several local residents, Tablighi Jamaat supports two madrasas - one each in Nuh and Ferozepur Jhirka. It has a markaz (centre) in Nuh which coordinates activities with the centre in Delhi. Arshad, a Nuh resident, who owes allegiance to the Jamaat, said two congregations take place in Nuh every year where members of the Jamaat come together. "Earlier, the jalsa (gathering) would be a one-day affair. Since last year, a three-day gathering has started taking place. There is no fixed schedule or venue for the gathering. It takes place in different villages every year," said Arshad, who goes by his first name.

Since the beginning of this year, the Jamaat has not conducted any congregation/gathering in Mewat. "Usually, the congregation happens in April, after the harvest of crops. People are relatively free during this time. There has not been any update on that front this year," said Arshad.

However, hundreds of locals are believed to have been at the congregation in Nizamuddin last month. The police identified at least 270 of them and isolated them in Government Polytechnic College in Malab and Shaheed Hasan Khan Mewati Government Medical College, Nalhar, Nuh earlier this week. According to the health department, at least seven of them had tested positive for Covid-19 by Sunday.

Shahid Ali, an advocate with the Tablighi Jamaat, said that while there was no written count of the members of the Jamaat; most people in Mewat subscribed to the Jamaat. "The organisation has a loose structure and there is no recorded membership, but the Jamaat traces its origin to Mewat due to which it is widely popular in the region. There is no fixed schedule for any congregation or gathering. Members of the Jamaat travel to Mewat for prayers, just as they visit other places across the country and beyond," said Ali.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 18 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculation by senior officials of the Trump administration that the Covid-19 epidemic might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan, a Chinese city that became the epicenter of the outbreak last December.

Officials of the US embassy China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the lab, had raised concerns in this state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory".

And, though the lab could conduct study SARS-like coronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strains that could infect humans, officials wrote in the cable, whose release was secured by the Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

But the cable did not prove or disprove the lab origin theory of the outbreak. "I don't see any evidence to support the idea that this was released deliberately or inadvertently," Ian Lipkin, the director of Columbia University's Center for Infection and Immunity, told the Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable."You can't just say someone is guilty of accidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it."

The Trump administration, however, appeared to have made that determination already in an effort to deflect blame for the spiraling infections and fatalities in the United States. President Donald Trump said in May he had a "high degree of confidence" that it had indeed started from the Chinese lab. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo followed up claiming "enormous evidence".

But, also in May, the US intelligence community punctured that theory. The office of the director of National Intelligence said in a statement it was still investigating outbreak started through contacts with infected animals "or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The Trump administration has not pushed the lab theory much in recent days, but it has blamed China for the outbreak, broke off ties with the WHO accusing it of being complicit in China's cover-up of it responsibility for the outbreak. Trump and Pompeo have called the virus the "Chinese virus" and the "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new cases reported in the last 24 hours and 843 deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit in this second surge. ICUs are running to full capacity in some of their worst affected counties, and, in a repeated of the grim situation in New York some weeks ago, refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 29 -- India on Saturday recorded 135 new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), one of the highest single-day spikes, as the number of cases crossed 1,000 amid a mounting challenge of controlling the spread of the disease that has killed about 30,000 people across the world.

Fresh deaths were reported in India from Kerala, Gujarat and Maharashtra, taking the death toll from the disease to 21, according to official data from states. Maharashtra has reported the highest number of Covid-19 cases so far at 186, with 29 fresh cases on Saturday, followed by Kerala at 182. In Telangana, the number went up to 67, while Karnataka has reported 76 cases so far.

The official data of the Union health ministry, however, said the case count was 918, which showed there was a lag in the official numbers released by states being taken into account.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who on Tuesday declared a 21-day national lockdown to contain the spread of the disease, announced the creation of a Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund where people can contribute and help in the fight against Covid-19.

"It is my appeal to my fellow Indians, kindly contribute to the PM-CARES Fund. This Fund will also cater to similar distressing situations, if they occur in the times ahead," he said. "This will go a long way in creating a healthier India," Modi added.

A statement posted on his official website said that while the Prime Minister is the chairman of the new public charitable trust, its members include the defence minister (Rajnath Singh), home minister (Amit Shah) and the finance minister (Nirmala Sitharaman).

As per officials in Kerala, which has the second highest number of cases after Maharashtra, the state reported its first Covid-19 death on Saturday after a 69-year-old man died at Ernakulam Medical College Hospital, but it was not included in the central data.

The man was admitted to the isolation ward on March 22 after his return from Dubai, the government hospital said. Maharashtra has reported 286 cases.

In Delhi, among the eight people who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday was a 48-year-old doctor at a private clinic in Hari Nagar. The Delhi health department wasn't immediately able to trace the source of the infection. "From the history given to us by him, he had gone for a home visit to a person who had returned from New Zealand. However, no such person has tested positive in Delhi yet," said a senior official from the Delhi health department. The total number of cases in Delhi went up to 49.

The Union health ministry's joint secretary, Lav Agarwal, said the government was working with states on health infrastructure preparedness and the focus was having dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and blocks in every state. Arrangements were being made to ramp up isolation and intensive care beds. Seventeen states have so far started work on this, he said, adding that doctors and nurses were being provided online training from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.

The developments came on a day the government faced a fresh challenge - the exodus of many of India's 100 million migrant workers from the national capital after a nationwide lockdown left them stranded without jobs, food and shelter. India's response to Covid-19 has been "pre-emptive, pro-active and graded", the government said, brushing aside the allegation that the nationwide lockdown was announced without any planning. The information and broadcasting ministry said the government had already put in place a "comprehensive response system" at the borders of the country, much before the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a public health emergency of international concern on January 30.

The ministry of home affairs issued another advisory urging all states and Union territories (UTs) to take immediate relief measures to provide temporary accommodation, food, clothing and medical care to homeless people, including migrant workers stranded due to the lockdown.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Singh Puri said aircraft were crisscrossing the Indian airspace to ensure that the Covid-19 testing kits of ICMR reached their destinations on time. The Indian Navy, too, deployed its aircraft to help the Goa government transport 60 samples to the Pune-based National Institute of Virology for testing, an official said on Saturday. The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said there were "sporadic cases" where the origin of the infections could not be traced but denied there was an alarming spread in the country. "Till the time we see a significant number of cases to indicate community transmission, let us not over-interpret things," said Raman R Gangakhedkar, head of the Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases at ICMR.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- As the number of coronavirus infection in Indian doubled in the last four days to cross 200 while the number of infections across the world rose to over 2,65,000. US President Donald Trump declared coroavirus a major disaster in the state of New York.

Italy recorded the highest toll in a single day on Friday with 627 deaths that took the number of casualties in the country to 4,032. It is so the largest daily rise in absolute terms since the cornavirus hit the country about a month ago.

In Washington, the White House said the United States has reached mutual agreements with Canada and Mexico to restrict non-essential travel across America's northern and southern borders.

In India, 63 fresh cases were reported Friday prompting experts to reiterate that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread of coronavirus could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

Many states have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission which is more dangerous because a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Meanwhile, the Lucknow police have lodged an FIR against Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor for allegedly not complying with directives to safeguard against the spread of coronavirus disease after her return from London earlier this month.

Follow coronavirus updates here.

She tested Covid-19 positive on Friday and left a chain of politicians who have either put themselves on self-isolation or earmarked for monitoring by the administration.

Here is a look at the trends in India and the world.

India trends:

--India reports 63 new cases on Friday highest jump since infections began here

--Singer Kanika Kapoor's contacts being traced. Members of Parliament including Derek O' Brien, Anupriya Patel and Varun Gandhi who were in touch with fellow MP Dushyant Singh are in quarantine. Dushyant Singh and his mother Vasundhara Raje Scindia who had attended Kanika Kapoor's birthday, had earlier quarantined themselves.

--Many hospitals cancel elective surgeries and set aside beds

--Delhi closes malls, markets for 3 days

--Covid 19 infected Italian who was discharged from hospital after testing negative dies of cardiac arrest in Jaipur

--India expands testing protocol to include more people and has intensified contact tracing

---Vegetable prices surge due to talks of mandi closure

--Delhi man who tested positive in Tamil Nadu could be first case of community transmission in India

--The Nifty 50 saw its best one-day gain in more than six months, but ended the week more than 12% lower. Both Nifty and Sensex logged their worst week since 2008

Global trends:

--Covid 19 deaths cross 10,000

--New Zealand reports first local outbreak

--Italy deaths cross 4000, New York and California in lockdown

--Clampdown begins in London with theatres, pubs shutting down

--Data from Wuhan awaited if they are recording any fresh local infection cases. They didn't record any local new infection for 24 hours on Thursday-Friday

--The new coronavirus has infected far more people in US than those who have been tested, analysis by Columbia University researchers show

--Cases in New York state top 7,800

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
DHARAMSHALA,, July 15 -- Himachal Pradesh on Wednesday recorded 32 fresh Covid-19 infections, taking the state's tally to 1,341, officials said.

Eleven cases were reported in Bilaspur, nine in Solan, six in Kullu, three in Chamba, two in Una and one Sirmaur.

In Bilaspur, nine migrant labourers from Bihar have been infected. They were engaged in building work at Hydro-Engineering College campus at Bandla. One of the labourer had tested positive three days ago after which others were quarantined at the college campus.

Three labourers tested positive early in the morning while seven more cases were detected in the afternoon. Besides, a woman, who had returned from Delhi, has also tested positive in the district.

In Chamba, a 29-year-old woman and 5-year-old girl from Salooni sub-division have tested positive. A 23-year-old pregnant woman from Mohalla Govindgarh of Nahan town in Sirmaur district has also contracted the disease. The woman was undergoing treatment at a hospital where her Covid-19 test came out positive. She has been shifted to a Covid-care centre and her primary contacts are being traced.

In Kullu district, six people tested positive, including a 31-year-old man, who had returned from to Delhi from Sudan on July 4 and from there he arrived in Kullu and was under home quarantine.

Nine cases were reported in Solan and two in Una late evening. Their details are awaited.

ACTIVE CASES RISE TO 351

Special secretary (health) Nipun Jindal said active cases in the state have reached 351 as 966 people have been cured till date. The recovery rate in the state is 72.03% %.

Kangra is the worst-hit district with 314 cases, followed by Hamirpur with 276 cases. Solan has 268 cases, Una 146, Chamba 71, Shimla 62, Bilaspur 63, Sirmaur 47, Mandi 40, Kinnaur 36, Kullu 14 and Lahaul-Spiti district four.

CM directs district authorities to keep strict vigil on migrant labourers

Chief minister Jai Ram Thakur on Wednesday directed all district authorities to keep a strict vigil on arrival of migrant labourers particularly in industrial units.

He was addressing a meeting of deputy commissioners, superintendents of police and chief medical officers through video conferencing.

The CM said the state government has decided that industrialists or their contractors will be allowed to bring labourers after due approval of the administration and will be kept in quarantine as per guidelines issued by the health department.

He said big industrial units will have to create adequate quarantine facilities, whereas small units can pool for creating the quarantine facility. He also directed the industries and labour and employment departments to keep a strict vigil on industrial units to follow the SoPs issued from time to time.

The government has decided not to open the temples and other religious places in the state to avoid overcrowding, the CM said.

He directed the officers to strictly enforce the decision of not allowing more than 50 people in marriages and other family functions.

The chief medical officers have been asked to increase testing capacity of Covid-19 in their respective districts. He said all persons with symptoms should be invariably tested for the virus besides ensuring proper testing of all the primary and secondary contacts of patients.

Thakur said about 1,560 residents have arrived from 78 cities of 61 countries and all of them were examined medically. He said out of these 1,117 persons arrived at New Delhi Airport, 192 at Amritsar Airport and 248 persons at Chandigarh International Airport. He said 613 flights were attended by the officers of the state government at New Delhi, Amritsar and Chandigarh airports.

The CM also directed the deputy commissioners to be more vigilant keeping in view the rainy season. He said this may increase the cases of viral and related ailments causing extra burden on health institutions. He also directed the superintendents of police to keep strict vigil on persons furnishing false information about their origin of arrival as well as Covid-19 status.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 30 -- As if the year were short on bad news, and needed more, a report by leading experts says the world could experience pandemics more frequently in future, that some of these will be deadlier than the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), and far too expensive to control unless there is a transformative change in the global approach to dealing with infectious diseases.

The global report on biodiversity and pandemics was authored by 22 leading experts from around the world, and released on Thursday. It is the result of a workshop convened by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) focused on the links between the degradation of nature and increasing pandemic risks.

And for those thinking SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19 is it, there are as many as 540,000 - 850,000 unknown viruses in nature that could infect people, warns the report. Interestingly, the report comes three days after the World Health Organisation (WHO) reported the outbreak of the Mayaro virus disease in French Guiana. With symptoms similar to dengue, this virus too is transmitted through mosquitoes.

The majority (70%) of emerging diseases such as Ebola, Zika, Nipah encephalitis, and almost all known pandemics such as influenza, HIV/AIDS, Covid-19, are zoonotic diseases that are caused by microbes of animal origin. These microbes spill over due to contact among wildlife, livestock, and people, the IPBES report added.

In the workshop, experts agreed that escaping the era of pandemics is possible, but that it requires a seismic shift in approach - from reaction to prevention.

"Covid-19 is at least the sixth global health pandemic since the Great Influenza Pandemic of 1918, and although it has its origins in microbes carried by animals, like all pandemics its emergence has been entirely driven by human activities," said the report.

An estimated 1.7 million currently undiscovered viruses exist in mammals and birds, of which up to 850,000 could have the ability to infect people, the report said.

"There is no great mystery about the cause of the COVID-19 pandemic - or of any modern pandemic", said Dr Peter Daszak, president, EcoHealth Alliance and chair of the IPBES workshop, in a statement.

"The same human activities that drive climate change and biodiversity loss also drive pandemic risk through their impacts on our environment. Changes in the way we use land; the expansion and intensification of agriculture; and unsustainable trade, production and consumption disrupt nature and increase contact between wildlife, livestock, pathogens and people. This is the path to pandemics."

Pandemic risk can be significantly lowered by reducing the human activities that drive the loss of biodiversity, by greater conservation of protected areas, and through measures that reduce unsustainable exploitation of high biodiversity regions. This will reduce wildlife-livestock-human contact and help prevent the spillover of new diseases, said the report.

The report pointed out that it is costlier to control outbreaks once they emerge because of the costs of developing drugs, vaccines and implementing public health measures that could damage the world economy. It is much more cost-effective to prevent these outbreaks, it said.

"It is a known thing that zoonotic viruses, in which viruses jump from animals to humans, are the next threat to humans because they will be new viruses that humans are not exposed to. Once these viruses adapt to human hosts they will start spreading. SARS-Cov-2 virus that causes Covid-19 disease is a classic example before us. You cannot predict which virus will be more invasive that spreads faster," said Dr Shobha Broor, former head, department of microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

Dr Mahesh Sankaran, professor, National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore, said, "India has many features that can potentially come together to create the 'perfect storm' for the spillover of novel diseases in the future - high biodiversity, high population densities and extensive land transformation and fragmentation that has increased the extent of the human-wildlife interface." He said there was a critical need to integrate biodiversity and ecosystem service values into land planning and management, while also investing in restoring and protecting natural land- and waterscapes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- President Donald Trump on Wednesday further ratcheted up his attacks on China saying its "incompetence" caused the Covid-19 pandemic, which he described as "mass worldwide killing".

The American president and his Republican allies have increasingly targeted China in a bid to shift the blame for the high number of infections and fatalities in the United States and the economic downturn triggered by the mitigation efforts with an eye on the November general elections.

Referring to a statement issued by "some wacko in China" the president wrote in a tweet "it was the 'incompetence of China', and nothing else, that did this mass Worldwide killing".

The president has called for an independent investigation in the origin of the epidemic in Wuhan in China last December and Beijing's attempts to conceal the true extent of the epidemic, with the complicity of the World Health Organization. He has separately accused the WHO and its director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus personally of "missteps" of their own, including abetting China's cover-up.

With all 50 United States set to reopen partially President Trump stirred fresh controversy Tuesday saying he considered it a "badge of honor" that the United States had the highest number of infections in the world at 1.5 million, arguing it was a testimony to increased testing.

Critics pounced on the president, arguing, he was taking credit for the highest number of infections.

"So when we have a lot of cases, I don't look at that as a bad thing; I look at that as -- in a certain respect, as being a good thing because it means our testing is much better," he had said, "I view it as a badge of honor. Really, it's a badge of honor."

There were 1.52 million confirmed Covid-19 cases in the United States till Wednesday morning and 91,983 fatalities, up by 20,260 and 1,574 in past 24 hours respectively. The total number of tests administered thus far was 12.6 million, according to the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The high number of infections is a reflection of higher testing, as the president has argued in his defence, but critics have largely attributed them, and the high fatalities, to his administration delayed and botched initial response to the outbreak, which allowed the virus to spread rapidly unchallenged.

President Trump has touted testing figures in recent days to counter criticism that the United States is not testing enough, specially with states reopening steadily. Public health officials have sought more testing to ensure lifting of curbs on public life did not lead to a resurgence as it has in countries.

Connecticut became Wednesday the 50th American state to join the national reopening, allowing restaurants, malls and some outdoor activities to resume. As in a number of other states, rest of the economy and public life will be reopened in phases depending, determined by declining incidence of infections.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 9 -- A team of experts investigating the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan has identified two most likely scenarios that caused the transmission of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to the human population. World Health Organisation (WHO) expert Peter Ben Embarek on Tuesday told a press briefing that the team probed four hypotheses around the transmission of coronavirus to human population and narrowed down on two most likely scenarios, including the one involving intermediary host species.

"Our initial findings suggest that the introduction through an intermediary host species is the most likely pathway and one way that will require more studies and more specific targeted research," said Embarek.

During the initial days of Covid-19 outbreak, preliminary studies had suggested that the bats could be the source since the coronavirus present in bats has a genome that is 96 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2. An intermediary host species has been considered the most likely pathway for such viruses because the bat coronavirus cannot bind to receptors in human lung cells.

Embarek, the head of the WHO-led team in Wuhan, also highlighted the possibility of transmission through the trade of frozen products. The WHO's food safety scientist said that virus can survive in frozen environments but added that the possibility of cold chain transmission of coronavirus warrants further investigation.

"We know the virus can survive in conditions that are found in these cold, frozen environments, but we don't really understand if the virus can transmit to humans," he told the briefing that lasted nearly 170 minutes.

China has often pushed the hypothesis of cold chain transmission and repeatedly announced findings of coronavirus traces on imported food packaging. Embarek stressed that investigation into the second scenario would require a study to find out whether a frozen wild animal in a market setting could spread the virus under right conditions.

The WHO expert said that the third hypothesis of direct transmission from an animal reservoir to a human, also known as "direct zoonotic spillover", is a possible pathway and generating "recommendation for future studies." He dismissed the possibility of the laboratory-related incident as the least likely scenario. "Findings suggest that the laboratory hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus to the human population," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Kishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu.

Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials? For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world. There is no second and third in the world on influenza, if you ask me. Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast. It will take at least three months to do animal trials to establish the safety properly. Then Phase 1 is only a one dose vaccine with 30 days' trial. Phase 2 we don't have to do because the same platform (nasal route) has already established the concentration required already in humans - so it can be minimised. Then for Phase 3, we need to have 1,000 people, and that is going to be another 45 days of trial in India. Human trial is going to be very short; the worry is only the animal trials as we want to establish the safety and efficacy, which is extremely critical.

Why a nasal vaccine?We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead, but if there is an animal problem then we may not even pursue the product further because the safety of people is most important.

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying, what is the capacity, when is the launch, what is the price etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups in India; what do we need for all these biological scientific companies to sustain themselves; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up.

We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country first or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do in vaccines? It is very tough. So what we did in this case is that we funded the animal trials at the University of Wisconsin. We need to build small islets of infrastructure in this country, which is what China did. They created infrastructure first, here we create institutes first.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 4 -- I have written in these columns about Gandhi's response to the plague epidemic in Johannesburg, South Africa in 1905.



When after an abatement, the contagion was threatening to reappear, he wrote an article in his journal Indian Opinion on January 16, 1905, which bears substantial reproduction. "Once again the dark clouds are gathering. It will be to the great benefit of our people if they bear in mind the following rules; otherwise there would be immense harm. What is more, it might be used as an argument for enacting more severe laws against us: (1) No one should think that the government will harass the patient after removing him to the hospital.

(2) The government should be immediately informed in case of a sudden attack of fever or asthma. (3) A doctor should be immediately consulted. (4) Everyone should stay where he is without becoming panicky. (5) Those who might have come in contact with a plague patient should not try to conceal the fact but should come forward to have their clothes etc, disinfected. (6) One should not, under any circumstances, have one's bedroom attached to the shop to save money. (7) One should not stock any goods for sale in one's house. (8) One should keep one's house scrupulously clean. (9) Every house or room should be well-lighted and well-ventilated. (10) One should sleep with the windows open. (11) The clothes worn by day as well as those used during the night should be kept clean. (12) The food taken should be light and simple. (13) Lavish dinners and feasts should be stopped. (14) Dry earth or ashes should be provided in latrines where buckets are used; and everyone should after easing himself cover the night soil thoroughly with these so that no flies sit thereon. (15) Lavatories and urinals should be kept clean. (16) The floors and other parts of the house should be washed clean with disinfecting fluid mixed in hot water. (17) No article from an infected place should be used elsewhere. (18) More than two persons should not sleep in a room of normal proportions. (19) One should not sleep in the kitchen, dining room or the larder. (20) Walls should be plastered with cement in order to keep out rats. Care should, most of all, should be taken to see that foodstuffs are kept beyond their reach. (21) Those who always work indoors should go out into the open air and walk a couple of miles daily for exercise."

One can see behind each of the items he has listed the presence of the rat. It is a plague-resisting list. Yet, the notes of caution, in points 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18, read like they have been written for our present Covid-19 pandemic.

If Gandhi spelt out in no uncertain terms the responsibilities of individuals and of society, he did not spare the municipality its share of the blame. The municipality's all-white officers believed and led others to believe that the spread of plague among the Indians was due to their insanitary ways - an impression that Gandhi sought strenuously to dispel by writing in the South African press and lobbying with members of the House of Commons and political leaders such as Dadabhai Naoroji in Britain and Gopal Krishna Gokhale in India.

The town council, at that time, had begun to take insensitive, callous and medically-uncalled-for steps such as shifting patients to canvas sheds in an open field about 13 miles from the city. Gandhi pilloried the council for its initial sluggish response to the epidemic and - most important- its treatment of the spread (until Gandhi made it realise the error of its ways) as something to do with the colour of the sick man's skin.

He was fighting plague and prejudice.

I must remind readers that Gandhi had, a little earlier, worked with chosen volunteers, to minister to 23 victims of the plague outbreak in that city. All the victims were of Indian origin, working in a gold mine just outside the city. Twenty one of the victims died, as did the sole nurse the municipality had provided. Rigorous hygiene and luck helped Gandhi and his colleagues, including a brave doctor, William Godfrey, to survive.

So, is this narrative merely a historical recall?

No historical allusion should be regarded as "merely" that, for history, when accurately and fairly recalled, without exaggeration or embroidering is not a story, but the living truth of the present in the past and the living past in the future.

But that truism apart, this narrative is vital for we can be sure that the world is going to live with this pandemic for a long while, as will the need to fight both the virus and, where they occur, our mistakes in handling it.

Gopalkrishna Gandhi is a former administrator, diplomat and governor

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 18 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculation by senior officials of the Trump administration that the Covid-19 epidemic might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan, a Chinese city that became the epicenter of the outbreak last December.

Officials of the US embassy China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the lab, had raised concerns in this state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory".

And, though the lab could conduct study SARS-like coronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strains that could infect humans, officials wrote in the cable, whose release was secured by the Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

But the cable did not prove or disprove the lab origin theory of the outbreak. "I don't see any evidence to support the idea that this was released deliberately or inadvertently," Ian Lipkin, the director of Columbia University's Center for Infection and Immunity, told the Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable."You can't just say someone is guilty of accidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it."

The Trump administration, however, appeared to have made that determination already in an effort to deflect blame for the spiraling infections and fatalities in the United States. President Donald Trump said in May he had a "high degree of confidence" that it had indeed started from the Chinese lab. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo followed up claiming "enormous evidence".

But, also in May, the US intelligence community punctured that theory. The office of the director of National Intelligence said in a statement it was still investigating outbreak started through contacts with infected animals "or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The Trump administration has not pushed the lab theory much in recent days, but it has blamed China for the outbreak, broke off ties with the WHO accusing it of being complicit in China's cover-up of it responsibility for the outbreak. Trump and Pompeo have called the virus the "Chinese virus" and the "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new cases reported in the last 24 hours and 843 deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit in this second surge. ICUs are running to full capacity in some of their worst affected counties, and, in a repeated of the grim situation in New York some weeks ago, refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- The two overriding emotions that India is witnessing these days, thanks to the coronavirus-induced crisis, are fear and happiness. The first stems from the panic that the virus has caused and the harsh impact it has had on the poor and the economy. At the same time, there is a degree of relief at the impact on the environment; air and water bodies are cleaner now, and snow-clad mountains are visible from cities situated in the foothills.

But are these a cause for celebration? Many commentators point out that these developments are only a short-lived reality. When the lockdown is over, it will be business as usual, and we won't slow down to remember this magical interlude.

The last two months, however, have made us intensely aware about the linkages that exist between the destruction of the ecosystem and the systematic plunder of the natural environment to the coronavirus crisis. These observations are not new, but now they are gaining traction because we are collectively facing a crisis. It is known that zoonotic diseases emerge due to anthropogenic activities, linked to unsustainable economic practices of plundering diverse ecosystems through deforestation, mining, and illegal trade in wildlife. The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), like Avian influenza, Ebola, Nipah, and Zika, has origins in excessive human influence on natural environments. The recent exhortation by the acting executive secretary of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, to ban wildlife markets is testimony to this.

A return to business as usual will be suicidal. A balance must now be achieved in how humans and other living beings, as well as natural ecosystems, survive, if not thrive, in each other's company. The concept of "One Health" for humans, animals, and ecosystems can work as a guide to nations.

Originating from the discussions on biodiversity and the health of ecosystems, "One Health" is defined by the World Health Organization as "an approach to designing and implementing programmes, policies, legislation, and research in which multiple sectors communicate and work together to achieve better public health outcomes". The areas of work in which a 'One Health' approach is particularly relevant, the WHO says, is "food safety, the control of zoonoses (diseases that can spread between animals and humans.) and combating antibiotic resistance." We believe that "One Health" should become a key pillar of India's environmental policy.

A recent European Commission report highlights the links between the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the climate crisis. The report noted: "Experts suggest that degraded habitats coupled with a warming climate may encourage higher risks of disease transmission, as pathogens spread more easily to livestock and humans. Therefore, it is important - now more than ever before - to address the multiple and often interacting threats to ecosystems and wildlife to buffer against the risk of future pandemics, as well as preserve and enhance their role as carbon sinks and in climate adaptation."

Realigning the focus of environmental policy with the "One Health" concept will be transformational. It will prioritise the resilience of ecosystems as well as the relationships of humans and other living beings to their ecosystems, rather than focus on solutions like pollution control.

Such transformative change also requires new kinds of partnerships and alliances between actors within the government, civil society, and the private sector. To draw up a plan of action, the involvement of environmentalists, conservationists, and medical doctors will be a must. The ministries of environment, forests, climate change, and health and family welfare would have to work to develop and implement this transformative agenda.

There are some elements of this plan in the Government of India's programmes, but these have to be more emphatically articulated and implemented. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought with it untold misery. But it's given us an unexpected gift - the potential to press the reset button of the planet. We might celebrate the moment by taking photographs of peacocks on our terraces, but we shouldn't lose the opportunity of a large-scale overhaul of our environmental policies.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 29 -- In the first event of its kind, DLF Public School, Ghaziabad, brought together 25 schools to take pledge for clean air for the city. Forming a partnership with the Lung Care Foundation, the school's Compassionate Ghaziabad Initiative launched the first-ever BEST (Breathe Easy Stay Tough) Club in Ghaziabad. Now this club is there in all those 25 schools. These clubs are an outcome of the Compassionate Ghaziabad Initiative in partnership with the global organisation Charter For Compassion and the Lung Care Foundation.

Through the BEST clubs, 200 student leaders and teacher mentors from those 25 proactive schools have pledged to work towards creating a tangible impact on air pollution in Ghaziabad city by influencing public attitude and engaging masses on air quality.

These schools aim to rewrite the story of the city from being one of the most polluted in the country to one where its school students engage in concrete practical actions to lead a fight against air pollution and ensure clean air for all its citizens.

Each of the schools will now work through a BEST club which will be mentored and guided by the Lung Care Foundation, and inputs from educators as mentors, doctors and local communities. Students participating in this virtual launch of best clubs received many insights about the basics of air pollution and its health impacts from Prof. (Dr.) Arvind Kumar and Rajiv Khurana, founder trustees of the Lung Care Foundation.

The findings of the research project titled Stubble Burning - Lethal Cost to Cheaper Alternative' were hugely appreciated during the webinar. School principal Seema Jerath said, 'Even if the Covid-19 had not struck, quite possibly we would still have to close buildings and shift to virtual classes because air pollution would not have allowed schools to open.' She laid emphasis upon the need of bringing in more compassion into the city and the necessity for the students to move from being helpless beneficiaries of society towards becoming drivers of change.

Dr. Radhakrishnan International School, Defence Colony, organises special function

Dr. Radhakrishnan International School, Defence Colony, organised a special function to commemorate the birth anniversary of one of its founders Smt. Chandra Raman.

Swarnika Parihar, in her welcome speech, highlighted the contributions made by Mrs. Raman in the fields of social work and child welfare activities. Madhurima, a Class 5 student of that school, explained the origin of the that function.

The students from various classes sang songs and recited poems, both in Hindi and English, dedicated to mothers. The students' mothers also participated in that event actively by singing and dancing along with their wards. Mamduha Siddiqui, mother of Midah Siddiqui of Class 10, explained the mother-daughter relationship which they share. All the students and staff participated in the special assembly held for the same. Alisha of Class 11 proposed a vote of thanks in the end.

Students of SPSEC, Kanpur, shine in English debate contest, bag winner's team trophy

The debators of Sir Padampat Singhania Education Centre (SPSEC), Kanpur, brought glory to their institution by winning the overall winner's team trophy in KSS Inter-school English Debate Competition hosted by city's Delhi Public School, Azad Nagar, on a virtual platform for the first time. Besides the overall winner's team trophy, SPSEC also bagged the Best Speaker (for motion) award.

In addition, speaking against the motion on the topic, Online Education Pushes the Learners to Islands of Isolation and Self-Absorption, Yash Tolani secured the first position while Suhani Kapoor bagged the second position. They impressed the panelists with their persuasive debating skills, defeating 42 participants from leading and reputed schools of the city. They proved their mettle by articulating their beliefs in an eloquent manner.

Chairperson Manorama Govind Hari Singhania, vice-chairman Abhishek Singhania and vice-chairperson Varsha Singhania congratulated the debaters and their mentors Vibha Dwivedi and Anila Chandak on their victory. Principal Bhawna Gupta extended her heartiest congratulations to the team for achieving the spectacular feat.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 8 -- The coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-induced pandemic has triggered a civilisational crisis with no immediate end in the sight. Many would reckon that India has done well to contain it. Yes, this is a crisis of enormous dimensions with extreme complexities. Lives are under threat, livelihoods are at stake, large reverse migration is underway, and the economy is in a tailspin with disruptions. This requires a multi-pronged response mechanism.

The Union government, along with the state governments, is working on these lines. A national economic relief package has been announced, with more in the offing. The economy is being opened up incrementally. State governments are addressing migration woes. People are getting used to the idea of their homes being their second workplace.

If there is one image of the national lockdown that has stayed with most of us, it is that of migrant labourers trudging to their respective home towns. Such episodes have been reported from Delhi, Mumbai, Surat, parts of Telangana, and elsewhere.

More than 90% of the workforce is in the unorganised sector. In the lockdown, it's the poorest and the marginalised who are hit the most. A United Nations University report says that 104 million more people could slip below the poverty line in India due to the crisis. An International Labour Organization report, on the other hand, says that around 400 million workers in the unorganised sector of India could sink further into poverty due to this.

When the poorest don't have enough for two square meals a day, it means that we, as a nation, have failed them. Look around and you will hear appalling stories of starvation deaths and malnourishment. All this will get exacerbated if the lockdown is extended.

It's generally believed that democracy, and a free Press, are the best guarantees against starvation.

So, where have we failed? What can be done to ensure that starvation and hunger deaths don't assume the form of a crisis in the uncertain times ahead?

When I moved a private member's resolution, advocating for a zero hunger Act in the Lok Sabha in 2006, I got overwhelming across-the-board support. A responsive political class, media, and civil society groups ensured that India got a National Food Security Act (NFSA) in 2013. It entitles 67% of the population (75% in rural India, and 50% in urban India) to five kg of food grains per person per month for priority households.

The Act covers over 810 million people. During the lockdown, the government has increased the monthly quota of subsidised food grains to seven kg per person along with the free distribution of five kg food grains under the PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojna for the next three months.

While the spread of the NFSA is welcome, more needs to be done. India ranks 72nd in a list of 113 countries in the Economist Intelligence Unit's 2019 Global Food Security Index, where availability, affordability, quality and safety of food are measured. Or, the Global Hunger Index of 2019, which ranks India at the 102nd position in a list of 117 countries.

As part of a long-term plan, India, like other countries, is working to end hunger, and eliminate malnutrition by 2030, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A 2019 Niti Aayog report says that Goa, Mizoram, Kerala, Chandigarh are among the states and Union territories that are doing well, but others are lagging behind.

As India comes to terms with a new post-Covid-19 normal, we should work vigorously towards a hunger-free, malnourishment-free India well before the deadline. This must be the top priority as we rejig our priorities. While the SDGs with 2030 as the deadline were launched in 2016, countries like Brazil launched a war on hunger way back in 2003, with its pioneering "Fome Zero" (Zero Hunger) aimed at providing everyone enough food, and the right kind of food, for nutritional needs and well-being.

We should use this crisis as an opportunity to undertake large-scale changes to be able to feed India, especially the most vulnerable sections, in the right manner.

The five kg food grain quantum under the NFSA should be raised to 10kg going forward. The government could consider introducing breakfast, in addition to midday meals, in schools, to ensure that children are healthy. It's time to make the NFSA coverage universal. The Food Corporation of India's godowns are filled to capacity with more than three times the buffer stock it is required to maintain. In other words, no one going to a public distribution system shop must be turned away because of the absence of a ration card. Some states have already acted on this.

A problem faced by migrant workers is that the ration cards from their places of origin are not valid in other states. The Union government is readying a "one nation, one ration card" scheme, and this needs to be prioritised. In the post-lockdown period, the issue has become particularly important, with large-scale reverse migration.

Another important problem pertains to the linking of Aadhaar cards to ration cards. In many rural areas, the identification infrastructure often malfunctions. The glitches in the verification process must not become an excuse to deny someone food grains. We also need to universalise direct transfers to those living on the fringes.

Let the Covid-19 crisis usher in policy changes that ensure that our poorest are well fed, their nourishment needs taken care of, and their dignity upheld. It is only then that India will be able to script an inclusive growth story.

Naveen Jindal is chairman, Jindal Steel & Power Limited and a former Member of Parliament

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 27 -- As many as 189 Indian citizens used sexual orientation as a ground to seek asylum in the United Kingdom since 2015, but applications fell after the Supreme Court struck down Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code in 2018, figures released on Thursday show.

According to latest immigration statistics from the Home Office for the year ending June 2020, the list of top five countries whose citizens mentioned sexual orientation in asylum applications is headed by Pakistan, followed by Nigeria, Bangladesh, Malaysia and Namibia.

Applications from Indian citizens on the basis of sexual orientation for the last five years were: 33 (2015), 59 (2016), 54 (2017), 21 (2018) and 22 (2019), the figures show. Of the total number of 189 applications, decisions (grants or refusals) were reached in 163 cases.

The Home Office's country policy and information note for India on notes that on September 6, 2018, the Supreme Court ruled that consensual sexual acts between adults, conducted in private, was no longer an offence under Section 377 of the IPC.

"The historic ruling effectively scrapped the colonial law, which deemed sex between consenting gay men, a punishable offence", the note adds.

The 189 applications based on sexual orientation were among overall 8837 asylum applications made by Indian citizens in the period 2015-19. Of all asylum applications from citizens of various countries, the grant rates are among the lowest for Indians: 3 per cent.

The figures also record that the list of largest number of voluntary returns to country of origin of those either detained under immigration rules or those who are in the country illegally is topped by Indians: 1,290, or 16 per cent, in the year ending June 2020.

Visitor visas issued during the year were down due to the coronavirus pandemic. Chinese and Indian nationals accounted for 42 per cent of all such visas issued, but they were down 44 per cent for Chinese and 41 per cent for Indians compared to the previous year.

"There were falls in the number of visitor visas granted due to travel restrictions implemented in response to Covid-19 to almost all nationalities, with the largest falls seen for: Chinese nationals, down 273,105 (-44%); Indian nationals, down 206,206 (-41%)", the Home Office said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- Given the deluge of queries coming in from Indians and those of Indian origin in Canada, the Indian High Commission in the country has deployed cutting-edge IT tool in the form of a chatbot to address concerns over the Covid-19 crisis.

The chatbot, called CANbot, has natural language conversation capabilities in English, Hindi and Punjabi and allows those seeking answers urgently to get them "safely and securely", either through a chat function on the High Commission's website or on a dedicated WhatsApp number.

The ability to quickly respond to the frantic questions relating to Covid-19, public safety measures taken in India and Canada and restrictions on international travel, has become particularly critical given the impact the pandemic has had, especially with nearly 1.6 million persons of Indian-origin living in Canada.

Among them are nearly 200,000 Indian students at Canadian colleges and universities, and since such institutions have closed, there have been concerns about this matter among their families in India, not to mention the issue of flying them back at a time when flights between the two nations are non-existent for the time being. This move comes even as the foreign ministers of the two countries discussed ways of dealing with the crisis of nationals seeking to return home.

The effort behind launching the chatbot was because the High Commission "wanted to create a service that can assist people in this emergency," India's envoy to Ottawa Ajay Bisaria said. The High Commission as well as the Indian consulates in Toronto and Vancouver have witnessed "a massive surge in queries received due to the situation arising from Covid-19 pandemic, including the disruption in international travel." Bisaria said, "We empathize with people's concerns in these troubled times and the need to receive immediate and accurate information wherever they are."

The bot has been developed for the High Commission of India by the Indian conversational platform Verloop.io and home healthcare company Portea Medical.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 23 -- The TIME magazine's list of 100 most influential people for the year 2020 includes Prime Minister Narendra Modi, actor Ayushman Khurrana and Bilkis, who emerged as the face of the Shaheen Bagh protests.

PM Modi has been kept under the 'Leaders' along with US President Donald Trump, US attorney general William Barr, Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen, US NIAID chief Anthony Fauci and Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden. The Indian Prime Minister, who turned 70 a few days ago, had also made it to the TIME magazine's 100 most influential people's list earlier as well.

Bilkis was an unlikely face among the names who made it to the 100 most influential people's list. She was among the leading figures who led peaceful protests in Delhi's Shaheen Bagh area against the Citizenship Amendment Act or CAA last year. The 82-year-old was known for sitting at the protest site from early morning till midnight almost everyday for three months until the protests were disbanded due to Covid-19.

Actor Ayushmann Khurana was the only actor from India who made it to the list. Khurrana is the youngest Indian to be featured in this year's TIME Magazine, according to news agency PTI. Khurrana told PTI that he has used his acting to bring a positive change to the world. Deepika Padukone wrote an essay to introduce Khurrana to TIME magazine's readers. He has acted in award-winning movies like "Vicky Donor", "Shubh Mangal Saavdhan", "Badhaai Ho", and "Article 15."

The others to bring laurels to the Indian community by being included in the coveted list include Sundar Pichai, the CEO of Google's parent Alphabet and clinical microbiology professor Ravindra Gupta.

Gupta, who is a professor of clinical microbiology at the Cambridge University, has been featured by the TIME magazine under the 'Pioneers' category. A doctor of Indian origin, Gupta achieved the feat of curing the London Patient Eric Castellijo of human-immunodeficiency virus or the HIV. Castellijo, who is the second person to be functionally cured of HIV wrote of Dr Gupta in the introduction, "Gupta has shared his knowledge and his enthusiasm to find a feasible cure for everyone. He has championed me and empowered me to become an ambassador of hope to millions of people living with HIV around the world." Castellijo also narrated how Gupta's compassion moved him and also brought him respect among colleagues in the HIV research community.

Pichai was put into the category of 'Titans' along with Miami Heat forward Dwayne Wade, actress Gabrielle Union and Formula One racer Lewis Hamilton among others. Jamie Dimon, chairman and CEO of JPMorgan Chase, said Pichai embodies the real American dream as he emigrated from India as an adult and worked his way up to become the CEO of Alphabet. He said, "(Sundar) represents the best of what we aspire for our society. He used his natural gifts and strong work ethic to rise through the ranks of Google (now Alphabet) by leading many of their most successful products."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- Defence minister Rajnath Singh said on Tuesday he was assured by the Russian leadership that all ongoing contracts for military supplies will proceed as scheduled and be completed speedily despite the impact of the Covid-19 crisis.

Singh's remarks, made during a media interaction in Moscow, came against the backdrop of reports that India is pushing Russia to speed up the delivery of S-400 missile defence systems following a tense standoff with Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).

Russia, which accounts for more than 60% of the military hardware used by the Indian armed forces, has called for the easing of tensions between China and India. The tensions spiked after 20 Indian soldiers were killed in a violent face-off at Galwan Valley on June 15.

"I have been assured that ongoing contracts will be maintained, and not only will they be maintained, they will be completed quickly and in less time," Singh said, describing his talks with Russian deputy prime minister Yury Borisov as "very positive and productive".

"All our proposals have received a positive response from the Russian side. I am fully satisfied with my discussions," he said, without giving details about the proposals.

Singh arrived in Russia on Monday - the first trip abroad by an Indian leader since foreign travel was restricted four months ago due to the pandemic - with a high-level delegation to participate in the Victory Day parade on June 24. He is scheduled to hold several meetings with Russian leaders though no talks are planned with his Chinese counterpart Wei Fenghe, who is in Moscow for the parade.

India plans to seek the advanced delivery of the S-400 missile defence systems, currently due by mid-2021. India and Russia signed a $5.4-billion deal in 2018 for five systems. New Delhi is also expected to ask Moscow to cut delays in supplying spares for key Russian-origin platforms such as tanks, combat jets and helicopters.

New Delhi's request could potentially place Moscow in a difficult position due to its relations with Beijing. It's becoming increasingly tricky for Russia to maintain good ties with India and China, Alexander Gabuev, a China expert at the Carnegie Moscow Center, told Bloomberg.

"It's a very important test overall of Russia's ability to balance its relationships amid growing dependency on China, which is becoming increasingly assertive and pushing its partners to choose sides," Gabuev said.

The sale of the S-400 and more combat jets to India won't spoil relations with China, said Igor Korotchenko, head of the Centre for Analysis of World Arms Trade. "The Indian arms market is a top priority for us," he said. "There's no problem here for our ties with China."

Singh described defence cooperation as one of the important pillars of the India-Russia special and privileged strategic partnership and said he and Borisov had reviewed the defence relationship. The traditional friendship between India and Russia remains strong and the mutual interests of the two sides "are solid", he added.

On Tuesday morning, defence secretary Ajay Kumar also held talks with his Russian counterpart, deputy defence minister Alexander Fomin.

Pointing to the 75th anniversary of the Victory Day parade, which marks the end of World War 2, Singh said Indian soldiers too participated in the war effort in the millions and suffered immense causalities. "Many of them were part of the efforts to assist the Soviet Army. Therefore, it is a great honour that an Indian military contingent will be marching in the Red Square tomorrow. This is a sign of the everlasting friendship between the armed forces of our two countries," he said.

Singh also said India is looking forward to a visit by Russian President Vladimir Putin at the invitation of Prime Minister Narendra Modi later this year.

On Tuesday, Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov also hosted a virtual trilateral meeting with his Chinese and Indian counterparts, Wang Yi and S Jaishankar. Following the meeting, Lavrov said, "India and China have every means to solve any problems that arise in their relationship.I don't think India and China need any help."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- The international team of World Health Organisation seeking investigation into the origin of Covid-19 virus will go to China in January, the global health body announced on Wednesday.

"I can confirm that this will take place in January," WHO spokesman Hedinn Halldorsson told AFP when asked about reports that the expert team, which includes epidemiologists and animal health specialists, would finally go to China next month, reported news agency AFP.

The global call to investigate the origin of the virus, suspected to be in China's Wuhan, has been echoed by scientists and medical experts as the scourage by coronavirus disease has claimed millions of lives and upended economies across the world.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

Also read | 'Pure propaganda': German scientist rebuts Chinese media on Covid origin

China has rejected the claims for almost a year now on the reports of virus originating from its central city. Recently, a top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Also read | Coronavirus Outbreak: WHO advance team concludes China visit to probe Covid-19 origin

In August this year, the agency's chief and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had said the "international team" will deploy to Wuhan, the city where the pandemic is believed to have erupted late last year. Tedros said "terms of reference" have been drawn up by the WHO and China, but he did not specify.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 8 -- India that is Bharat shall be a Union of States."

That is how our Constitution starts. Never has that line rung truer than now.

Parts of India that they have always been, the states today are more, much more. They are India. The India where life's breath is now drawn with vigilance, where hands and fingers move with caution and frequently come together in prayer.

Facing the biggest challenge since Independence, the states and Union territories are grappling with the pandemic hour by hour, minute by minute. Speaking to chief ministers on April 27, the prime minister got it exactly right. He said that the states are better acquainted with ground realities about the pandemic. He has been a chief minister and he knows what ground realities mean.

The clarion call having been sounded by our prime minister, all chief ministers, their health ministers, chief secretaries, health secretaries and the district administration have been holding the virus by its invisible micro-horns. Their work done with such financial and human resources as they have, and under many constraints, can only be described as heroic.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan's efforts in Kerala have been pioneering. His government took the first steps towards halting the virus in its tracks well before the rest of the country did. Odisha's achievement in controlling the pandemic has been remarkable as has Goa's record of being the first to have zero active cases. Tamil Nadu, by getting an early start in testing, has done well for itself. And Rajasthan, by setting up a framework for food supplies to the poor, and health access with a helpline, has factored care into the lockdown at a great financial cost.

Maharashtra and Mumbai being the most coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-challenged of all states and cities, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray's great firmness has to be lauded. He has shown himself to be just the type of no-nonsense leader that his state needs. Delhi's chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, has done likewise. The West Bengal chief minister's determined outreach to her people is reassuring, though it makes us worry for her own protection.

Federalism has, thus, been at work in the best sense of that first line of our Constitution. Behind this lies a constitutional sanction. In fact, a constitutional imperative. In the Constitution's division of prerogatives and duties as between the Union and the states, severally and in the Concurrent List, jointly, "public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries" form an entry in the State List.

More relevantly "prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants" is an entry in the Concurrent List which is binding on both the states and the Centre. These entries have a passivity to them in normal times. But in times we are facing now, they spring into life, federal life. They make the states of India, where we live, India.

A word here is needed on a state beyond states in India: Migrant workers. They form a floating Union Territory that requires full statehood, not territorially but civilisationally. One great responsibility that lies with the states is to ensure that during these relaxations, urban to rural migration is strictly contained, with the greatest sensitivity. Will a post-Covid-19 India give them that? If it does not, it cannot be expected to have what it takes to win the battle over Covid-19.

The virus is not going to leave us easily or soon. If India is to be safe from this and future death-dealing and death-distributing viruses, it must undertake a few urgent measures. One, seeing the zoonotic origins of this virus, end the suicidal neglect of basic hygiene procedures that lurk like a hidden Wuhan in every unsupervised meat and poultry chain, market and public lavatories. Two, demand an end to the callous and relentless spoliation of our natural resources in the name of industrialisation. Three, get over our passion for congregating en masse in places of worship and entertainment with our stubborn habit of spitting .

Emperor Asoka speaks in his edicts of his subjects' fascination for "unnecessary assemblage". Four, ask "Where do we get clean water?" if we are to "keep washing our hands". Five, demand access to basic medical facilities within walkable distances.

If we can raise the age of marriage, have fewer children than our parents did, realise that untouchability is wrong, absurd and illegal, surely we can attempt these five.

Governments have to reset their priorities dramatically, investing massively and immediately in clean water access and on raising the doctors/nurses population ratio. And raise the status of nurses, hustled on duty and huddled in hostels off duty, from being taken-for-granted appurtenances to being major front-ranking players.

The Constitution asks India to feel its heart beating strong in the pulse of its states.

Gopalkrishna Gandhi is a former administrator, diplomat and governor

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- The suicide of a man, who was admitted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital after flying in from Sydney, even as test results to ascertain whether he had the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) were awaited, is a wake-up call. There has been commentary on safety measures required to deal with the outbreak and the individual, social and institutional actions required. But not enough attention has been paid to the toll the disease - and the messaging around it - is taking on mental health.

Covid-19 is new. Rarely, if ever, in recent history have human beings across the world - be in Boston or Bengaluru, Wuhan or Doha, Rome or Seoul - experienced a common set of concerns, driven by a single factor. From its roots to its symptoms, from its treatment protocol to a possible cure, uncertainty is rife. This uncertainty is causing fear, anxiety, panic among people - about themselves, about their loved ones, about their future. This is coupled with a sense of shame among those who are either suspected or have the infection, because of the stigmatisation of Covid-19 patients. Yes, there are people who could have been more careful; yes, there has been a streak of irresponsibility in those should have followed treatment protocols. But it must be emphasised that a patient who gets infected is not guilty, but is actually a victim. Targeting individuals or families with traces of the case is wrong. Unacceptable racial attacks - be it against Chinese-origin Americans in the United States or against people from the Northeast in India - is only adding to this sense of vulnerability. Misinformation is not helping.

The government must weave in the mental health dimension in the way it approaches Covid-19. There has to be sustained counselling and therapy for patients and suspected cases. There has to be better messaging, which battles the sense of shame associated with Covid-19 and emphasises that social distancing is a temporary measure and patients are not criminals. There has to be kindness and empathy in the way families, neighbours, and communities engage with each other. Only a humane response can help deal with the deeply vulnerable human condition of these times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- The rise in zoonotic diseases like the coronavirus disease, or Covid 19 is linked to the loss of biodiversity and forests, public health experts and scientists have said. Zoonotic diseases are those that spread from animals to humans.

There is a consensus among scientists that a rise in zoonotic diseases--Nipah, Ebola, Avian Influenza, Zika, Coronavirus to name a few in recent decades - is driven by biodiversity loss and climate change.

In a press briefing held in New York by the Global Alliance of Indigenous Peoples on Friday, indigenous leaders said the Covid 19 outbreak was a result of loss of native forests and habitat.

"The coronavirus is now telling the world what we have been saying for thousands of years-that if we do not help protect biodiversity and nature, then we will face this and worse future threats," said Levi Sucre Romero, a BriBri indigenous person from Costa Rica who is the Coordinator of the Mesoamerican Alliance of Peoples and Forests.

Scientific studies have already flagged this link. The Intergovernmental Science Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (Similar to Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) in their report last year said that zoonotic diseases are significant threats to human health, with vector-borne diseases accounting for approximately 17 % of all infectious diseases and causing an estimated 700,000 deaths globally per year.

"Emerging infectious diseases in wildlife, domestic animals, plants or people can be exacerbated by human activities such as land clearing and habitat fragmentation," the report said. It also highlighted that around 25% of species in the animal and plant groups were under threat, suggesting that around one million species are already confronting extinction.

The World Health Organization has said there is now evidence of the link between the 2019-nCoV and other similar known coronaviruses (CoV) circulating in bats, and more specifically those of the Rhinolophus bat sub-species.

But the route of transmission to humans is still unclear. The most likely hypothesis is that an intermediary host animal played a role in the transmission of this disease.

According to a 2010 study in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases, about 60% of emerging human pathogens are zoonotic. Of these pathogens, over 71% have wildlife origins.

"There is no doubt that zoonotic diseases are on the rise. One of the reasons for their rise, among many others, is that animals are coming in contact with human habitation. Chikungunya, for example, also came through an intermediate host. More interactions are happening between animals and humans, which may not have been the case earlier. Some emerging zoonotic diseases include Bacterial Anthrax, Brucella, Leptospira, Salmonella, Kyasunar forest disease, Avian influenza, Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic fever, Nipah, Corona among others," said Dr Shobha Broor, former head of department of microbiology at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.

"Now we know that COVID 19 may not have come from snakes. Even from evolutionary perspective, pangolins and bats are more closely related to us than snakes. There is a definite link of forest loss, climate change and these zoonotic diseases. In Karnataka for the past few years, there are reports of the Kyasanur forest disease particularly from Shimoga. There is agreement that it has got to do with habitat loss. Also, cattle enter forest areas transferring infections to wildlife and vice versa," said Kartik Sunagar, assistant professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab at Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science.

"Many mammals, like bats and rodents, harbour virsues and bacteria that can spillover from wildlife populations into humans. Sometimes these spillover events can cause outbreaks, like the one we are experiencing now. Meta-analyses of spillover events across the world suggest that they are more likely to occur when the number of mammal species in an area is high, such as in tropical, biodiverse environments. But other important drivers of spillover are land conversion (e.g. forest clearing for agriculture or developmental activities) and human population density. In parts of India, all three of these are high: we have high biodiversity, high land conversion and high human population density. We must better understand the dynamics of spillover in such situations," said Uma Ramakrishnan, Associate Professor, Senior Fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UNSC, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic.

The G20 communique said the pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label it as the "Wuhan virus". "The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics," said a person aware of the discussions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 30 -- Piyush Goyal, Union Minister for commerce and industry, has asked the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) to strengthen the "rules of origin" provisions, one of India's key concerns, because the nation's markets are being flooded by Chinese goods through some Asean countries.

Goyal co-chaired the 17th Asean-India Economic (AEM) Ministers' Consultations held on Saturday via videoconference in a bid to maintain social distancing norms because of the raging coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

He highlighted that the free trade agreement (FTA) has to be "mutually beneficial" and expressed the need to strengthen the rules of origin provisions, work towards removal of non-tariff barriers and provide better market access, a ministry statement said on Sunday.

Goyal asked for an early review of the Asean-India Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA), as the trade pact is hurting India's interest, particularly because of the violation of rules of origin clauses.

Also read: PM Modi lauds India's farmers for higher crop production amid Covid crisis

India is concerned and wants to review FTAs, as several Chinese goods are dumped in its markets through a third country with which the nation has an agreement, a government official said requesting anonymity.

The review is necessary, as many items enter Indian markets taking advantage of Asean-India FTA. Imports at reduced or zero duty put the domestic industry at a major disadvantage, the official said.

Goyal used the Asean ministerial forum to reiterate India's consistent position that the review of the FTA has been inordinately delayed. He asked for a closer engagement ahead of the Asean-India Leaders' Summit scheduled to be held in November and to start the full review before the end of this year, the commerce ministry said in the statement.

Goyal co-chaired the meeting with Tran Tuan Anh, Vietnam's minister of industry and trade.

A report of the Asean India Business Council (AIBC) was also presented in the meeting.

It also recommended a review of the AITIGA for mutual benefit. The ministers from India and Asean countries instructed the officials to start the discussions to determine the scope of the review at the earliest to make the FTA more user-friendly for businesses.

Sangita Reddy, co-chair of AIBC (India), said the nation and Asean should develop a road map for collaboration in healthcare and pharmaceuticals sectors along with exchange of knowledge and digital connectivity. "She shared that special incentives for Indian pharmaceutical companies should be introduced for setting up plants in dedicated Asean zones," the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) said in a statement.

The industry association is the Indian secretariat of AIBC.

The meeting was attended by the trade ministers of all the 10 Asean countries such as Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

The ministers reaffirmed their commitment to take collective actions in mitigating the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and resolved to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability and resilient supply chain connectivity, particularly the unimpeded flow of essential goods and medicines in the region, in compliance with the World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules, the statement said.

AIBC also recommended elimination of non- tariff measures to enable seamless movement of goods and services, FICCI said in the statement.

It proposed the introduction of a business travel card which would facilitate business travel between India and Asean countries with a minimum 90-day validity.

.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 7 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Krishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?

We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu. Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials?

For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world... Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast...very short.

Why a nasal vaccine?

We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead...

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?

While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?

In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying,.. etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up. We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do ....

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 27 -- As the coronavirus pandemic raged across the globe, most of the children and their parents came to terms with the difficult life that has now become the "new normal".

But a 15-year-old decided to do something to bring about a positive social change during the pandemic. Neha Shukla applied to the 'Girls With Impact' programme in the United States that teaches entrepreneurial skills to young girls.

The push for Shukla was the rapid spread of the disease and that fact that people could lose their lives because of a careless mistake, of not social distancing correctly.

Indian-origin girl's 'SixFeetApart' alarm wows US in Covid times

"I wanted to do something about it and I set out to create a social distancing device that utilises ultrasonic sensors and microprocessors to detect when a person crosses that six-feet detection range and alert the user through vibrating and beeping," she told Hindustan Times.

With her interest in engineering and technology, Shukla began working on the device that would keep people six feet apart. And to make it useful, the 15-year-old chose a cap.

The cap beeps and vibrates when someone breaches the six-feet perimetre.

"It's a microprocessor based device that's embedded in a hat. Whenever somebody crosses that six feet range, the programme and the microprocessor are alerted," explains Shukla while describing her device.

She adds, "On the inside, there's an ultrasonic sensor, a microprocessor, a buzzer and a nine-volt battery. I coded a programme that causes these ultrasonic sensors to send out these pulses (ultrasonic waves). Now, when these waves collide with a person within that six-feet detection range, this raw data calculation is converted to a system that it would understand and hence alert the user."

Shukla was born and brought up in the United States. She started working on the project in April and a prototype was ready in June. Shukla is now working on improving the design of the device further to make it easier to wear. "I am also working on developing a Bluetooth app that will send the same notification to your phone as well and you can keep a track of that history," she says.

She has been featured in the New York Times and on the Nasdaq screen last month. Shukla's LinkedIn profile described her as a student, innovator, researcher and writer.

Shukla said that she would love to come to India as soon as the Covid-19 pandemic is over.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, March 18 -- Maharashtra reported its first death from the new coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Tuesday as 40 other confirmed cases indicated an alarming surge in infections in the state, which considered tightening the shutdown of travel and workplaces on a day several trains were cancelled in the region to step up containment efforts.

All passengers landing at the Pune airport from foreign destinations will be put in hospital quarantine for 24 hours irrespective of whether they have any symptoms, a senior official said. The city has reported seven cases of the disease, while the neighbouring Pimpri-Chinchwad has reported 10.

A 64-year-old man who recently tested positive for the coronavirus infection died in Mumbai, an announcement that came shortly before chief minister Uddhav Thackeray said the state government may have to take the harsh decision of shutting public transport in the country's financial hub if people don't avoid non-essential travel.

Thackeray clarified that, for now, local trains will remain operational and government offices will continue to function.

About eight million people take Mumbai's suburban trains every day and the admission that the government may be forced to shut down the service indicated the deepening public health crisis in the state over fears of the infection taking hold and spreading to other states.

Experts warned that if the state doesn't move fast to stop the local infections from turning into community infections, when it is not possible to trace the origin of the spread, the region may have to be put under a stringent lockdown to guard against wide transmissions.

Of the 137 cases of Covid-19 confirmed in the country by the Union health ministry, 41 have been reported in Maharashtra, the largest number for a single state. While one person tested positive in Mumbai on Tuesday, another in Pune was confirmed to be infected.

Of the 40 cases other than the death in the state, the highest number (10) is from the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation near Pune, which is home to several information technology professionals frequently visiting the US and European countries for work. TheBrihanmumbai Municipal Corporationand Pune Municipal Corporations have reported seven patients each, while four patients are being treated in Nagpur.

Navi Mumbai, Yavatmal and Kalyan Dombivali Municipal corporations have reported three patients each while one patient each is being treated at Thane, Raigad, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad. There are 105 suspected patients hospitalised in variousMaharashtra cities.

At a news briefing on Tuesday afternoon, Thackeray said 39 patients were stable and one was critical. He said the government was working on a proposal to let government offices function with only 50% strength.

The 64-year-old man from Mumbai who died on Tuesday morning became the third Covid-19 fatality in the country. He had recently travelled to Dubai.

A 49-year-old man in Mumbai who returned from the US on March 7 and a 26-year-old man in Pune who returned from the US on March 14 tested positive on Tuesday.

There are 502 beds ready in isolation wards across the state, an official statement said, adding that mandatory 14- day follow-up of 442 people out of 1,169 who returned from abroad was complete.

Officials said Indian Railways cancelled 76 trains as precaution against the spread of coronavirus and due to low occupancy. The list includes some popular long-haul trains, including the Hazrat Nizamuddin Rajdhani Express from Mumbai to Delhi and the Mumbai-to-Howrah Duranto Express, among others. Fifty-three trips of 10 trains stood cancelled by the Western Railways, 29 by South Central Railways, nine by South Eastern Railways and four by Northern Railways.

"Various preventive measures have been taken by Western Railways to counter the spread of this infection in railway premises. We have cancelled these trains due to low occupancy as a crowd management measure to contain the spread of the disease as many had cancelled due to coronavirus," a Western Railways official said on condition of anonymity.

As a precautionary measure railway zones like Western Railways and Central Railways have also increased the prices of their platform tickets to discourage large crowds. "All staff of catering units should be directed to maintain personal hygiene as per the food safety norms/standards of FSSAI," the guidelines stated. FSSAI is short for the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- President Donald Trump has promised a "conclusive" report on the US investigation into Chinas handling of the coronavirus outbreak and he once against revised projections for US toll, which he said, could now hit 100,000.

"We're going to be giving a very strong report as to exactly what we think happened. And I think it will be very conclusive," Trump said a "virtual town hall" hosted Sunday by Fox News. "My opinion is they made a mistake. They tried to cover it, they tried to put it out., just like a fire."

The US has disputed the Chinese version of the origin of Covid-19 - from a meats and fresh produce market in Wuhan - and alleged it started instead at a virology lab in the same city. And it has also accused Beijing of delaying alerting the rest of the world and of suppressing the true extent of its epidemic.

Secretary of state Mike Pompeo has said the US has "enormous evidence" of the outbreak began at the Wuhan lab. He has not shared any evidence, and neither has any US official thus far, despite continued and rising rhetoric against China, with threats of punitive measures, including making China pay for it.

China has dismissed these allegations and called them last Thursday an effort by the Trump administration to "shift their own responsibility for the poor handling of the epidemic".

The Trump administration has indeed faced questions about its response to the epidemic, essentially for squandering time gained by the earlyFebruary ban on travelers from China. The president has pushed back and insisted he was, in fact, ahead of the curve, citing the same travel restrictions.

At the Fox New town hall, the president sought to shift the blame somewhat on to Anthony Fauci, a top epidemiologist and member of the president's task force on the outbreak - "everybody, even Tony Fauci, was saying it's going to pass, not going to be a big deal".

It did not. And the United States has borne the brunt of the pandemic with 1.15 million confirmed and reported infections till Monday morning, a third of the cases worldwide; and 67,710 fatalities, close to a quarter or the global toll. The US numbers went up in the last 24 hours 25,501 infections and 1,313 deaths.

President Trump said the town hall he fears the fatalities will go up further, revising upwards his earlier assessments. "We're going to lose anywhere from 75-, 80- to 100,000 people," Trump said. "That's a horrible thing. We shouldn't lose one person over this. This should've been stopped in China."

The president had last week that the toll will "hopefully" wind up under 100,000, changing his earlier assessments of 240,000 way back in March before issuing lockdown guidelines to 60,000 and 70,000 in recent days and weeks, as he has sought to frame the reducing numbers as an achievement.

Without the mitigation measures ordered by him the numbers would have been far higher, he has argued.

Even at 100,000, his new projection, is way in excess of the 72,433 Covid-19 deaths projected by the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), whose modeling and numbers have been cited often by the Whit House. The IHME projected number if for August, at the current levels of mitigation.

With many states rolling back restrictions and reopening some businesses, with the very public backing of the president, experts fear a resurgence, specially those that ignore the federal reopening guidelines and and end up "leapfrogging" conditions laid down for graduating from one phase to another.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- India reported more than 850 confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease and 19 deaths on Saturday as the country entered the fourth day of the three-week nationwide lockdown.

The government has taken a slew of measures to step up against the spread of Covid-19, including announcing the 21-day lockdown across the country and the economic stimulus package.

As the numbers neared the 900 mark, many have expressed concern that the coronavirus epidemic could be advancing towards community transmission in the country.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the Union ministry of health and family welfare and members of Covid-19 task force have been said India is not in the dreaded Stage 3 or there is no community transmission of the coronavirus at the moment.

China, Italy and the United Kingdom have already reached Stage 3 of the pandemic and reported hundreds of deaths and ballooning cases of the coronavirus disease.

Here is what the four stages of the Covid-19 pandemic mean:

Stage 1

Stage 1 is when cases are imported from affected countries without any local origin and only those who have travelled abroad test positive for the respiratory illness. The disease does not spread locally at this stage.

Stage 2

This is the stage when local transmission happens and its source is known and can be located. At this stage, people testing positive have come in contact with a patient who has travelled outside the country. They are usually those in close contact with the patient such as family members or others who have been in touch with the infected.

Fewer people are affected at Stage 2 and it is easier to perform contact tracing and contain the spread via self-quarantining. India is currently in Stage 2.

Stage 3

This is the stage of community transmission and takes place when the source of an individual's infection can't be traced and isolated.

During this stage, those who have not been exposed to an infected person or anyone who has a travel history to affected countries still test positive for the coronavirus. The outbreak will spread fast in clusters once the community transmission starts.

Countries like Singapore, Italy and Spain are currently in Stage 3.

Stage 4

It is the most dreaded stage during which there are several clusters of the infection and it takes the form of an epidemic. Massive numbers are infected making it very difficult to control and contain the spread of the disease.

China has already been in Stage 4.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infecting human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has, until Tuesday, killed over 318,000 people and sickened more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ".SARSCoV2 [the virus that causes Covid-19] is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

The four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus's "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

The research is plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin,Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University, told HT.

China has consistently denied, and cited international research, to deny that he virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology, located in the central Chinese city where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with COVID is we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow in the past been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh, who are both bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India, and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia, Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human, are not rare and have been regularly witnessed with Ebola, bird flu, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Ebright,is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were doing research on bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether COVID-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 28 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said that India was able to tackle Covid-19 far better than experts around the world had believed it could because of the timely country-wide lockdown, which gave it time to ramp up its health system significantly. The epidemic also taught India, he added, to be "self-reliant".

"With timely lockdown India successfully protected the lives of thousands and lakhs of its citizens," the prime minister said in a video address streamed live to a virtual annual meeting of the American Association of Physicians of Indian origin. "Contrary," he had said earlier, "to fears expressed by experts around the world that India could be in deep crisis."

PM Modi said that Covid-19 fatalities were less than 12 for every 1 million people in India - "not even 12", he repeated to emphasise the low number - compared, in his telling, to more than 350 in the United States and more than 600 for the UK, Spain and Italy. The United States leads the world in both the death toll and infections with over 1,25,000 and 2.4 respectively, and they are both growing.

"If India today has been able to fight the coronavirus (he used the shorter form "corona") so much better," the prime minister said, adding, "the lockdown played a very big role in it." He spoke mostly in Hindi.

While fighting the pandemic, India used the time period of the lockdown to "ramp up" its healthcare system, he said. It was able to expand the number of hospital beds for special Covid-19 treatment and isolation chamber, grow the number of labs to test coronavirus infections from one to more than 1,000, the prime minister said detailing the outcomes. He added that till three months ago, India was a net importer of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs), testing kits and even N-95 masks. Today, India produces four millions PPEs a week and three million N-95s.

"We used to import earlier, and now we are moving towards exporting them," he said.

Even ventilators, which are needed for severely ill and hospitalised patients, were mostly imported earlier, whereas 50,000 of those made in India are in the process of being deployed.

"It's said that every crisis teaches us something or the other," Modi said, adding, "corona has taught India to be self-reliant." And this will help further strengthen the healthcare system.

The prime minister went on to give a detailed account of his government's approach on health and initiatives such as on eradication of tuberculosis (TB) and mitigation of Kala-azar (Black Fever, also called visceral leishmaniasis).

"Our pehchan (identity)," he said, "is linked to manawta (humanity) not money."

As the Covid-19 epidemic spread around the world, India supplied medicines and medical equipment to more than 150 countries and provided training to personnel of 16 countries, he said, adding, India sent hydroxychloroquine to many counties "including America".

India was now working with many countries on finding a vaccine for Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 13 -- The Boris Johnson government on Tuesday reiterated its call to people of Indian, Asian, Afro-Caribbean and other racial origins to volunteer for ongoing vaccine trials, including those by the University of Oxford-AstraZeneca.

The non-white community has been disproportionately affected by coronavirus pandemic, prompting the government to launch an inquiry. Currently the community is under-represented in six vaccine clinical trials taking place across the UK.

Officials said that of the 270,000 people who had signed up to the NHS Vaccine Registry (launched in July), only 11,000 volunteers are from Asian and British Asian backgrounds, and just 1,200 are Black, African, Caribbean or Black British.

Thousands of people from different ages and backgrounds are urgently needed to help speed up their development and ensure they work effectively for the whole population, the officials added.

Business secretary Alok Sharma said: "Coronavirus can affect anyone regardless of their background, age or race. To ensure we can find a safe and effective vaccine that works for everyone, we all need to get involved".

"That's why we are urging more people to support our incredible scientists and join the 270,000 people who have already signed-up so we can speed up efforts to find a vaccine to defeat this virus once and for all." he added.

Maheshi Ramasamy, consultant in Infectious Diseases and Acute General Medicine and principal investigator at the Oxford Vaccine Group, added: "We know that people from Black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds are disproportionately affected by Covid in terms of severe disease and mortality."

"So when we do have a vaccine that we roll out to the general population, it's really important that we can demonstrate to people from these communities that we have evidence that the vaccine works."

The UK government set up a Vaccine Taskforce in May to ensure speedy access to clinically effective and safe vaccines, while working with partners to support international access.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 30 -- The Covid-19 pandemic has tested the limits of healthcare systems across many countries and has caused serious damage to lives and economies around the world. From announcing the name of the disease caused by the novel coronavirus to tracing and studying the origins of the virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) has been active in the global effort against the Covid-19 pandemic.

According to official data from WHO, as on December 30, 2020, a total of 80,453,105 people have been infected with Covid-19 and 1,775,776 people have died due to the disease.

Companies like Pfizer and BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca have developed a potential Covid-19 vaccine candidate. However, the rampant spread of a new Covid-19 strain that emerged in the United Kingdom has again caused concerns among countries.

With more vaccine candidates emerging, here is a look back at some of the important scientific interventions by the WHO in the year ravaged by the pandemic -

Jan 9: WHO announced the spread of a new cluster of pneumonia patients in Wuhan, China and also said that the Chinese authorities have identified a new coronavirus as the possible pathogen.

February 11: The name for the new disease caused by the novel coronavirus was confirmed as Covid-19 by the WHO in accordance with the best practices for the naming of new human infectious diseases.

March 18: An international clinical trial named Solidarity was launched by WHO along with partner agencies intended to develop an effective drug for the disease. The trial involved 12,000 patients in 500 hospitals spread across 30 countries.

April 13: A pool of 130 scientists, funders and manufacturers from around the world, pledged to work with the WHO to speed up the process of finding a Covid-19 vaccine.

May 15: The WHO published a scientific brief about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and adolescents temporally related to Covid-19.

June 17: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) arm of the Solidarity trials were stopped by the WHO, citing medical evidence that the drug doesn't reduce the mortality of Covid-19 patients who were already hospitalized.

July 1 & 2: More than 1000 researchers and scientists from various countries participated in the second Covid-19 summit of the WHO. The summit decided the treatment based on the different stages of the disease and also discussed criteria to further proceed with various vaccine candidates.

Also read: Where India stands in global Covid-19 spread

July 9: Possible Covid-19 transmission modes such as physical contact, droplets and mother-to-child were given by the WHO in an updated scientific brief.

Aug 3: Covid-19 Preparedness and Response Progress Report was published by the WHO. Progress made in some key areas of global effort against the pandemic and the future challenges were discussed in the report.

Oct 15: Evidence based on interim results that repurposed drugs like remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon were ineffective against hospitalized Covid-19 patients was submitted.

(With inputs from WHO's Covid-19 response timeline)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 24 -- A survey of over 2000 doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers revealed on Friday suggests that being a member of the non-white minority in the UK itself is an independent risk factor, complementing similar recent data that has prompted an inquiry by the Boris Johnson government.

The survey by the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (Bapio) was held over a week from April 14. It said the results confirm that irrespective of having comorbidities (underlying health conditions), being a non-white individual - called BAME (black and minority ethnic) - is in itself a significant independent risk factor to contract coronavirus.

Over 80 medical staff, including Indian-origin doctors, have passed away in the UK in recent days and weeks. According to NHS England, the dead include 492 people categorised as 'British Indian', while data shows 35% people in critical care in hospitals are non-white.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

Indranil Chakravorty of Bapio said: "This is the largest survey of its kind that involves BAME healthcare workers from all backgrounds. And the results are no surprise, that being of BAME background is a major risk factor for contracting the virus."

Bapio chairman added: "There are a number of areas highlighted in this important survey. Being BAME is a clear risk factor, and we need more sophisticated research into this area".

"Also testing was not available to a sizeable number so they may have been isolating needlessly, as well as the fact that the lack of appropriate PPEs remains a recurring issue for our frontline staff".

The majority (66%) of the survey respondents were hospital doctors, with primary care practitioners forming the second large group (24%). As many as 86% came from BAME backgrounds, with south Asians forming the bulk (75%).

The respondents were mainly in the ages of 40-60, and a significant number (30%) declared at least one comorbidity. Nearly 4% were Covid-19 positive, and another 15% were isolating and not available to work because they were symptomatic and had not been tested.

"Our survey found that only 20% of the 2003 respondents had PPEs that were fit for purpose, and the majority (70%) could not comply with social distancing in their clinical areas of work", Bapio said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- Labour leader Keir Starmer on Thursday appointed Seema Malhotra and Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi to his shadow cabinet to monitor the work of the Boris Johnson government, increasing the number of Indian-origin MPs in the frontline opposition team.

Malhotra is MP from Feltham and Heston, while Dhesi is MP for Slough. They join Lisa Nandy and Preet Kaur Gill in the shadow cabinet, who were earlier appointed as shadow foreign secretary and shadow international development secretary respectively.

Malhotra has been appointed shadow employment minister, while Dhesi, who is the first turban-wearing Sikh MP elected to the House of Commons, is shadow railway minister. Goa-origin Valerie Vaz continues in her role as the shadow leader of the House.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

Starmer said: "This is a new team that will take the Labour Party forward in a new era. Under my leadership, the Labour Party will be utterly focused on working in the national interest, rebuilding people's trust in our party and winning the next election".

According to parliamentary rules, the shadow cabinet is the team of senior spokespeople chosen by the leader of the opposition to mirror the cabinet in government. Each member of the shadow cabinet is appointed to lead on a specific policy area for their party and to question and challenge their counterpart in the cabinet.

Click here for the latest updates from the coronavirus outbreak

In this way the official opposition seeks to present itself as an alternative government-in-waiting, the rules state.

Starmer, who promised to be a rallying figure in the party, defeated Nandy and Rebecca Long-Bailey in the leadership election that was triggered after Corbyn stepped down following the party's fourth election loss in a row in December.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 25 -- Bihar government has exuded confidence that the door-to-door screening surveillance, which has led to the detection of two new coronavirus disease (Covid-19) positive cases in Bhagalpur, and around 1,900 swab samples that are pending results would help reduce the number of cases of the pandemic in the state.

Bihar has reported a spike in the number of Covid-19 positive cases over the past week from 86 on April 18 to 225 on Saturday amid growing concerns that the worst is yet to come. Though 20 districts in the state have reported the viral outbreak from 12 till 10 days, only five districts account for 70% of Covid-19 positive cases, the state authorities said. The state has reported two deaths to date, they added.

Chief minister Nitish Kumar himself allayed the apprehensions, as he underlined that the recent Covid-19 positive cases trace their origin to superspreaders and that have led to the deployment of door-to-door surveillance across the state.

Lokesh Kumar Singh, health secretary, Bihar, corroborated the CM's assessment. "One patient in Munger district transmitted SARS-CoV-2, which causes Covid-19, to 29 others, while one each in Siwan and Nalanda districts infected 22 and 19 people, respectively," Singh said.

"Most cases have shown a similar pattern, leading to five districts accounting for 70% of the cases. Even in the state capital, Patna, 17 Covid-19 positive cases have one common source. While in Rohtas district, one patient infected 14 others. Similarly in Buxar district, another patient transmitted to seven others. In several cases, a single Covid-19 positive case either had recent travel history or showed tell-tale symptoms of the viral infection," he added.

The state health authorities said that door-to-door surveillance would help track the symptomatic patients and also instill confidence among the general public to volunteer for checks.

"Early detection and treatment of Covid-19 hold the key to faster recovery like any other disease. Bihar has shown a remarkable recovery rate. We're urging people to come forward and report if they're showing any signs of symptoms or had recent travel history for the benefit of their loved ones," said a health official. "The CM himself is constantly monitoring the situation with health officials and experts," he added.

AIIMS Patna for plasma therapy

Sanjay Kumar, principal secretary, health, Bihar, tweeted on Saturday morning that the state now has the facility for a plasma therapy for critical Covid-19 patients at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Patna, on the lines of a similar line of treatment being adopted across the country. Bihar has received the "deemed approval from the Indian Council of Medical Research for AIIMS, Patna," Kumar tweeted.

PK Singh, director, AIIMS, Patna, said that the hospital is prepared to administer convalescent plasma therapy to critical Covid-19 patients.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 17 -- Beijing on Thursday said it was ready to cooperate with the World Health Organization (WHO) in tracing the origin of the novel coronavirus, a day after the global public health body announced it was sending a team of investigators to China next year.

A team of 10 experts led by the WHO is expected to visit Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the coronavirus first emerged in December last year.

The Chinese foreign ministry did not directly comment on the upcoming visit or share details but assured cooperation.

"China stands ready to enhance its cooperation with the WHO to advance the global tracing efforts and contribute our share in our early victory against the pandemic," said Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, on Thursday.

Wang added that since the Covid-19 outbreak, China has taken the lead in conducting traceability cooperation with the WHO in an open, transparent and responsible manner.

China, however, has strongly opposed calls for an international inquiry into the origins of the virus, saying such calls are anti-China.

It has been more open to a WHO-led investigation, and allowed experts from the organisation to visit China twice.

Several countries including the US and Australia have called for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 virus. It has become one of the reasons for deteriorating ties between Beijing on one hand, and Washington and Canberra on the other.

In Singapore, a WHO official said on Thursday that Beijing will welcome an international team of Covid-19 investigators due to travel in January.

"WHO continues to contact China and to discuss the international team and the places they visit," Babatunde Olowokure, the WHO's regional emergencies director in the Western Pacific, told a news conference on Thursday.

"Our understanding at this time is that China is welcoming the international team and their visit... This is anticipated, as far as we are aware, to happen in early January," he was quoted as saying by Reuters.

"It's really not about finding a guilty country," Fabian Leendertz of Germany's Robert Koch Institute told AP, adding that the WHO was not seeking to fix the blame but attempting to prevent future outbreaks.

The emergence of the coronavirus was linked to a wet market in Wuhan, though Beijing has been pushing the narrative that it could have been circulating in other countries before it was detected in the Chinese city.

"The present pandemic started almost certainly in the People's Republic of China. Genetic analysis of the virus suggests that it originated in a bat and was transmitted to humans via a yet unknown animal, possibly a mammal used as food or for fur production," Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, told HT in an email recently.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 15 -- Two dogs who were reported to have contracted the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) recently likely got the infection from their owners, according to a new research paper that analysed cases in animals in Hong Kong.

"An analysis of viral genetic sequences from the dogs showed them to be identical to those in the infected people," an article on the findings in Nature said.

While the paper didn't study if animal-to-animal transmission could occur, the authors recommended that for precaution, pets belonging to Covid-19 patients be isolated and tested, as is already being done in Hong Kong.

The paper, published in Nature journal on Thursday, found that two of 15 dogs from households with confirmed human cases of Covid-19 in Hong Kong were found to be infected. These two were a 17-year-old neutered Pomeranian and a 2.5-year-old German Shepherd. They were tested using Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) kits and the virus was later isolated and sequenced.

Canine ACE-2 (an enzyme the Sars-CoV-2 virus uses to enter the body) is similar to the enzyme found in humans. Of 18 amino acids that are known to be involved in interaction between ACE-2 and the spike receptor binding domain of Sars-CoV-2 (which Sars-CoV-2 uses to bind to its host's cells), there are five that differ between humans and dogs, the study led by Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department of Hong Kong said.

"The evidence suggests that human-to-animal transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur. We do not have information on whether this virus can cause illness in dogs but no specific signs were seen in either of the infected dogs during the time they were shedding virus," the paper said. The Pomeranian died two days after release from isolation but very likely due to other underlying diseases. The German Shepherd was kept with a second cross-breed dog but the second dog didn't get infected.

"The limited implications of these findings are that there is now increasing evidence for human to animal transmission, especially to pet animals that are in close contact with infected humans. There is as yet no evidence for any subsequent animal to animal transmission," said Abi Tamim Vanak, Fellow, DBT India Alliance Program and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE).

"However, given that high viral loads were found in nasal swabs of infected animals, as well as in rectal swabs, there is a possibility of onward transmission to other animals, especially if an infected pet is free-ranging and regularly comes in to contact with other animals or humans. Again, this is only speculative, and it would require experimental challenge studies to determine if animal to animal transmission is a viable route of spread for this virus. If such evidence is found, then it will make the control of this disease much harder, because many regions of the world have fairly large populations of free-ranging domestic animals (e.g. India has ~60 million dogs), which do not receive even the most basic healthcare, such as anti-rabies vaccinations," he added.

The findings also have implications for future zoonotic transmission events. Dogs, other canids and felids can be sold in or found near wild-game animal markets like in Wuhan from where Sars-CoV-2 is understood to have transmitted to humans. These domestic animals should also be tested during investigations into the origin of the virus to determine if they play any role in spillover events, the authors concluded.

Earlier, a study by Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and National High Containment Laboratory for Animal Diseases Control and Prevention in China had suggested that cats are highly susceptible to contracting Sars-CoV-2 but dogs, ducks, chickens and pigs were not as susceptible. The study was based on lab experiments and not real-life cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 6 -- China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus?

The lethal virus emanated from China, leading to a paralysing pandemic whose costs are immeasurable. Is it unreasonable for the world to want to know how and why it happened?

Investigating the genesis of the pandemic is critical for another reason - this is not the first deadly disease to spread globally from China. A Chinese cover-up of the 2002-2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) outbreak triggered the world's first 21st-century pandemic. Getting to the bottom of how the latest pathogen flared up and spread is essential for designing rapid-response efforts to prevent a future outbreak from spiralling into yet another pandemic.

Even the World Health Organization (WHO) agrees. This is the organisation whose repeated deference to Beijing since December helped China to cover its tracks. Several countries now want an inquiry to focus on the roles of both China and WHO. The WHO representative in China has said the "origins of the virus are very important" to prevent "reoccurrence". Yet Beijing has shut out even WHO from its national Covid-19 investigations.

United States (US) President Donald Trump has offered China an incentive for cooperation by contrasting a mistake with wilful action: "If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake. But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences." Beijing, however, has shied away from answering even basic questions.

For example, why did China stop flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak, yet allowed international flights to operate from Wuhan, thus facilitating the global spread of the virus? Why did it clamp down recently on further research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus? It instituted a new policy mandating prior vetting after several Chinese research papers highlighted dangerous work on bat coronaviruses, with one study concluding that "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan".

Authorities shut a Shanghai laboratory a day after its publication of the coronavirus genome opened the global path to diagnostic tests. China refused to share any live virus sample with the world, "making it impossible to track the disease's evolution," to quote US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. The dangerous lab research in Wuhan may explain why China, instead of sharing any coronavirus sample, destroyed its lab samples.

Just think - if China was not guilty of any cover-up, wouldn't it be welcoming the growing international calls for an independent inquiry and offering to assist in such a probe? This would give China a chance to clear the air with the rest of the world. Instead, Beijing seems to be showcasing its guilt by belligerently rejecting the pleas for such an inquiry and threatening economic reprisals.

Australia is Exhibit A. The country is more economically tied with China than with its security patron, the US. Yet Australia has come under a blistering attack from China for proposing that WHO member-nations support an independent inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus. Australia said it will push for such an investigation at the WHO assembly when it convenes for its annual meeting on May 17. In response, the Chinese ambassador to Australia threatened punishment through Chinese boycotts of Australian wine, beef and tourism and education sectors.

Meanwhile, as the Group of Seven (G7) countries, India and others seek a review and reform of WHO, China's decision to give an additional $30 million to the agency appears aimed at frustrating such calls. International rules require countries to notify WHO of "a public health emergency of international concern within 24 hours of assessment". China's failure to do so has led to calls for introducing WHO inspectors with the power to enter a country to probe a disease outbreak in the manner of weapons inspectors.

Make no mistake: Money alone can neither aid China's strategy to deflect blame for the current crisis nor help defuse the increasing global backlash against it. Calls are growing louder across the world to hold China publicly accountable for the pandemic's mounting human and economic toll. The only way China can silence such calls and begin to repair the serious damage to its image is through an independent international inquiry.

If it blocks such a probe, China will pay enormous costs - not as reparations but by compelling other major economies to restructure their relationships with it, a process that could ultimately end its status as the global hub of vital supply chains. China's mercantilist expansionism has already led to new regulations in the European Union, Australia, Germany, Spain and Italy. But India's recent new rule mandating prior scrutiny of Chinese investment in any form is the first of its kind. Another major recent move is by Japan, which has earmarked $2.2 billion to help Japanese firms shift manufacturing out of China.

If China refuses to come clean, important countries are likely to start economically distancing themselves from it, through new tariffs, non-tariff barriers, relocation of manufacturing and other policy moves. Eventually, this could undermine the communist party's monopoly on power in China.

Brahma Chellaney is a geostrategist

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 20 -- Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has named 36-year-old Indo-Canadian Maninder Sidhu, a first-term Parliament member, as a parliamentary secretary to international development minister Karina Gould.

Sidhu, who was elected to the House of Commons for the first time in October 2019 from Brampton East, tweeted his appreciation for the appointment, saying he was "excited and truly honoured." He replaces another Indo-Canadian lawmaker Kamal Khera, who resigned in January after it emerged that she had travelled to the US during the Christmas break even as the government warned against non-essential travel outside the country due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

Sidhu, a Sikh with roots in Punjab, is an alumnus of the University of Waterloo. He is married and has two daughters. Sidhu ran a customs brokerage business before he entered politics.

Sidhu's appointment was part of a reshuffle that has led to the induction of new appointees and changes in some portfolios of the 38 parliamentary secretaries. There are also three Indo-Canadians in Trudeau's Cabinet including defence minister Harjit Sajjan. Anita Anand is the public services and procurement minister. Bardish Chagger is the diversity and inclusion and youth minister.

"Parliamentary secretaries support ministers to deliver real, positive results for Canadians. I am confident that this team's dedication, skills, and experience will help us continue to fight the global COVID-19 pandemic, keep Canadians safe and supported, and build a more resilient Canada for everyone," Trudeau said in a statement.

Parliamentary secretaries form a link between ministries and Parliament. They also help with legislative business.

Arif Virani is the other Indian-origin parliamentary secretary in the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 1 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Delhi AQI rises to 339, continues to be in very poor zone

Air quality in Delhi remained in the very poor zone on Tuesday morning with the air quality index (AQI) at 339. The average AQI on Monday was 318. Government agencies have forecast a deterioration in air quality over this week due to dipping temperature and reduction in wind speed. Read more

India performed 140 million Covid-19 tests in past 11 months, says government data

India has conducted 140 million tests to detect Coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in the past 11 months, of which 10 million tests were performed during the past 10 days alone, government data shows. The first test to diagnose Covid-19 in the country was performed on January 23, and on Monday, India performed about 900,000 tests in a single day. Read more

2nd phase of Jammu and Kashmir's DDC elections today

Polling for 43 constituencies in the second phase of election for District Development Council (DDC) in Jammu and Kashmir will be held on Tuesday. The contest is between the newly launched People's Alliance for Gupkar Declaration, the BJP and the Apni Party floated by former finance minister Altaf Bukhari. Read more

Fake news on Covid-19 vaccines a 'second pandemic,' says Red Cross chief

The head of the world's largest humanitarian network is urging governments and institutions to combat "fake news" about Covid-19 vaccines which has become "a second pandemic" and start building trust in communities around the world about the critical importance of vaccinating people. Read more

A fast bowler won't rectify Kuldeep and Chahal's problems, India need a spin bowling coach: Maninder Singh -Exclusive

A little more than six months after starting their India journey together, wrist spinners - albeit of different kinds - Kuldeep Yadav and Yuzvendra Chahal sneered 32 wickets between them to help India blank South Africa 6-0 in their own backyard in an ODI series in 2018. Read more

Audi to get real dirty, announces entry in Dakar Rally with electric SUV

Audi has announced it is ready to kick up a dust storm, quite literally, and will take part in the famous - and challenging - Dakar Rally in 2022 for the first time. The company states that it will compete with an 'innovative prototype' and that it will make use of a high-voltage battery. Read more

Malaika Arora shows how to improve your posture, amid work from home, with Yoga's Dhanurasana

The backbending or bow pose exercise of Yoga increases and regains spinal strength and flexibility and this week, Malaika Arora was seen teaching fitness enthusiasts how to do that with Dhanurasana to improve your posture amid work from home. Read more

Why this man is roaming around Delhi with a mask attached to a can filled with a plant

A few people from different parts of the country have stepped up to do their part to spread awareness among the masses about the increasing pollution. Among them is Pankaj Kumar from Bihar. An Instagram video of Kumar in which he is seen wearing a mask attached to an old water can filled with plants has grabbed the attention of netizens. Read more

Covid | 'Need to find virus origin, don't politicise probe': WHO chief Tedros

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 5 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

'Govt without a heart': Shivakumar stings Yediyurappa on Covid-19 response

In what is being seen as an astute political move by Congress, offering to pay fare of the migrants travelling across the country back to their native states, part of the credit should go to its Karnataka unit which made this initial offer to the state government locally on Saturday. Read more.

'Can't take risks': Kerala CM on flying back Indians without Covid-19 test

Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Tuesday said the Centre's plan to bring back Indians stranded abroad without testing them for coronavirus was fraught with risks. Read more.

Flights for stranded Indians to cost Rs 1 lakh from US, Rs 16k from UAE

Around 15,000 stranded Indians are expected to be flown back to India in 64 flights in the first week of the government's mammoth exercise to evacuate stranded Indians from abroad, union civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said Tuesday. Read more.

In Centre's plan to get Indians abroad home, Aarogya Setu app must

As Centre plans mega evacuation plan, beginning Thursday, for Indians abroad, the ministry of home affairs issued a list of instructions which included a mandatory download of the Aarogya Setu app. Read more.

China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus? Read more.

Anup Jalota denies marrying Jasleen Matharu, says she is like his 'daughter' and he 'will do her kanyadaan'

In an interview with Bollywood Hungama, Anup said, "Not Again! My marriage to Jasleen is news to me. I and her father are looking for a suitable match for her. I have suggested to them a Punjabi boy living in Canada. Nothing is fixed yet." Read more.

Met Gala 2020: Priyanka Chopra's princess dreams, Kylie Jenner's ripped dress at the red carpet

The first Monday of May is a big day in fashion, this is the day when the Met Gala takes place, and the biggest names in fashion and entertainment strut their stuff on the iconic red carpet. However, this year, on account of the coronavirus pandemic, the Gala was cancelled. Read more.

Fred the doggo must be made for customer service because of the cute looks he is serving

We all know that the first day at a new job can be a little nerve-racking. It can be particularly hard if you work in customer service because customers predominantly only require service when they're unhappy with something. Read more.

Does coronavirus affect children differently?

Covid-19, the disease caused by the Sars-Cov-2 coronavirus appears to have largely spared young children. Most hospitalisations and deaths are among older adults and those with chronic illnesses, like diabetes, asthma, hypertension etc. However, clinicians in the US and Europe are investigating the possible link of a deadly inflammatory syndrome with coronavirus disease. Watch here.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 7 -- French President Emmanuel Macron dialled Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday evening to discuss a wide range of issues including the digital and strategic autonomy, deepening defence cooperation, Indo-Pacific, and the security environment in Asia and the West Asia.

PM Modi conveyed to President Macron his condolences for the terror attacks in France, and reiterated India's full support to France in the fight against terrorism, extremism and radicalism, the Prime Minister's Office said. The leaders also discussed other bilateral, regional and global issues of mutual interest including improving affordability and accessibility of Covid-19 vaccines, post-Covid economic recovery and climate change.

People familiar with the matter said the two leaders are learnt to have decided to set up a hotline between the two leaders. The move comes against the backdrop of France's greater focus on the Indian Ocean and China's aggressive posture across the region that had prompted President Macron to appoint one of France's most senior diplomats, Christophe Penot, as the country's first special envoy for the Indo-Pacific in October this year.

But French President Macron has been vocal about countering China for much longer. Two years ago, he was among the first to call for building a strategic alliance between India, France and Australia that could respond to challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and the growing assertiveness of China. This initiative had taken baby steps in September when the top diplomats of the three countries had their first meeting over a video conference.

Like India, France believes in both strategic autonomy and plural democracy and is concerned about Chinese moves in the South China Sea and the French territory spread across dozens of islands in the South Pacific, New Caledonia, an official said.

India and France's strategic partnership dates back to 1998; it was then New Delhi's first. Over the next few decades, the two countries have established a strong institutional mechanism to deepen cooperation in space, counter-terrorism, maritime security, as well as dialogues among defence chiefs and National Security Advisers.

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval had spoken to his French counterpart last month and the strategic dialogue between the two countries is expected to take place in January 2021.

The partnership between the two countries has particularly deepened over the last few years, coinciding with PM Modi's decision to buy Rafale fighter jets. The two countries are also exploring joint manufacture of fighter jet engines and ancillaries in India that can power India's indigeous LCA Mark II with a higher engine thrust.

That Paris had recently asked Qatar, which had also bought the Rafale fighter jet, not to allow Pakistan-origin technicians to work with the plane is indicative of the sensitivity that France has demonstrated to New Delhi's security concerns, an official said.

New Delhi had reciprocated such gestures of the French leadership in October this year when it issued a sharply-worded statement condemning personal attacks targeting the French President from some Islamic countries such as Turkey and Pakistan for his stand on Islam and radicalism.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 7 -- The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) on Sunday said it is all geared up to resume services, and meet all challenges including crowd management, after a five-and-a-half-month-long hiatus from Monday.

With transport experts expressing concerns over the issue of crowding inside the network and outside the transit stations, DMRC officials said it has put necessary arrangements in place to maintain social distancing and hygiene, which is crucial to control the spread of Covid-19 infection.

Click here for full Covid-19 coverage

In an interview to HT last week, DMRC chief Mangu Singh had said that crowding is indeed a concern and they will make efforts to "break the peak".

Singh had told HT, "We want to ensure that there is no peak in crowding; that there is an even flow. We want people to support us and plan journeys accordingly because this is the best way to utilise the system. And we will also be able to provide the best service."

The DMRC has issued a detailed advisory for commuters about the dos and don'ts while travelling in Metro in the new normal post-coronavirus pandemic. Anuj Dayal, executive director, corporate communication, DMRC, on Sunday said, "Besides 'break the peak', DMRC appeals to commuters to talk less during travel in the Metro to prevent the possibility of short-range aerosol transmission."

The other concern, raised especially by medical experts, is of strict enforcement of social distancing norms.

Also read: DMRC conducts dry run on Yellow Line, Rapid Metro

With the Metro, which is the transport lifeline of Delhi and NCR, starting its services with reduced capacity -from 360-400 passengers to 50 passengers per coach-experts say crowding at stations and outside is bound to happen. The DMRC has decided that if the train is full or there is a crowd at the station, the train will skip the station.

Experts say crowding is likely on stations which are immediately on the line after the point of origin. "Not many people take the Metro for short distances. The train is bound to be full at the starting point. So, what happens to passengers who will be waiting at the third or the fourth station?" said Mukti Advani, principal scientist, transportation planning division, CSIR-Central Road Research Institute.

She added, "For this, the DMRC can spread out the starting point, that is the trains can start from multiple stations so that those on station falling in the middle of the corridor are also able to travel without waiting for too long."

DMRC officials say that a plan has been worked out to avoid such a situation. Dayal said, "To prevent crowding in trains/stations, we may have to opt for starting certain empty trains from terminal stations or short loop some trains to manage the crowded zones on a particular route/section."

He added, "This dynamic regulation of train movement will be based on the ground situation at given hours and one may have to skip a train or two, leading to extra time in completing the travel."

The measures planned by DMRC for crowd management inside the network, experts say, might result in congestion outside the station. While the situation inside might be good, transport expert Sewa Ram said, there could be chaos on the streets outside the station. "They should set up queuing areas outside the station so that people can wait in case the station gates have to be closed due to rush inside," said Sewa Ram, professor at School of Planning and Architecture.

To begin with, the DMRC is starting its service on the Yellow line (HUDA City Centre to Samayapur Badli) and subsequently open another line. By September 12, the entire network spread over 389 kms will be operational.

This is when the DMRC's crowd management plan will be put to test, especially at interchange stations. Transport experts say that it is impossible to know how many people at any given point of time will exit the trains at interchange stations.

"To manage crowds at interchange stations will be a real challenge. For this, the DMRC can work out a service plan in which it can ensure that all trains might not stop at a particular interchange station. Also, the DMRC should open all the Automated Fare Collection gates," said Amit Bhatt, director transport, WRI India.

With DMRC increasing the dwelling time at each station by 10-20 seconds for boarding-deboarding and extra time to sanitise the trains at the terminal stations, the frequency of trains is likely to drop. Bhatt said, "The 5-7minute gap between trains can be counter-productive as it will result in crowding at stations. Efforts should be to increase the frequency of trains."

The DMRC has decided to push all the trains into service to minimise the frequency gap.

Starting its services after a long hiatus, DMRC has advised passengers to keep 15-30 minutes of extra time while planning their journey.

While the medical fraternity is divided over the decision to resume metro services, those in favour say that the DMRC should ensure strict enforcement of the safety norms needed to contain the spread of the infection.

Dr Jugal Kishore, head of community medicine at Safdarjung Hospital, said, "The most important thing is that people don't take off their masks inside the trains. They should have one person deployed on trains to check that people wear masks properly. I personally feel that there is no need to leave a gap of one seat as long as people wear a mask. Those standing inside the trains will be touching multiple points and should be very careful."

Smita Nair, a resident of Janakpuri, said that the opening of Metro services will come as a huge relief to her, especially because of the nature of her work that requires her to regularly go to office.

"I am an IT professional and I work in Noida. Our team was called back from June and ever since, I either have to pay a hefty amount for cab rides or depend on my husband to drop me. Metro station is barely two kilometres from my place and commuting now will be extremely convenient. It was inconsiderate for the government to have allowed offices to call its employees but not allow the most used transport mode in the city," she said.

Vighnesh Jha, secretary general, Federation of Richshaw Pullers' Association of India, said the resumption of Metro services will boost the earnings of cycle rickshaw pullers by 40-50%. "With several commercial activities being allowed in June, cycle rickshaw pullers' income had revived. But it wasn't sufficient. Now, with opening of Metro, things will change for better. It will result in an additional 40-50% increase in their earnings, as a large number of Metro commuters prefer to take rickshaw for short distance travel."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 7 -- India fast-tracked delivery of the last batch of the US-built Apache attack choppers after the May 5 stand-off with China in eastern Ladakh to be able to ramp up their presence along the Line of Actual Control (LAC). The last batch of five choppers arrived in India last month after the central government exempted Boeing contractors from the mandatory quarantine rules notified due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The team assembled the five choppers that had been shipped to India and quickly had them flown to the Pathankot air base after being flight-tested for deployment in Ladakh.

"The military wanted to be prepared for the worst-case scenario. And it was," a top government official told Hindustan Times on Monday.

India had last year inducted 17 of the 22 AH-64 Apache choppers ordered from Boeing that can track 128 targets, prioritise threats and engage 16 targets. The remaining five were to arrive in India by the end of March. But the plan to ship the choppers had to be halted due to the nationwide lockdown enforced in India due to the coronavirus pandemic.

India was taken by surprise in early May when China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) soldiers adopted an aggressive posture, setting up a stand-off at four locations in eastern Ladakh. As it became clear that the stand-off was probably directed from Beijing, New Delhi started preparing for all eventualities.

Over the next few days and weeks, the air force started moving its assets such as the Apache choppers and the 15 heavy-lift Chinook choppers to airbases closer to Jammu and Kashmir.

Simultaneously, it also reached out to Boeing to indicate its ability to receive the shipment. Special visas were arranged and formal orders exempting the contractors who would re-assemble the choppers from the mandatory quarantine rule was issued on grounds of national security. By 1 June, the Home Ministry allowed visas to foreign technical specialists travelling for installation, repair and maintenance of foreign-origin equipment.

The induction of the two aerial platforms acquired in a $3 billion deal is a game-changer for the Indian military which otherwise relied on Russian Mi-17 medium lift helicopters for rapid induction of forces and an obsolete squadron of Russian Mi-26 helicopters.

The Chinook helped the military transport troops, artillery, equipment, and fuel to forward bases. The AH-64 Apache choppers, described by some as the Ferrari of attack choppers, was one of India's primary counter to Chinese threats on the ground and in the air. Because they have an amazing maneuverability, the Apache is designed to operate in "nap-of-the-earth" flight - that is flying at an extremely low level and using terrain and vegetation to hide from hostile elements.

Counted among the deadliest flying machines, the Apache has a 30mm cannon under the nose that can fire 1,200 rounds in less than two minutes. It can also carry 80 rockets besides Hellfire missiles that can identify, track and hunt targets in the dark.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 4 -- Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co. reported sales that fell short of Wall Street estimates, signaling weaker corporate demand for servers amid macroeconomic concerns and the ongoing shift to cloud computing.

Fiscal first-quarter sales declined 8% to $6.95 billion, the San Jose, California-based company said Tuesday in a statement. It marked the fifth consecutive quarter of year-over-year sales declines. Analysts, on average, expected $7.21 billion, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

Profit, excluding some items, was 44 cents a share, matching analysts' projections. The company also maintained its fiscal 2020 outlook for adjusted profit at $1.78 to $1.94 a share.

HPE Chief Executive Officer Antonio Neri has sought to fuel growth at the hardware company by moving to a subscription business model and investing in more sophisticated server technologies. The strategy may take years to pay off. In the meantime, HPE is exposed to China, the origin of the coronavirus, through its supply chain and its H3C server joint venture in the country. The company opted not to give a profit forecast for the current period due to uncertainty over the effects of the outbreak.

HPE's server sales decreased 16% to $3.01 billion in the period ended Jan. 31 because of macro uncertainty, supply chain disruption and a factory consolidation, Neri said in an interview. Businesses have reduced the pace of purchases for major information technology products amid slowing global economic growth.

ALSO READ: Xerox tries to woo HP after raising takeover offer

"I'm disappointed in the revenue performance for the business," Neri said. "(But) we see continued momentum in key strategic areas," including big-data storage, supercomputer sales and edge computing, which lets clients process information closer to the source rather than at far-away data centers, he added.

On a conference call with analysts, Chief Financial Officer Tarek Robbiati said HPE wouldn't produce any revenue growth this year, citing the supply chain disruptions. The company had said in November that it expected 1% to 3% sales growth in the next three years.

HPE's shares declined about 6% in extended trading after closing at $12.59 Tuesday in New York. The stock has dropped 23% in the past 12 months, including a 12% fall in the last two weeks as the broader market plunged on coronavirus concerns.

The server maker cut its forecast of fiscal 2020 free cash flow to $1.6 billion to $1.8 billion, from a range of $1.9 billion to $2.1 billion, because of supply-chain disruptions due to the virus. HPE still expects to return 50% to 75% of free cash flow to investors, Neri said.

The outbreak of the virus, known as Covid-19, has triggered companies to cut their financial outlooks and cancel events such as conferences. HPE said late Monday that it would cancel almost all events that require travel through April, except for a conference in London.

"The situation is very fluid in the supply chain," Neri said. "We can move products around. We are doing that as much as we can."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday that all available evidence suggests the coronavirus originated in animals in China late last year and was not manipulated or produced in a laboratory.

US President Donald Trump said last week that his government was trying to determine whether the virus emanated from a lab in Wuhan, where the coronavirus emerged in December.

"All available evidence suggests the virus has an animal origin and is not manipulated or constructed in a lab or somewhere else," WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib told a Geneva news briefing. "It is probable, likely, that the virus is of animal origin."

It was not clear, Chaib added, how the virus had jumped the species barrier to humans but there had "certainly" been an intermediate animal host. "It most likely has its ecological reservoir in bats but how the virus came from bats to humans is still to be seen and discovered."

She did not respond to a request to elaborate on whether it was possible the virus may have inadvertently escaped from a lab. The Wuhan Institute of Virology has dismissed rumours both that it synthesised the virus or allowed it to escape.

Also on Tuesday, as global cases crossed 2.5 million, the WHO warned that lifting of lockdowns must be gradual, and if restrictions were to be relaxed too soon, there would be a resurgence of infections. Takeshi Kasai, WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, said, "At least until a vaccine, or a very effective treatment, is found, this process will need to become our new normal."

In Myanmar, a car used by the WHO to transport swab samples to be tested for the virus was attacked, killing the driver and wounding a passenger.

In Germany, Bavaria cancelled the Oktoberfest for the first time since WWII. The event takes place from September to October.

Spain unveiled a series of measures aimed at helping prostitutes and victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation survive the country's lockdown.

In the UK, as PM Boris Johnson said he would speak with US President Donald Trump and hold an audience with the queen this week, scientists at the University of Cambridge found a link between living in an area of England with high levels of air pollution and the severity of Covid-19. Researchers at the university's MRC Toxicology Unit analysed data on Covid-19 cases and deaths against the levels of three major air pollutants, collected between the years 2018 and 2019.

Meanwhile, watchdog Reporters Without Borders claimed China has "extensively" censored information on the outbreak, saying the impact of it has been experienced globally.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 29 -- Pursuing a strategy to 'eliminate' coronavirus, Scotland first minister Nicola Sturgeon on Monday reported in Edinburgh that there was no new death for the fourth day in a row, while UK-wide figures released in London showed another low day-rise of 25 deaths.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson is due to announce plans for a multi-billion-pound economic stimulus on Tuesday to recover from what he called a 'disaster' cased by the pandemic. Moves to ease lockdown and re-open economy from July 4 include abolishing quarantine curbs for some air passengers.

Sturgeon said: "I can report today, that an additional 5 positive cases were confirmed yesterday - which takes the total now in Scotland to 18,241 confirmed cases.A total of 10 people last night were in intensive care with confirmed or suspected Covid".

"And in the past 24 hours, I'm pleased to report that no deaths were registered of a patient confirmed through a test as having Covid-19 - the total number of deaths in Scotland, under that measurement, therefore remains at 2,482".

"This is the fourth day in a row when no deaths of patients confirmed through a test have been recorded in Scotland", she added.

According to Devi Sridhar, professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh and an adviser to the Sturgeon government, Scotland is on course to be virus-free by the end July if the rate of decrease of new cases is maintained.

"But we are going to see little bumps, so it's a question of how small can you keep those bumps. July is a crucial month for people to follow the rules and guidance, and be sensible because the virus is still around and can still increase quite fast within days and weeks," she told BBC.

According to the Department of Health, the UK-wide figures were: 43,575 deaths (25 in last 24 hours) and 311,965 cases (day rise of 815 cases). Re-opening of the economy prompted by the dwindling figures is expected to happen from July 4 along with local lockdowns based on new spreads.

One such local lockdown is being considered in the east Midlands town of Leicester, which has a large population of Indian origin. Current restrictions are to continue there for two more weeks, unlike the rest of England that will largely re-open later this week.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 21 -- The Union health ministry has issued new guidelines for international arrival amid the spread of mutant variants of Covid-19 and they will come into effect from Monday. The rules will come into effect from 11:59pm on Monday and will be in force till further orders. "There is increasing evidence that the mutant variants of SARS-CoV-2 are in circulation in many countries and these mutant variants are driving the pandemic in their country of origin. So far, the three SARS-CoV-2 variants in circulation viz-a-viz (i) UK variant (ii) South Africa variant and (iii) Brazil variant, have been detected in 86, 44 and 15 countries, respectively," the health ministry said in its updated guidelines.

Here are the guidelines for international arrivals which will be effective from February 22:

1. All international travellers will have to submit a self-declaration form (SDF) for Covid on the online Air Suvidha portal before their scheduled travel.

2. Travellers will also have to upload a negative Covid-19 RT-PCR report on the online portal of New Delhi airport, www.newdelhiairport.in, with a declaration form stating the authenticity of the report.

3. The test must be conducted 72 hours prior to the journey.

4. Only asymptomatic travellers will be allowed to board after the thermal screening.

5. These rules shall also apply to international travellers arriving through seaports/land ports but online registration policy cannot be availed by them.

6. International travellers arriving from/transiting through the United Kingdom, Brazil and South Africa (during the past 14 days) will have to be segregated by the airline in-flight.

7. Self-paid confirmatory molecular tests on arrival will be mandatory for all travellers arriving from/transiting through flights originating in the United Kingdom, Europe or the Middle East.

8. Such travellers will give their samples to the designated area before exiting the airport. If the test report is negative, they will be advised to self-monitor their health for 14 days. If the test report is positive, they will undergo treatment as per standard health protocol.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 16 -- With reports emerging that the first case of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) was detected in China as early as November 17, 2019, Beijing should reveal more information about the virus behind the global health scourge. The world economy has come to a virtual standstill, and people are forced to live in isolation, largely because one of the most powerful countries in the world either chose to be in denial or actively muzzled information in the initial stages.

As some confusion lingers over the exact nature and origin of the disease, a Chinese government spokesperson last week appeared to blame the US military for the spread of contagion, immediately attracting diplomatic retaliation from the US State Department. Though many in China and other places have now said the spokesperson spoke out of turn, official communiques in the country are known to have a sanction from the Xi Jinping regime.

In any case, for prevention, the world needs to know the exact source of this contagion. The total number of affected are heading towards 165,000 with more than 6,000 deaths, and the virus has spread to large communities in Italy, France, Germany and Spain.

The Chinese response to coronavirus was in two phases. First, it appeared to live in denial despite the numbers mounting in Hubei province late last year, and clamped down on contrarian voices.

This may have led to people from other countries getting affected and carrying the contagion to their countries of origin. The second phase was after China realised that it could not control the spread, and so it opened data and specifics of the disease to the world while locking down its own communities.

Professor K VijayRaghavan, principal scientific adviser to Narendra Modi government, told HT that the world has learnt two things from the Chinese responses to the virus. "Acknowledgement of a potential problem is best done speedily. China could, perhaps, have acted better, earlier. Second, act speedily to identify, test, contain, and manage. Hubei and China have done well here. India has analysed this and scenarios from other countries such as Iran, Italy, US and UK etc," he said.

The former head of National Centre for Biological Sciences added: " The health ministry, ICMR and the Central and state governments in general have been constantly analysing the global and national situation, and taking decisions based on best science and public health practices. This can help "flatten" the intensity over the time, allowing systems to effectively deliver to most needy and vulnerable, he said.

Given India's weak health infrastructure, PM Modi, with foreign minister S Jaishankar and the para-military chiefs, have been involved in the health ministry's response right from the start.

According to top experts, while the cure of the disease may be found in about a year, the best way out is to flatten its impact by controlling community spreads through social distancing. Virologists all over the world are meanwhile trying to tweak existing anti-viral drugs to see if they can control the coronavirus. Others are trying to develop new drugs so that they can scale up the production much faster, if proven successful.

We must remember that the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) first appeared in November 2002 in the Guangdong province of southern China, affecting 8,000 people, with the source again linked to transmission from animals. Two decades later, it's time Beijing answers some hard questions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 16 -- India's merchandise exports slumped by a record 34.6% in March while imports declined 28.7% as countries sealed their borders to combat the covid-19 outbreak.

In February, merchandise exports had rebounded 2.9% after falling for six months in a row.

Of the 30 major items each in India's export and import baskets, 29 saw a contraction in March, signalling the severity of the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on the global demand and trade.

Only iron ore exports (58.4%) and import of transport equipment (11.9%) recorded a growth during the month.

Engineering Export Promotion Council chairman Ravi Sehgal said the sharp drop in merchandise exports in March was not a surprise with major economies of the world in a state of lockdown.

"April would be worse as international trade excepting medicine and essential supplies has come to a near halt. Exporters are facing a question of survival," he added.

During FY20, India's exports contracted 4.8% to $314.3 billion while imports shrank 9.1% to $467.2 billion, leaving a trade deficit of $152.9 billion.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) has projected global merchandise trade to plummet between 13% and 32% in 2020 due to the covid-19 outbreak.

"The wide range of possibilities for the predicted decline is explained by the unprecedented nature of this health crisis and the uncertainty around its precise economic impact. But WTO economists believe the decline will likely exceed the trade slump brought on by the global financial crisis of 2008-09," it said last week.

Sharad Kumar Saraf, president, Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO), said with cancellation of over 50% of orders, gloomy forecast, major job losses and rising bad loans amongst exporting units, the government should immediately announce a relief package for exporters as any further delay would be catastrophic.

"The huge support given by various economies to exports will put Indian exports in further difficulties as when the size of the cake reduces, competition intensifies with focus on prices," he added.

World Bank in its latest South Asia Economic Focus said reduced external demand for manufacturing as well as services exports will impact India.

"One of India's largest exports is business and professional services, consisting of business process outsourcing (BPO) such as technical support and call centers largely based in India. This sector is severely affected," the Bank noted.

" Lockdown measures, both in origin and destination countries, have forced offices to close as their infrastructure is heavily geared towards in-office working. There is also a concern that external demand will drop precipitously even beyond the lockdown period, as clients cut costs," it said in the report. "This situation will certainly mean fewer new projects, as well as the scaling back of existing ones," World Bank added.

However, the Bank said India's balance of payments position is expected to improve.

"Weak domestic demand, low oil prices and covid-19-related disruptions are expected to narrow the current account deficit to 0.2% in FY21 and to keep it low in the following years," it added.

India's current account deficit declined to 1% of GDP during the first three quarters of FY20 compared to 2.6% during the same period in FY19 due to reduction in the trade deficit and an improvement in net services exports.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 31 -- New Delhi

Railway minister Piyush Goyal on Sunday rejected allegations that special trains meant to ferry migrant workers back home were mismanaged and some of them took wrong routes and said every single train reached its desired destination, with only a fraction diverted, and in a five-day period that saw a rush of trains headed for East Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, to avert congestion.

Several Opposition leaders, including Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, have alleged that the trains, labelled "Shramik Specials", were running late by days. Others have alleged that a large number of trains was diverted. According to data collected by the Railway Protection Force and reported by HT, around 80 travellers on these have died, although, to be sure, some of them, according to the force's own report, had pre-existing health conditions.

The railway minister said the allegations on widespread delays and diversions were "completely baseless and wrong". "Almost all trains up to May 19 were before time... (So far) only 71 out of 4,040, which is 1.75% trains, were diverted. Charges like 'kahin se nikle, kahin chale gaye' (they left from somewhere and went off somewhere else), all that is nonsense. Every train reached the destination, only took a slightly longer route to ease the congestion and keep the flow of trains running. Otherwise, I would have to stop the operation," Goyal told Hindustan Times in an interview. It was only between May 20 and May 25 that a rush caused a congestion and resulted in diversions and delays, he added. And no train has taken seven or nine days to reach its destination as is being claimed, the minister said.

So far, 4,040 Shramik Specials - necessitated by a national lockdown brought on by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) - have carried more than 5.4 million passengers. The minister said almost 80% of the trains were travelling to Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, leading to congestion on the limited routes. And stations which received around three trains a day were being asked to deal with many more.

On being asked why the special trains for migrant workers began operating only by May 1, Goyal said: "The purpose of the lockdown was containment and the idea was that we have to break the coronavirus chain and, therefore, starting the trains any earlier would have been counterproductive. The idea was that all migrants should stay where they are... We also requested states to ensure that they were well-looked after."

"It needed that five weeks at least to break that coronavirus chain but then, we found that people are getting very anxious... We decided on May 1 to start this and we continued to ramp it up," the Union minister said.

In March, the Centre halted all passenger rail operations in an attempt to stop the spread of Covid-19. It later announced that special trains for migrant workers and some other passengers would be allowed, but only with strict social distancing norms and other health care protocols.

The Indian Railways said on Sunday it will begin operation of 200 special trains from June 1 and more than 145,000 passengers will travel on the first day as the lockdown measures are relaxed over the coming weeks. These services will be in addition to Shramik Special trains, and other special trains being run since May 12.

Goyal said that the reasons for delays of most of the special migrant trains were not the journeys, but "at the end". "There were only seven places where maximum trains were headed... Trains were just bunched up. Local administrations were taking precautions, taking three hours for each train or two hours for each train to disembark. Fewer platforms were there. So the bunching and delay happened because of the congestion at the end..."

He said beyond a point, states demanded more stoppages for the trains that were initially origin-to-destination. They couldn't bring people to the stations in time, the minister said, adding that this caused bunching up. "To ease that congestion, we took a considered view and diverted 71 trains."

These trains, he said, took a little longer to reach their destinations but that they took "seven to nine days" was a gross exaggeration. "No train took seven or nine days," he said.

"We never refused a single train. On the contrary, states could not use many of the trains that we provided. Nearly 250 Shramik trains which were provided had to remain unused because the states could not get the passengers in time. Maharashtra alone was over a 100 trains which could not be used. It's a very unfortunate situation," he said.

The minister added that despite the diversions, and eateries being closed due to the lockdown, the railways provided food and water, five-six times in some journeys, in the diverted trains. He said 11.9 million meals were provided by the railways in addition to 5.4 million of them provided by the states at the point of embarkation. The railways also provided 15 million water bottles other than those provided by the states. And the states also provided food when the migrants disembarked, Goyal pointed out.

On the issue of deaths - there have been about 80 deaths on board the Shramik Special trains between May 9 and May 27, according to data from the Railway Protection Force - Goyal said they found that in all cases, there were existing ailments. "Some of the stories are sought to be portrayed as if people died of hunger or starvation. I can say with confidence that no one died of hunger," he said, adding that in long-distance travel, some deaths occur even in normal operations.

He added that Railways has been transparent about the deaths, and insisted on compiling a list of them, and finding out causes even as news reports suggested that "eight or nine migrants" died on trains. The real number has emerged only because of this, he suggested.

"We are very concerned... My heart goes out to the families (of those who have died)," the minister said.

Goyal said some of the deaths could have been prevented with better medical screening but the doctors who were dealing with a heavy flow of people could not be blamed.

He added that 36 pregnant women who were expecting to deliver were allowed to travel in the trains and they went into labour in the course of the journey. "They should have never have been on the train."

Praising the efforts of railway employees across the country, the minister said: "In such adverse circumstances, moving 54 lakh people, with all the associated health protocols, is certainly not an ordinary operation. And in the extraordinary circumstances, I will say that the railway employees put in their heart and soul... They are as much front-line corona warriors..."

The minister said the special trains will run for as long as there is a demand from states. "We have been asking states... The current demand today is 250-300 trains. Maximum demand is now to West Bengal and to Odisha."

But the flow is also starting in the reverse direction, he suggested.

"The good news is that a lot of people are travelling back from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Trains are getting booked in the reverse direction also."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 10 -- Srikant M Datar, an alumnus of Mumbai University and IIM Ahmedabad, has been named the new head of Harvard University's business school.

Datar will succeed Nitin Nohria, another Indian American, and will be the second dean of Indian origin in Harvard University, with Rakesh Khurana, who heads Harvard College, one of the university's 10 graduate and professional schools.

"Srikant Datar is an innovative educator, a distinguished scholar, and a deeply experienced academic leader," Harvard University President Lawrence S Bacow said announcing the appointment on Friday, as cited in a post on the Harvard Business School (HBS) website. "He is a leading thinker about the future of business education, and he has recently played an essential role in HBS's creative response to the challenges posed by the Covid-19 pandemic."

Datar will be the 11th dean of the prestigious school that is counted amongst the top business schools in the US and the world. He joined the HBS faculty in 1996 after teaching stints at Carnegie Mellon and Stanford, where he had also studied for his two masters in statistics and economics and PhD. He started higher education at the University of Mumbai (it was then called the University of Bombay) and the next stop was the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.

"I am equal measures humbled and honored to take on this role," said Datar. "Harvard Business School is an institution with a remarkable legacy of impact in research, education, and practice. Yet the events of the past year have hastened our passage to an unforeseen future. I look forward to working with colleagues and friends of the School - including throughout Harvard, in our Boston community, and around the world - to realize our mission in what undoubtedly will be an exciting new era."

Nohria, who also studied in Mumbai - the Indian Institute of Technology, had been HBS dean for more than 10 years, starting in 2010. Later that year in 2010, Ratan Tata, an HBS alumnus, had donated $50 million to the school - the largest gift in the school's history - for a residential and academic building which is called Tata Hall. Nohria had announced plans to step down last November but stayed on in view of the pandemic.

"Srikant is an outstanding choice as Harvard Business School's next dean," Nohria said, adding, "He has thought deeply about the challenges and opportunities facing management education, and has a proven record of collaboration, innovation, and leadership - not only within HBS, but across Harvard and at other organizations."

The HBS post called Datar "a prominent thinker and innovator" on the future of business education. He co-authored "Rethinking the MBA: Business Education at a Crossroads", and has developed new courses on "Developing Mindsets for Innovative Problem Solving" and "Managing with Data Science".

Datar started by focusing on cost management and control, strategy implementation, and governance, the HBS post added, and has turned in recent years to such areas as "design thinking and innovative problem solving, as well as machine learning and artificial intelligence".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 1 -- Canada will keep its borders sealed till at least the end of July as the government extended its ban on travellers due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The prohibition was originally announced on March 16 and the only exemption is for those coming from the United States for "essential" reasons.

The announcement came from a spokesperson for the Canada Border Services Agency, who stated that the agency has "implemented travel restrictions across all ports of entry in all modes of transportation - land, sea, air and rail. All travel of an optional or discretionary nature, including tourism and recreation, is covered by these measures."

Exceptions have also been made during this period - some repatriation flights took stranded Indians back home - but those are facilitated at a government-to-government level.

The ban instituted in March had been announced by Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and he had recently indicated it would remain in place, as he said during a media briefing that the federal government was "going to be very, very careful about when and how we start reopening international borders."

Non-essential travel between Canada and the United States remains paused till later in the month, while stringent quarantine measures applied to the few which allowed entry into the country have also been extended till the end of July.

Travellers like Canadians of Indian origin, permanent residents or immediate family members will have to confirm they have a suitable place to self-isolate for a mandatory 14-day period, otherwise they may be placed in a government-approved facility.

This announcement came even as the European Union announced that similar travel restrictions were being lifted for citizens of 14 nations, including Canada. However, it does not appear that Canada will immediately reciprocate by opening up travel to the country for EU residents.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 30 -- A group of 14 countries including the US, Britain, Japan, Australia and Canada have expressed "shared concerns" with a WHO-backed study on the origins of the Covid-19 outbreak in China and said they supported a "independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence" of the pandemic.

They also said the report was "significantly delayed" and added that it "lacked access to complete, original data and samples", pointing to a lack of cooperation and transparency from China, with naming it.

They did not, however, directly reject the report and said they remained committed to working with the World Health Organization.

"Together, we support a transparent and independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence, of the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic," the 14 countries said in a joint statement.

The countries are Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, South Korea, Slovenia, Britain and the US.

"In this regard, we join in expressing shared concerns regarding the recent WHO-convened study in China, while at the same time reinforcing the importance of working together towards the development and use of a swift, effective, transparent, science-based and independent process for international evaluations of such outbreaks of unknown origin in the future," they added.

The report released earlier on Tuesday suggests the deadly virus jumped from bats to other animals to humans. Interestingly, it discounts as "extremely unlikely" the possibility that the coronavirus escaped from a lab - a theory that many experts believe, including Robert Redfield, former US head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Noting the WHO's mission to advance global health security, the 14 countries expressed full support for its staff and experts, saying that "with such an important mandate, it is equally essential that we voice our shared concerns that the international expert study on the source of the Sars-CoV-2 virus was significantly delayed and lacked access to complete, original data and samples".

They added that "there must now be a renewed commitment by the WHO and all member states to access, transparency and timeliness".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- In a case of alleged negligence, a Covid-19 patient at M R Bangur hospital, a designated Covid hospital in Kolkata, was told he had tested negative and discharged on April 26. Later that very night, the patient was told that there had been a mistake, that he had tested positive and readmitted to the hospital. He died on April 28 at the hospital.

The deceased's son has alleged gross negligence, pointing out that after returning home and the assurance of having tested negative, his father had spent time with his granddaughters, one of whom is a seven-month-old baby.

Chief secretary Rajiva Sinha, director of health services Ajay Chakraborty and health secretary Vivek Kumar did not respond to questions sent by text messages and WhatsApp about the incident.

However, at the state secretariat, without mentioning Bangur hospital, chief minister Mamata Banerjee had said on Wednesday that minor clerical mistakes do take place.

"There could be some errors at the ground level. Those must be forgiven for the time being. This is not a deliberate mistake. This is a new task and a new initiative. Some minor mistakes may happen." She, however, did not mention the name of the hospital or patient.

"...There can be a minor error in a notice, a printing mistake. Some are trying to malign the government with these. All that health workers need at this hour is some appreciation," she added.

The man was admitted to the hospital on April 22 as he was suffering from a dry cough.

"On April 25, I received a call from the hospital at night, saying my father had tested negative and would be released. He was discharged on the morning of April 26 and the discharge certificate had 'Covid-19 negative' written on it. However, that very night, hospital authorities telephoned me again, this time to say that there had been a mistake and he was actually positive. They asked me to take him back to the hospital," said the son of the deceased, a resident of Bechu Chatterjee Street in North Kolkata.

The man was readmitted to the hospital on April 27 and died on April 28.

"Who is responsible for this mistake? They killed my father! Also, what if my children now test positive? My father spent time with them after coming back home. My mother is 63. They are all vulnerable," said the deceased's son.

A senior doctor at the hospital said that the error was not due to defective kits, since those had been sent back. It could not be ascertained whether the hospital is using kits of Chinese origin.

"It was a human error. The report came positive but got wrongly listed as negative," said the doctor, who did not want to be identified.

A senior health official, who did not want to be named, said that all members of the family would be tested for novel coronavirus infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 23 -- The world's first museum biennale hosted by the Bihar Museum kicked off in Patna to mark Bihar Diwas celebration on Monday. Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar inaugurating Bihar Diwas with a virtual address on Monday.

The objective of the week-long museum biennale is to explore and promote museum culture across the globe by taking connoisseurs of art to different museums in the country and abroad by showcasing rare and finest artefacts.

Chief Minister Nitish Kumar virtually inaugurated the first edition of biennale.

"The world-class Bihar Museum is the pride of the state and impresses visitors from across the globe. We are also working on renovation and uplift of Patna Museum. We aim to connect both museums through an underground path," he said.

"We planned to host the event last year in offline mode inviting visitors from various countries but that could not materialise due to Covid-19 crisis. The biennale will highlight the features and achievements of Bihar Museum and also spread knowledge about the glorious legacy of the state among the young generation. The association of international museums will lead to historical and cultural exchange of different origin", he added.

Anjani Kumar Singh, the nodal officer of the Bihar Museum and advisor to the chief minister of Bihar, said arrangements are in place for virtual tours during the biennale.

"Visitors can take a virtual tour of 20 museums including 13 from the country and seven from foreign including the USA, Mexico, Italy, Poland and Bangladesh. Keeping varying time zones across the world, we have also made a provision to record and upload the virtual tour on our official website so that viewers can watch them as per their suitable timings. We will also run English subtitles to overcome language barrier," Singh said.

The event also includes two days of international conferences and four days of master class sessions.

Some of the participating Indian museums are Assam State Museum (Guwahati), City Palace Museum (Udaipur), Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya (Bhopal), Kanha Museum of Life and Art (Madhya Pradesh) and Kiran Nadar Museum of Art (New Delhi).

The first edition of Bihar Museum Biennale will conclude on March 28.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 12 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US. The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two smaller state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey, both focused on domestic audiences.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

The reference to 2016 was alleged Russian operations that is believed to have boosted the political campaign of US president Donald Trump, a matter that is presently under investigation. Similar campaigns have been seen in Ukraine where Moscow has been locked in a territorial fight since 2014.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 18 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organization's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organization and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organization for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-co-ordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic" as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 22 -- Two of the world's closest neighbours, India and Nepal, are locked in a cartographic, diplomatic, and to an extent, a political stand-off. The dispute is over the ownership of nearly 330 sq km of land called Kalapani near Nepal's western tri-junction with India and China.

The dispute was triggered in November 2019 when India issued a new map to indicate the changed status of Jammu and Kashmir into a Union Territory. Nepal raised objections because the Kalapani area was shown as being in India. Indian maps have always shown it that way; therefore, there was no change in the map. This was followed by Nepal's objections to the inauguration of a road from Darchula to Lipu Lekh Pass, aimed at strengthening India's defence supply lines as well as facilitating smooth passage for pilgrims to Kailash Mansarovar in Tibet. Nepal said this road is an encroachment on its sovereignty. There have been street protests, parliament has agitated, and now the Nepal government has issued its map showing Kalapani as its territory. New Delhi has reiterated that the area belongs to India, and would be willing to resolve the dispute through diplomatic negotiations after the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) crisis is over.

Nepal's claims are rooted in the Sugauli Treaty signed with the British in March 1816. In this, Nepal renounced "all claims to or connextions (as in original text) with the countries lying to the west of river Kali." (Art.V). The land east of the Kali thus remained with Nepal. This claim is reinforced by some old revenue records and gazette notifications.

India accepts this position, but its claim arises from the ambiguity in the treaty on the identification of the Kali river and its origin. According to India, the river originates from Lipu Lekh and then merges into other streams and tributaries to become the Mahakali. Nepal's contention is that Kali originates from Limpiyadhura and the stream originating from Lipu Lekh is called Lipu Khola. Hence the dispute. The area between these two streams is Kalapani. The treaty underwent some revisions to accommodate Nepal in the Terai (southern part) and was finally endorsed by the British government on November 15, 1860.

The maps issued by the British between 1816 and 1860 generally favour the Nepali position. But, the maps issued afterwards endorse India's position. It is possible that the British administration changed this position through proper surveys or subsequently decided to manipulate this position, to serve its larger strategic and commercial interests in using the Lipu Lekh pass for access to Tibet. Independent India was handed over access to Kalapani and Lipu Lekh by the British.

Blaming India for any encroachment is baseless. It must be borne in mind that much before the British came, or the Gurkha kings annexed Kumaon and Garhwal regions - then surrendered under the Sugauli Treaty - Indians were using this route for the pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar. The route has deep spiritual and civilisational significance for India. China accepted Lipu Lekh as one of the cultural and commercial transit points with India under its 1954 Peaceful Co-Existence Agreement. This was reiterated in 2015 in a joint statement during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to China.

Nepal has endorsed India's position for nearly 150 years. It used Indian maps showing Kalapani, Limpiyadhura and Lipu Lekh in India. Objections to this were raised in the 1980s, but were ignored by the royal regimes. Since 2000, the two surveyed the length of their boundary to resolve outstanding issues, except in two areas, including Kalapani. It is mutually agreed that these issues will be resolved through diplomatic negotiations.

Why then has the Nepal government turned up the heat on the Kalapani issue? Prime Minister KP Oli faces serious internal opposition at the moment, including from within his ruling Nepal Communist Party. This is largely on account of his governance failures and lack of action on combating the pandemic. He has consolidated his nationalist image since 2015 by fighting India's ill-advised diplomatic intervention on the constitution issue and the counterproductive economic coercion (partial economic blockade) that followed. He perhaps hopes that this face-off with India on Kalapani will give him a new lease of political life.

The strategic community in India apprehends that Nepal is also being prompted by China to get India out of Kalapani. Indian Army chief General MM Navrane's indirect reference in an Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses lecture may be recalled here. This apparently conflicts with China's endorsement of the Indian position in 1954 and 2015. However, China is seldom straight in diplomacy. It is unhappy with India's growing strategic proximity to the United States. It has also objected to India's defence infrastructure upgradation projects all along the border. The Darchula-Lipu Lekh road is one such project. Needling India and alienating Kathmandu from New Delhi serves China's broader purpose. This explains why is it is playing an active role in preserving the unity of the Nepal Communist Party and protecting the Oli regime.

Prolonging this stand-off is not in the interest of either Nepal or India. It will be exploited by the third parties to their advantage. India and Nepal, keeping in mind their mutual stakes and concerns, should through resilient and mutually accommodative diplomacy, resolve this.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 16 -- With his sights set firmly on becoming a World Champion since joining ONE Championship last year, heavyweight Arjan Singh Bhullar has returned to Punjab to rediscover his roots and empower and inspire people in his native village of Jalandhar.

As one of the top mixed martial artists in the world, Bhullar has always looked to use his career as a platform to inspire his people, transcending the boundaries of sports and looking to make a real change in society.

From winning a gold medal in wrestling in the 2010 Commonwealth Games to making a thunderous ONE debut, the 2016 Olympian is certainly an accomplished athlete and his position come with a lot of influence. But despite his success on the global stage, Bhullar's profound love and respect for the country of his origin has remained intact.

One area of society Bhullar has focused to champion is the empowerment of Indian women, particularly in Jalandhar. Bhullar recently built a facility where village women can socialize. He provided sewing machines, cloth and various other materials for the purpose of producing face masks to help keep the village safe from the overreaching tentacles of COVID-19.

"I have been frequently visiting India since I was a child. I am still very attached to my village and the people there. We have built a very special place within the village for the women to gather, as they, unlike men, have nowhere to go and spend time," said Bhullar.

"The women have a great time there and during the pandemic, they have been making masks with the sewing machines that I have procured for them. Today, these women are not only self-sufficient but are also helping and empowering the entire village and the neighbouring region."

Bhullar also put up a local gym to help groom the next generation of Indian mixed martial arts stars.

The colossal heavyweight is on a personal mission to turn India into a martial arts powerhouse by taking troubled youth off the streets, many of whom have fallen prey to the traps and vices of poverty and hardship, and change their lives through sports. These efforts have built many futures and have energized Jalandhar.

"We built a gym shortly after the 2010 Commonwealth Games for the youngsters" said Bhullar.

"It's connected to the local school and kids come to practice sports from the adjoining villages too. The kids have all taken on sports in a professional way and it keeps them focused. I want to make my village a model village and spread the message that anything is possible all over India when the intent is right."

While Bhullar is dedicated to helping his people, especially in these times of need, he has not lost sight of advancing his professional career. Bhullar is laser-focused on making a run at the ONE Heavyweight World Championship, currently held by Filipino-American superstar Brandon Vera.

Bhullar made his ONE Championship debut last October in Tokyo, Japan, defeating top contender Mauro Cerilli via dominant unanimous decision. The incredible performance over a former world title challenger catapulted Bhullar up the divisional ladder, and he's now next in line for a shot at the gold.

Although details of the bout are yet to be revealed, Bhullar and Vera are expected to meet inside the Circle when the current situation eases and events resume. The thought of becoming a ONE World Champion and representing India is one that drives Bhullar to push himself hard each day in training.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- Chinese President Xi Jinping has called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

The early Friday phone conversation between Xi and Trump was held in the backdrop of Covid-19 cases in the US surging past China's and Beijing's late night decision on Thursday to close down its borders to foreigners amid fears of a second wave of infection coming in from abroad.

China's decision to ban foreigners from entering the country was preceded by the call to limit incoming international flights to one every week from every country.

Data from the Johns Hopkins University said Friday the US had 82,404 confirmed Covid-19 cases by Thursday evening.

China's national health commission (NHC) reported 81,340 confirmed cases, and 3298 deaths.

The pandemic has spread to at least 175 countries and territories, more than 532,700 cases have been reported worldwide since last December and the death toll is now above 24,000 with over 122,600 recoveries.

During the phone call, Xi told Trump that bilateral relations were at a critical juncture and both nations stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation and that cooperation is the only correct choice for both sides.

According to Chinese state media, Xi "called for joint efforts from both sides to bolster cooperation in areas such as epidemic containment and develop a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation".

"Working together brings both sides benefits, fighting hurts both. Cooperation is the only choice," he said.

The Chinese president urged Ttump take "substantive actions" in improving bilateral relations.

"China has always shared information on the Covid-19, including the genetic sequence of the virus, at the earliest time possible, with the World Health Organisation and countries including the US in an open, transparent and responsible manner since the start of the pandemic," Xi said.

"The country has also shared its experience on epidemic containment and medical treatment and done its best to support and help countries in need of assistance," Xi was quoted as saying.

Soon after the conversation, Trump tweeted that he had a "very good conversation" with Xi and called the pathogen "coronavirus" instead of the "China virus", which had infuriated China.

"Just finished a very good conversation with President Xi of China. Discussed in great detail the CoronaVirus that is ravaging large parts of our Planet. China has been through much & has developed a strong understanding of the Virus. We are working closely together. Much respect!"

Trump and other US politicians have repeatedly to call the disease "the Chinese virus," in the face of strong protestations from Beijing, which called it attacks which are racist and stigmatises China.

A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in turn tweeted that the virus, which emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, originated in the US and was planted in the city by the US military.

In context of reports on racist attacks that Chinese have faced, Xi told Trump China hopes for the U.S. side to take practical and effective measures to safeguard the safety and health of Chinese citizens includes students in the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Sept. 16 -- The Sars-Cov-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, shows signs that are not usual for a naturally evolved pathogen, a group of researchers have contended, reigniting theories that the virus may have been developed in a lab - a notion that scientists and public health officials have rejected on several occasions.

The claim was made in a paper uploaded by Li-Meng Yan, who specialised in virology and immunology at the Hong Kong School of c before she moved to the United States where she is believed to be seeking refuge.

"SARS-CoV-2 shows biological characteristics that are inconsistent with a naturally occurring, zoonotic virus. In this report, we describe the genomic, structural, medical, and literature evidence, which, when considered together, strongly contradicts the natural origin theory," said the paper, which is yet to be peer-reviewed.

The natural origin theory was first reported by Nature Medicine in a paper on March 17, in which researchers said the virus had a 96% resemblance with a coronavirus found in bats, called the RaTG13. Yan and her colleagues contend that there are growing doubts over the natural existence of this bat coronavirus, and that the Sars-Cov-2 instead has strong overlaps with two other bat coronaviruses: the ZC45 and ZXC211.

"The evidence shows that SARS-CoV-2 should be a laboratory product created by using bat coronaviruses ZC45 and/or ZXC21 as a template and/or backbone," the report said.

The researchers add three hypotheses to support their contention that the virus could be a lab creation, calling it also "a demonstration of how SARS-CoV-2 could be conveniently created in a laboratory in a short period of time using available materials and well-documented techniques".

The first of these, the researchers say, is history of coronaviruses ZC45 and ZXC21, both of which were discovered by military laboratories - one in the Third Military Medical University (Chongqing, China) and the other in Research Institute for Medicine of Nanjing Command (Nanjing, China).

The second has to do with a component of the virus known as the receptor-binding motif (RBM) within the spike protein, the portion of the virus that hooks onto a target cell. The RBM "resembles that of SARS-CoV from the 2003 epidemic in a suspicious manner. Genomic evidence suggests that the RBM has been genetically manipulated," they said.

The third has to do with another feature of the spike protein called the furin cleavage, which, the team said has been established to "greatly enhance viral infectivity and cell tropism". "This cleavage site is completely absent in this particular class of coronaviruses found in nature. In addition, rare codons associated with this additional sequence suggest the strong possibility that this furin-cleavage site is not the product of natural evolution and could have been inserted into the SARS-CoV-2 genome artificially by techniques other than simple serial passage or multi-strain recombination events inside co-infected tissue cultures or animals," they said.

Scientists are yet to comment on these claims in a paper.

Yan, in an interview a British talk show earlier this week, alleged there was a cover-up of the virus's origins. "I decided to report this development to my supervisor, who is also a World Health Organization (WHO) consultant. There was no response from the WHO and my supervisor. Everyone warned me that do not cross the right line and keep silence or else I would be made to disappear," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, June 29 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said India was able to combat Covid-19 far better than experts around the world believed it could because of the timely countrywide lockdown, which gave it time to ramp up health system significantly. The epidemic also taught India, he added, to be "self-reliant".

"With timely lockdown, India successfully protected the lives of tens of thousands of its citizens," Modi said in his address to a virtual annual meeting of the American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin. He added it was contrary to fears expressed by experts around the world that India could be in "deep crisis".

The lockdown was imposed from March 25 to check the spread of the disease before the government last month announced the phased plan to lift the stringent restrictions.

Modi said Covid-19 fatalities were less than 12 for every million people in India. "Not even 12," he repeated to emphasise the low number compared to more than 350 in the US and over 600 in the UK, Spain, and Italy.

The US is the worst-hit by the Covid-19 in terms of the death toll and infections.

"If India today has been able to fight the coronavirus, it is because the lockdown played a very big role in it."

Modi said India was able to increase the number of hospital beds, isolation wards, and labs to test coronavirus infections during the lockdown. He added three months ago, India was an importer of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), testing kits, and even N-95 masks. He added today India produces 4 million PPEs a week and 3 million N-95s. "We used to import earlier, and now we are moving towards exporting them," he said.

He added even ventilators, which are needed for severely ill and hospitalised patients, were mostly imported earlier, whereas 50,000 of them made in India are in the process of being deployed. "It is said that every crisis teaches us something or the other," Modi said. He added Covid-19 has taught India to be self-reliant and this will help further strengthen the healthcare system.

He said India has supplied medicines and medical equipment to over 150 countries and provided training to personnel of 16 countries. He added India sent anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine to many countries, including the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 25 -- Sixty-four scientists have said bats do not spread Covid-19 after reports of people requesting local authorities to clear trees over a fear of the colonies the winged mammals host.

The chiropterologists issuing the statement said they came together after reports of public requesting removal of bats, destroying bat roosts, bursting crackers or smoking them out and sealing crevices where bats and their pups roost came to them from various parts in India.

They argued in their statement on Friday that Sars-Cov-2 may have diverged from the closest coronavirus found in bats called RaTG13, about 40 to 70 years ago indicating that the bat virus cannot directly infect humans.

"The coronavirus found in one species of bat was found to be the closest match to the novel Sars-Cov-2. However, studies show that it cannot bind efficiently to receptors in the human lungs. This suggests that the virus may have evolved in an intermediate host. At the moment, a lot of evidence points towards pangolins as being the intermediate host. However, there is, as yet, no scientific consensus," Rohit Chakravarty, a research scholar at Berlin's Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research, said.

Also read: Covid-19 not the last pandemic, world has to build resilience

"This should not become a reason to demonise pangolins which are currently the world's most trafficked animals. Instead, we must push for the increased protection of these rare and elusive animals," Chakravarty said.

A recent study by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had found coronaviruses in two bat species in Indian but they are not the same as Sars-Cov-2 and cannot cause Covid-19, the scientists said.

The driving factor behind viruses jumping over from animals to humans is encroachment and destruction of wildlife habitats.

Also read: Maybe once in 1000 years, says ICMR on Covid-19 transmission from bats to humans

"Human activities and encroaching upon wildlife habitats puts us at risk of encountering new viruses. These viruses may come from any wildlife species and not necessarily just bats. Thus, we need to modify human practices to prevent the emergence of new pathogens," Arinjay Banerjee, a postdoctoral researcher at McMaster University, Canada, who studies bat viruses.

Banerjee was a part of the team that isolated the Covid-19 virus.

Changing human-wildlife interface, global wildlife trade and industrial livestock farming are all suspects in causing zoonotic disease outbreaks like Covid-19, they underlined.

Six myth busters from the team of bat experts:

* The exact origin of Sars-Cov-2 or its precursor is not known yet

* Scientists strongly suggest that it is highly unlikely for Sars-like viruses to jump directly from bats to humans. Also, there is no evidence of humans contracting coronavirus or any such viruses through the excreta of bats.

* ICMR report on the discovery of bat coronaviruses (BtCoV) in two species of South Asian bats poses no known health hazard.

* Information on the current, and past zoonotic disease outbreaks suggest that global wildlife trade and/or large-scale industrial livestock farming play an important role in such events.

* Killing bats and other wild animals, or evicting them from their roosts in retaliation is counterproductive and will not solve any problems.

* Bats pollinate the flowers of some mangroves, and many other commercially and culturally important plants.

* Insect-eating bats are voracious eaters of pest insects in rice, corn, cotton and potentially, tea farms. Therefore, bats benefit ecological and human health and provide intangible economic benefits.

* South Asian countries should strengthen the legal framework to protect bats in view of their ecosystem services and their slow breeding capacity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 6 -- India and Italy are set to sign about a dozen agreements in areas ranging from trade and investment to infrastructure when Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Italian counterpart Giuseppe Conte hold a virtual summit on Friday.

The meeting, the latest in a string of virtual engagements by Modi after his successful summits with Australia and the European Union (EU), is part of New Delhi's enhanced focus on Europe against the backdrop of a global rebalancing in the post-Covid-19 scenario. Leading EU players, such as Germany and France, have also signalled a greater interest in the Indo-Pacific region.

People familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity that around a dozen agreements and MoUs covering areas such as trade, investment, infrastructure, environment, fisheries, media and filmmaking, are expected to be signed at the summit.

Also read | Working with India to find solutions to Covid pandemic: Finland envoy

The two sides will explore the possibility of increasing Italian investments in India and enhancing defence cooperation and manufacturing under the Make in India initiative, the people said.

Both countries are keen to firmly put behind the 2012 killing of two Indian crew members of a fishing boat off the coast of Kerala by Italian marines guarding an oil tanker Enrica Lexie, an incident that took bilateral ties to an all-time low.

"Barring the brief hiatus caused by Enrica Lexie incident for some time, the two countries have always enjoyed a cordial relationship since they established political ties in 1947," said one of the people cited above.

Referring to a UN arbitral tribunal's ruling this year that the Italian marines are entitled to immunity in relation to their acts, the person said, "Following the arbitral tribunal's verdict, Italy wants to build robust economic relations on the foundation of the political relationship."

India sees Italy, the third largest EU economy after Brexit with robust manufacturing, technological and design capabilities, as a strong partner for the Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat (self-reliant India) initiatives.

From January, India will also join the G20 troika along with Italy and Saudi Arabia. India and Italy will be part of the troika for 2021 and 2022, when New Delhi will take over as the G20 chair.

Italy is currently India's fifth largest trading partner in the EU, and bilateral trade was worth 9.52 billion Euros in 2019. India, however, ranks 16th as country of origin for Italian imports, and experts believe there is potential for considerable growth.

About 600 large Italian companies are active in India, while some 4,000 Indian students and 250,000 workers, mainly in the agricultural sector, are in Italy.

Italy has traditionally been supportive towards India at multilateral forums, and the two countries are currently working towards a roadmap for a more substantive engagement, including a migration mobility partnership agreement, the people said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 16 -- With reports emerging that the first case of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) was detected in China as early as November 17, 2019, Beijing should reveal more information about the virus behind the global health scourge. The world economy has come to a virtual standstill, and people are forced to live in isolation, largely because one of the most powerful countries in the world either chose to be in denial or actively muzzled information in the initial stages.

As some confusion lingers over the exact nature and origin of the disease, a Chinese government spokesperson last week appeared to blame the US military for the spread of contagion, immediately attracting diplomatic retaliation from the US State Department. Though many in China and other places have now said the spokesperson spoke out of turn, official communiques in the country are known to have a sanction from the Xi Jinping regime.

In any case, for prevention, the world needs to know the exact source of this contagion. The total number of affected are heading towards 165,000 with more than 6,000 deaths, and the virus has spread to large communities in Italy, France, Germany and Spain.

The Chinese response to coronavirus was in two phases. First, it appeared to live in denial despite the numbers mounting in Hubei province late last year, and clamped down on contrarian voices.

This may have led to people from other countries getting affected and carrying the contagion to their countries of origin. The second phase was after China realised that it could not control the spread, and so it opened data and specifics of the disease to the world while locking down its own communities.

Professor K VijayRaghavan, principal scientific adviser to Narendra Modi government, told HT that the world has learnt two things from the Chinese responses to the virus. "Acknowledgement of a potential problem is best done speedily. China could, perhaps, have acted better, earlier. Second, act speedily to identify, test, contain, and manage. Hubei and China have done well here. India has analysed this and scenarios from other countries such as Iran, Italy, US and UK etc," he said.

The former head of National Centre for Biological Sciences added: " The health ministry, ICMR and the Central and state governments in general have been constantly analysing the global and national situation, and taking decisions based on best science and public health practices. This can help "flatten" the intensity over the time, allowing systems to effectively deliver to most needy and vulnerable, he said.

Given India's weak health infrastructure, PM Modi, with foreign minister S Jaishankar and the para-military chiefs, have been involved in the health ministry's response right from the start.

According to top experts, while the cure of the disease may be found in about a year, the best way out is to flatten its impact by controlling community spreads through social distancing. Virologists all over the world are meanwhile trying to tweak existing anti-viral drugs to see if they can control the coronavirus. Others are trying to develop new drugs so that they can scale up the production much faster, if proven successful.

We must remember that the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) first appeared in November 2002 in the Guangdong province of southern China, affecting 8,000 people, with the source again linked to transmission from animals. Two decades later, it's time Beijing answers some hard questions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 5 -- Coronavirus originated from China's Wuhan last year. As it began to step away from mainland China, the deadly contagion left behind over 80,000 patients and killed more than 3,000 people in the country.

As of today, nearly 1.2 million people are affected by the virus and a whopping 60,000 have been killed. The virus is estimated to account for a record number of patients and deaths in the United States. European nations like Italy, Spain, France and Germany are already reeling.

Global bodies like the World Health Organization hailed South Korea for its strategy to contain the virus spread. Another administration which has done laudable work in mitigating the crisis within its territory is Taiwan.

Taiwan, although so close to mainland China (just 81 miles off coast), has managed to keep the ugly head of Covid-19 from rising within its territory.

According to a report, as the news of coronavirus' emergence surfaced in Wuhan last year, officials at Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) acted quickly.

Stanford expert Jason Wang, who is an associate professor of pediatrics at Stanford Medicine, says the outcome is a result of Taiwan using "new technology and a robust pandemic prevention plan put into place at the 2003 SARS outbreak".

Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) was set up after the SARS pandemic and became part of its mechanism to tackle large outbreaks.

While world economies were mulling over what actions to take and when, Taiwan was already responding with a Covid-19 strategy in place. Owing to its proximity to mainland China, it was supposed to be one of the worst-hit regions by coronavirus.

Taiwan quickly moved to put travel curbs in place, checking its ports and introducing stringent punishments for violators of quarantine orders. Aggressive testing also helped Taiwan deal with the pandemic efficiently.

Taiwanese authorities came into action as soon as the WHO was notified of a pneumonia of unknown cause in the Chinese city of Wuhan in December.

In the first week of January itself, Taiwanese authorities issued a notification for individuals who had travelled to or from Wuhan in the past 14 days and reported fever or symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection.

Those displaying symptoms were quarantined, tested for over 20 viruses.

"Taiwan leveraged its national health insurance database and integrated it with its immigration and customs database to begin the creation of big data for analytics; it generated real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and clinical symptoms to aid case identification. It also used new technology, including QR code scanning and online reporting of travel history and health symptoms to classify travelers' infectious risks based on flight origin and travel history in the past 14 days," Wang says in a paper published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The administration prepared a list of 124 action items to devise a strategy against coronavirus.

After nearly three months into the Covid-19 crisis, Taiwan has reported less than 400 coronavirus cases and witnessed 5 deaths as per the data by Johns Hopkins University.

The lessons that world economies can learn from Taiwan's Covid-19 plan are enormous. Taiwan's strategy finds its foundation in early recognition of the crisis.

With "daily briefings to the public, and simple health messaging, the government was able to reassure the public by delivering timely, accurate, and transparent information regarding the evolving epidemic," Wang writes in her paper.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 27 -- Tesla CEO Elon Musk has called Amazon Founder and CEO Jeff Bezos a copycat after the e-commerce giant announced to purchase self-driving car company Zoox pegged at over $1 billion.

"@JeffBezos is a copy[cat] haha," Musk tweeted late Friday with a link to an article about Bezos' Zoox purchase.

Like Tesla, California-headquartered Zoox "is applying the latest in automotive, robotics and renewable energy to design a symmetrical, bi-directional, zero-emissions vehicle from the ground up to solve the unique challenges of autonomous mobility".

Zoox settled a lawsuit with Tesla in April after admitting that some new employees it hired from Tesla possessed documents when they joined Zoox. Tesla had filed a lawsuit in March last year against four former employees and Zoox.

Earlier this month, Elon Musk has slammed Blue Origin and Amazon Founder Bezos, saying it is time to break up the e-commerce giant and end its monopoly.

He tweeted after former New York Times reporter and prominent lockdown critic Alex Berenson published a screenshot, saying that his book titled "Unreported Truths about Covid-19 and Lockdowns: Part 1: Introduction and Death Counts and Estimates" has been censored on the e-commerce platform.

"This is insane @JeffBezos," Musk said, tagging the Amazon CEO. "Time to break up Amazon. Monopolies are wrong!"

The book, however, was available for purchase soon after the Musk tweet.

Musk mocked Bezos' moon plans last year, saying they make no sense.

Bezos had described his vision of humans living on miles-long, orbiting space stations called "O'Neill colonies", named after physicist Gerard O'Neill, who first floated the concept.

"Makes no sense. In order to grow the colony, you''d have to transport vast amounts of mass from planets/moons/asteroids. Would be like trying to build the US in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean," Musk tweeted.

Bezos has never replied to Musk on tweets against him.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 27 -- New viruses being discovered are only the "tip of the iceberg", said a leading virologist from a Chinese laboratory that's at the centre of conspiracy theories on the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic.

"The unknown viruses that we have discovered are actually just the tip of the iceberg," Shi Zhengli, deputy director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, told Chinese state TV, adding that it was important to carry out advance research on pathogens.

Shi is known as China's "bat woman" as she has worked on coronaviruses found in the flying mammals for years, notably inside abandoned mines in the province of Yunnan.

Shi has kept a low profile since the Covid-19 outbreak emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, only occasionally commenting on social media, including once to deny that she had defected from China after the epidemic spread.

The People's Daily reported that on February 2, Shi had reacted to a research article by Indian scientists implying the novel coronavirus possibly originated from the Wuhan Institute of Virology. "The 2019 novel coronavirus is a punishment by nature to humans' unsanitary life styles. I promise with my life that the virus has nothing to do with the lab," she said on the social media app WeChat.

In her short interview to state TV channel CGTN on Monday, Shi defended China's transparency in handling the outbreak and stressed the need for more research on viruses. "If we want to protect humans from viruses or avoid a second outbreak of new infectious diseases, we must go in advance to learn of these unknown viruses carried by wild animals in nature and then give early warnings," she said. "And we must be able to store some drugs and reagents for detection, prevention or treatment for future prevention and control.

Shi denied that her institute was the origin of the coronavirus. The institute, she said, shared available data with the world and that the WHO was well-informed about breakthroughs.

"Later, we, along with two other medical institutes in our country, submitted the whole genome sequence of the virus to the WHO on January 12, 2020," she said. "We also uploaded other sequences to a gene library called GISAID, which is used by governments and scientists around the world to identify pathogens, to develop vaccines and screen drugs."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 7 -- Jitendra Kumar Rathod, who gained medical qualifications from Bombay University in 1977, moved to the UK and worked for years in the National Health Service (NHS), has died after being infected by coronavirus, officials in Wales said on Monday night.

The Cardiff and Vale University Health Board said: "It is with profound sadness that we must inform you that Mr Jitendra Rathod, Associate Specialist in Cardio-thoracic Surgery at the University Hospital of Wales, has passed away".

Indian doctors and nurses are among frontline NHS staff dealing with thousands of patients in hospitals across the UK. Doctors who qualified in India are the second largest group employed in the NHS, after those qualifying in the UK.

The board added: "He died early this morning on our General Intensive Care unit after testing positive for Covid-19. Jitu had worked in the Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery since the mid-1990s and came back to UHW in 2006 after a brief stint abroad".

"He was an incredibly dedicated surgeon who cared deeply for his patients. He was well-liked and greatly respected by one and all. He was a very compassionate and a wonderful human being. His commitment to the specialty was exemplary," the board said in a tribute.

Rathod is survived by his wife and two sons.

The number of people dying of coronavirus in the UK rose on Monday to 5,373, most likely including many of Indian origin from the 1.5 million strong Indian community. The NHS does not disclose the ethnicity of the dead.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 18 -- The Indian high commission reached out to Indian citizens stranded in the UK after New Delhi's ban on all travel to the country took effect from 12 noon GMT on Wednesday, as Indian students at various universities faced uncertainty over teaching and stay.

The mission, which fielded several queries from Indian citizens and Overseas Citizens of India in recent days, said: "Indian citizens, including students stranded in the UK due to non-availability of flights or closure of hotels who have nowhere to stay may reach us on info.london@mea.gov.in giving their details such as flight bookings, etc".

India on Monday announced a ban until March 31 of travel from UK and the European Union.

Indian officials have been in constant touch with the Home Office for assurances on visa-related issues of citizens who are in the UK. The mission said: "UK authorities are working on guidance for Indians in the UK whose visas are due to expire but are currently unable to leave".

On campuses across the UK, thousands of Indian students face uncertainty as universities switch to online teaching and scramble to deal with the implications of the coronavirus challenge, with some managing to leave for India, but others stuck in the UK.

The uncertainty has been heightened in universities that asked students to leave campus and go home during Easter vacations.

Nicole M Joseph, a student from Bengaluru at the University of Cambridge, said: "I could not go to India. We are not sure what will happen when the next term begins on April 21. I hope they won't kick us out. My family has been too stressed about me being alone here".

Colleges in Cambridge have come under much criticism for sending allegedly conflicting messages to students; some asked them to leave rooms by Thursday, while others offered accommodation on an exceptional basis if they cannot go to their home countries.

Sanjan Das of the Cambridge University India Society said he could not leave after India suspended those holding Overseas Citizen of India status: "We tried to get emergency visa, but was told that was available only for deaths and similar situations. Now no one can go".

Since student visas are linked to attendance at lectures and other academic engagements, the Home Office has relaxed norms, so that those unable to do so are not penalised.

The University and College Union (UCU) petitioned the University of Cambridge about growing concern among international students being asked to leave, alleging that its colleges had provoked "wide-scale panic" with their messages.

"We are extremely concerned that the invitation to leave the country at such short notice, when most countries are closing their borders, will dramatically affect the most economically and socially vulnerable members of the college community who cannot afford to leave the UK at the last minute, who do not have healthcare coverage in their country of origin, who simply have nowhere else to go, and do not have clear instructions on how leaving will impact their visa status", UCU said.

Universities UK (UUK), the umbrella body representing all UK universities, said Indian and other international students stranded in the UK should be able to continue to stay in university accommodation ('halls').

A UUK spokesperson said: "A student's halls are generally their main 'home' for much of the year and universities will support those who cannot or do not want to go home. We are seeking specific advice for student accommodation providers from the government on the issue of any student who needs to self-isolate in student accommodation".

"The focus for universities who have students in this situation would be to ensure every possible measure is being taken to support them during self-isolation, to ensure this is effective but also that their needs are met".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 13 -- Poornima Nair, who gained medical qualifications from the University of Delhi in 1987 and practised as a general practitioner after moving to the UK in 1997, has passed away after contracting coronavirus, her practice in County Durham said on Wednesday.

The Station View Medical Centre in north-east England, where she was based, said: "The practice is very sorry to announce to our patients the death of our much loved and valued colleague and friend Dr Poornima Nair".

"Dr Nair passed away after a prolonged Covid 19 illness which she fought with her great strength of character. We are all devastated and upset by this tragic news and hope you will join with us in our thoughts and prayers".

Nair, 56, was on life support since March 27 having been taken ill two weeks earlier and admitted to the University Hospital of North Tees Hospital in Stockton.

Practice manager Sarah Westgarth described her as "positive, encouraging and so caring. It's quite unbelievable that seven weeks down the line, as a practice we are having to mourn the death of someone who is so important to us and a real focal point of the surgery".

"I really feel for her family - her mum, husband and son. Her heart was with the NHS and what she could do to help her patients and the staff. She'll be so missed."

Nair joins the grim list of medical staff of Indian heritage who passed away from the virus, which includes Jitendra Kumar Rathod, Manjeet Singh Riyat, Krishan Arora, Rajesh Kalraiya, Pooja Sharma, Jayesh Patel, Vivek Sharma, Kamlesh Kumar Masson, Amarante Dias, Sophie Fagan, Hamza Pacheeri and Amrik Bamotra.

Their passing away reflects the reality of tens of thousands of Indian doctors and health care professionals arriving in the UK over the decades and taking up key jobs in the NHS.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 8 -- Margaret Keenan, 90, became the first person to be vaccinated with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine early on Tuesday, but the second person to get it also hit the headlines and tickled some funny bones - the reason: his name is William Shakespeare.

Both received the vaccine in the University Hospital in Coventry in the Midlands, not far from Stratford-upon-Avon, the birthplace of the better-known Bard of Avon. The modern-day Shakespeare is 81, which makes him eligible to be in the first group to receive the vaccine.

His name sparked much ado and creativity on the social media, evidence that there is lots in a name. The image of Shakespeare receiving the vaccine was widely shared, with remarks such as: 'The Taming of Flu' and 'The Two Gentlemen of Corona'.

One commentator wondered if Keenan were to be called Patient 1A, would Shakespeare be "Patient 2B or not 2B?" Another said he was "glad he (Shakespeare) wasn't Bard from having it", and some hoped that "In a world when people hardly ever remember who came second, the second person to get the Covid jab might stick in the memory".

Health secretary Matt Hancock also had a laugh on live television that the second person to receive the vaccine was named William Shakespeare, insisting the vaccine roll-out "makes you so proud to be British".

Among those lined up to first receive the vaccine are Hari Shukla, a retired teacher and race relations campaigner in north England, and his wife, Ranjan, 83, at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle.

They are among the over-80-year-olds prioritised to receive the first of the 800,000 doses in 50 hospitals across the UK. The vaccine is administered in two doses, 21 days apart.

Awarded the royal honours of MBE, OBE and CBE for his work in race relations, the Uganda-born Shukla said: "I am delighted to be doing my bit by having the vaccine, I feel it is my duty to do so and do whatever I can to help. I feel very comfortable and happy to be the first one".

"As far as I'm concerned, I'm excited about it. We were waiting for this vaccine for a very long time. Having been in contact with the NHS staff, I know how hard they all work and I am grateful for everything they have done to keep us safe during the pandemic".

The UK has ordered 40 million doses of the vaccine and is expected to receive 4 million more by the end of this month. The UK regulator is also evaluating the clinical data of the University of Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna vaccine candidates.

Shukla, widely seen as a local hero, added: "We hope that everybody will participate in it and get back to next to normal. I have been following the news and our scientists have done a wonderful job. I have no doubt in my mind they are the best in the world."

Several individuals such as Shukla and Ranjan receiving the vaccine is being publicised widely by the UK's health authorities to overcome anti-vaccine anxieties among some people, as well as content on social media.

Queen Elizabeth, 94, and Prince Philip, 99, are also expected to be among the first to receive the vaccine.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said: "Today marks a huge step forward in the UK's fight against coronavirus. As the programme ramps up in the weeks and months ahead, it is as important as ever to keep to the Covid winter plan - following the rules in your area and remember the basics of hands, face and space."

Simon Stevens, NHS England's chief executive, called the start of the vaccine programme a "turning point", and said: "The deployment of this vaccine marks a decisive turning point in the battle with the pandemic. NHS vaccination programmes which have successfully helped overcome tuberculosis, polio and smallpox now turn their focus to coronavirus."

As of Monday evening, 61,434 people have died in UK hospitals and care-homes, making it the worst affected country in Europe, including over 1,000 people of Indian origin. The number of cases has climbed to 17,37,960.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. The story drew little attention, as the world prepared to celebrate the beginning of a new year later that night.

In less than 100 days in the new year - Thursday is the 93rd day to be precise - the virus has infected 1 million people and killed 50,000, ripping through 203 countries in a rampage that will likely exact as severe an economic, social and psychological toll as the number of casualties by the time humanity can beat it. Till now, a little over 200,000 have recovered from the disease.

In India, infections crossed 2,000 on Wednesday and the country was on course to add 514 more on Thursday -- the first time daily new cases crossed the 500 mark. New fatalities too logged a big jump -- 19 -- taking the total toll to 72 in the country, which is in the middle of a three-week long nationwide shutdown to ensure the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak does not assume the proportions it has in countries such as Italy and the United States.

The United States is now the worst-hit region, accounting for more than a third of all daily new cases around the world. New York has lost 2,200 people and the virus was on course to surpass the 9/11 terror attacks in the next 36 hours as the deadliest tragedy in a city that is at the heart of modern day pop culture.

Almost 10 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the last two weeks.

The United States and Europe are largely being regarded as the current hot spots of the pandemic, with world leaders expecting "the roughest two or three weeks" in their country. "We're going to lose thousands of people," US President Donald Trump said earlier in the week, while projecting that up to 240,000 people could die.

Italy, with a large ageing population that is the most vulnerable to the Sars-Cov-2 pathogen, has seen the highest number of deaths at 13,000. Spain, the United Kingdom, France and Germany together account for close to 20,000 fatalities.

China, where the pathogen is believed to have mutated in either bats or pangolins to jump to humans, has recorded 3,300 deaths - with a rate of growth that slowed into single digits only after what has been a close two months of lockdown in large parts of the country.

Stock markets around the world suffered historic losses in the first three months of the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and London's FTSE 100 saw their biggest quarterly drops since 1987, plunging 23% and 25% respectively. In India, Bombay Stock Exchange investors lost around 33.38 lakh crore (in market value) in March, the month when the coronavirus contagion spread to equities. In an age largely defined as the era of social media, Covid-19 has now introduced a new zeitgeist: social distancing. Jobs that can be done are now being done from home -- as are classes for schools and college, and even the UK parliament. As a result, digital pipelines are sagging under the load of unprecedented video streaming and conferencing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 22 -- India will reopen air travel on 383 routes across the country after a two-month gap, the government announced on Thursday, but allowed one-third of the operations beginning May 25 and set limits on fares that airlines can charge in the initial phase of this critical unlocking of swift long-distance travel.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said the government has identified seven bands based on flight durations, while announcing a set of norms for airlines and guidelines for passengers that outline how air travel is set to change in India in the aftermath of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

The fares - consistent for each band - will be capped till at least August 24.

"[Because of the lockdown] we have been able to escape the situation other countries have found themselves in. [But] it is equally important that at some stage you will have to open up. Two months is a very long time...you have to balance between lives and livelihood; it is time to now open up," Puri said at a press conference in New Delhi, a day after announcing the resumption of domestic flights.

According to data by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), flights in the first phase will operate on all routes, taking off from a total of 35 origin cities and landing in 39 destination airports.

"The central government hereby directs that domestic civil flight operations are permitted from 25 May, 2020 to a limited extent... For operations from Metro to Metro cities, One-Third capacity of the approved Summer Schedule...," the civil aviation ministry said in an order on Thursday.

The metro cities were identified as Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The rule will be applicable for metro to non-metro operations as well.

Though there are several guidelines for social distancing in airports and at embarkation and disembarkation points, the middle seat will not be kept vacant in the aircraft.

Lancelot Pinto, an epidemiologist at Mumbai's Hinduja Hospital, said social distancing should be a priority. "Even though the government is saying they will scan each passengers, many of the travellers will not show any symptoms as almost 80% people (Covid-19 patients) are asymptomatic."

Puri, however, said it was not possible to keep the middle seat vacant. "This is not an option being followed by any other country as well. We will keep our fingers crossed," he said.

The seven bands identified by the government are: flights with duration of less than 40 minutes (Sector A), those with journey time of 40-60 minutes (Sector B), 60-90 minutes (Sector C), 90-120 minutes (Sector D), 120-150 minutes (Sector E), 150-180 minutes (Sector F) and 180-210 minutes (Sector G).

A Delhi-Mumbai air travel takes around two hours, putting it in the category of Sector D.

"Earlier, air carriers could put their range (minimum to maximum) on their websites...We want air travel to become affordable. We have set a minimum fare and a maximum fare. For Delhi to Mumbai, the minimum fare will be Rs 3,500 and maximum Rs 10,000," Puri said at the media briefing.

The government said 40% of the tickets in all bands will be sold at a price less than the mid-point (of the lower and upper limits). In case of a Delhi-Mumbai journey, these tickets will be priced at around Rs 6,700.

The move to set fare limits will ensure there is no overcharging by airlines in view of an expected rush of passengers and heightened demand for tickets, Puri said. At the same time, the move to set lower limits is expected to protect carriers from extremely low fares set by competitors.

Domestic flights with less than 40-minute duration, like the ones from Delhi to Chandigarh, will have lower and upper limits of Rs 2,000 and Rs 6,000, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) announced later in the day. For flights with duration between 40 and 60 minutes, such as Delhi to Lucknow, the lower and upper fare limits are Rs 2,500 and Rs 7,500.

In the next band (60-90 minutes for journeys like the ones between Bengaluru and Mumbai), the lower fare limit is Rs 3,000 and the upper limit is Rs 9,000, the aviation regulator said. Flights between 120 and 150 minutes, including those on major routes such as Delhi-Bengaluru, will have lower and upper limits of Rs 4,500 and Rs 13,000.

Those with duration between 150 and 180 minutes (such as Delhi to Imphal), the lower and upper limits are set at Rs 5,500 and Rs 15,700. And finally, for flights with duration between 180 and 210 minutes - like the ones on Delhi-Coimbatore route - the range will be Rs 6,500 and Rs 18,600.

Vistara welcomed the moved to resume domestic flights, which were grounded on March 25, the day restrictions were first imposed in the country.

"Aviation is a growth engine for the economy and resumption of air travel will give great impetus to the government's overall efforts in helping the country eventually return to normalcy," Vistara CEO Leslie Thng said.

Global airlines' body International Air Transport Association (IATA), a grouping of 290 airlines, said the decision to regulate airfares is a "step back". Private carriers such as Air India, Vistara, IndiGo and SpiceJet are its members.

"Airlines need to have the freedom to make their commercial decisions, including the pricing of airfares. Hence, we recognise and hope that this is a one-time measure as a result of Covid-19 and will be discontinued on August 24," IATA assistant director (corporate communications - Asia Pacific) Albert Tjoeng told news agency PTI.

Ravi Kini, managing partner at law firm MV Kini & Co, said: "Fares are published by airlines in the regular course. The range normally published is very wide for allowing flexibility for the airlines to respond to the market demand in free market situation. In the current situation, free market play has been curbed due to Covid-19...This is a good move by the government to balance the consumer interests with airline profitability."

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 24 -- Remittance flows into India may decline by 23% in 2020 to $64 billion, the sharpest fall in recent history, due to declining oil prices and the Covid-19-led global recession, said a World Bank report.

The loss of employment and wages for migrant workers in Gulf countries will contribute significantly to the drop in remittances to India, it added.

In 2019, India recorded a 5.5% growth in remittance receipts to $83 billion.

"Global remittances are projected to decline sharply by about 20% in 2020 due to the economic crisis induced by the Covid-19 pandemic and shutdown. The coronavirus-related global slowdown and travel restrictions will also affect migratory movements, and this is likely to keep remittances subdued even in 2021. The projected remittance growth of 5.8% in 2021 will keep total regional flows at about $115 billion," the World Bank added.

Studies show that remittances alleviate poverty in lower- and middle-income countries, improve nutritional outcomes and are associated with higher spending on education, and reduced child labour in disadvantaged households. A fall in remittances affects the ability of families to spend on these areas, as more funds are allocated for food and immediate livelihood needs.

"Remittances are a vital source of income for developing countries. The ongoing recession caused by Covid-19 is taking a severe toll on the ability to send money home and makes it all the more vital that we shorten the time to recovery for advanced economies," said World Bank group president David Malpass.

Madan Sabnavis, chief economist, Care Ratings, said the forecast is of concern. "The current account deficit (CAD) has been under control mainly due to remittance and software exports. Both of them will be impacted due to Covid-19, which will put pressure on CAD. However, with oil prices crashing, the trade balance will improve and provide some compensation. The balance of payments will definitely be under some pressure as capital flows would be restricted as countries go through a recession. The high quantum of reserves will help tide over this problem."

In other South Asian countries, such as Pakistan, the projected decline in remittances is about 23% to $17 billion in 2020, while for Bangladesh it will fall by 22% to $14 billion. "Before the coronavirus crisis, migrant outflows from the (South Asian) region were robust. The number of recorded, primarily low-skilled emigrants from India and Pakistan rose in 2019 relative to the prior year, but is expected to decline in 2020 due to the pandemic and oil price declines impacting the GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council) countries. In India, the number of low-skilled emigrants seeking mandatory clearance for emigration rose slightly by 8% to 368,048 in 2019."

The World Bank said the coronavirus crisis has affected both international and internal migration in the South Asia region. "The lockdown in India has impacted the livelihoods of a large proportion of the country's nearly 40 million internal migrants. Around 50,000-60,000 moved from urban centres to rural areas of origin in the span of a few days," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- A top Chinese official on Wednesday dismissed accusations that China did not share all data with the World Health Organization (WHO)-appointed researchers tracing the origin of the Covid-19 virus.

The denial comes a day after the publication of the WHO-China joint report on the origins of Covid-19, following which WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Beijing withheld relevant data from the team of scientists who visited Wuhan in January.

Tedros was quoted as saying the investigation was "not extensive enough" and that experts had struggled to access raw information during their four-week visit to the central Chinese city of Wuhan where the virus first emerged in December, 2019.

Additionally, at least 14 countries, including the US, Australia, Canada, and the Czech Republic, raised concerns over the report released by the WHO on Tuesday into the origin of the coronavirus, citing delays and a lack of full access to data.

Speaking on the report on Wednesday, Liang Wannian, co-leader of the joint study, said Chinese and international researchers had access to the same data throughout the probe period and that the claims about lack of access were not accurate. "Of course, according to Chinese law, some data cannot be taken away or photographed, but when we were analysing it together in Wuhan, everyone could see the database, the materials - it was all done together."

Rejecting complaints about the report being delayed, Liang said "every sentence, every conclusion, every piece of data" needed to be verified by both sides before it could be released. "Throughout, we always upheld the principle of "quality comes first"," said Liang, chief of a Covid-19 experts' committee set up by the China's National Health Commission.

Liang had earlier told state media that to ".accomplish the arduous task of scientific cooperation and exchange, the Chinese side brought together the relevant institutions and hundreds of scientists and did their best to collect and collate data and conduct a preliminary analysis".

Liang said the origin tracing of the virus is a continuous work, adding that further tracing will be carried out around the globe, based on the findings of the study in China.

China was the first country to report Covid-19 cases, so the global tracing of virus origins was first conducted here, Liang said.

Separately, the Chinese foreign ministry on Wednesday called on all parties to respect science and the opinions and conclusions of the WHO report that found it's extremely unlikely the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The WHO said work could also be carried out in laboratories around the world if further evidence was available and needed, ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said, adding that China hopes that other relevant countries will cooperate with the WHO in the same open and transparent manner as China has done.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 7 -- The Bombay high court (HC) has refused to accept that the spread of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic in the country is a valid ground to allow a Thai national and a person of Indian origin (PIO), who is engaged in a legal battle with her estranged husband, to relocate her son (12) to Bangkok.

"This ground of Covid-19 pandemic for relocation does not appeal to us at all," said the two-member HC division bench, comprising Justices Amjad Sayed and Abhay Abuja, on October 1, while dismissing the petition filed by the woman, who is married to a Mumbaikar.

The woman, who has been estranged from her husband since 2012, had moved the HC in June, seeking urgent orders to allow her to relocate her son to Bangkok until the time the petition for his custody was decided by the family court at Bandra.

The petitioner had contended that "in view of the rapid spread of Covid-19 pandemic in India, we (the mother and the son) urgently want to relocate to our home country, Thailand, where my parents live, until the time the family court at Bandra decides on my son's custody".

She had stated that she and her son were leading a lonely life in India without any basic medical and financial assistance, maintenance and insurance.

She had claimed that the Covid-19 curve had flattened in Thailand and the South-east Asian country had become "one of the safest places on the earth amid the pandemic crises".

She had drawn a parallel between the viral outbreak in her native Thailand and India and also had given the example of June 18 in a bid to bolster her argument.

She had pointed out that on that day Thailand had reported 3,290 Covid-19 and 58 deaths. On the contrary, India had reported 1.44 million and 32,063 Covid-19 cases and deaths, respectively, on the same day, she had added.

However, the contentions failed to impress upon the court.

The bench noted that the boy is studying in a reputed international school in Mumbai. "In our view, it would not be proper to disrupt the studies of the boy in the middle of the academic year, classes of which are being conducted online," said the bench.

The bench also thought it improper to uproot the teenager at this stage in his life because he has lived in Mumbai all along.

The bench also rejected the petitioner's contention that courts had allowed her nine times earlier to travel to Thailand along with her son.

It said previous concessions would not work in her favour. "It certainly cannot be equated to relocating the boy to Bangkok pending disposal of the Bandra family court's proceedings," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 31 -- No large country in the world has been able to contain the disease to one restricted geography the way China has.

According to worldometers.info, it has seen 84,165 cases of the coronavirus disease thus far with only 4,634 deaths. It has only 574 active cases of the disease (all data is till late evening of July 29). Merely by looking at the numbers it is difficult to imagine that the disease which has infected more than 17 million people worldwide, killing close to 670,000 (including over 4.4 million cases and 150,000 deaths in the US, and close to 1.6 million cases and almost 35,000 deaths in India) actually originated in Wuhan, China, from where it travelled, through people, all over the world. Sure there has been a minor flurry of cases in Beijing, but the numbers are far too small to suggest any sort of outbreak.

Click here for full Covid-19 coverage

One theory is that the Chinese have completely buried all inconvenient information related to the disease and its fallout within the country. This is true at least in part; Beijing has steadfastly sidestepped calls for a scientific investigation into the origin of the virus. But there is nothing to suggest that it has engaged in a massive cover-up to hide outbreaks in other parts of the country.

Which is why its Covid-19 numbers are a mystery. This column has pointed out that the pandemic has followed roughly the same trajectory in most countries. It has also pointed out that its trajectory has been similar in large countries such as the US, Brazil, and India, with concentrated outbreaks in a few areas that gradually spread to other areas, which then started seeing similar outbreaks. China is the world's most populous country and the third largest country by geographical area. The US is the fourth largest, Brazil the fifth, and India the seventh (India is the second most populous country in the world, the US the third, and Brazil the sixth).

A recent paper in Science may have the answer. According to the paper, by Benjamin Cowling and other researchers, mostly at the University of Hong Kong, China's ability to stop Covid-19 in its tracks may have to do with its ability to manage the serial interval. In epidemiology, the serial interval is the gap between the onset of symptoms in Person A, and Person B, who is infected by Person A. The researchers' main finding is the title of the paper: "Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions".

The researchers found that the serial interval in Wuhan came down from 7.8 days to 2.6 days between early January and early February. They hypothesise that this was made possible by China's aggressive contact tracing, quarantine, and isolation protocols, which meant that all infections arising from one infected individual happened in a short period of time (in this case, 2.6 days), thereby ensuring that infected people, because they were isolated, could not infect any more people later in the infection cycle. The result, according to the researchers, was fewer cases. The sooner an infected person was isolated, the researchers found, the shorter was the serial interval. Their paper also explains that the serial interval is related to other epidemiological parameters, such as the attack rate of a virus (the proportion of people exposed to the virus over a period of time) and the reproduction rate or R naught, the number of people who will be infected by one infected person.

At this point, what Cowling and Co have proposed is a theory (backed by data and research), albeit a very plausible one.

It is also one that emphasizes the only way to deal with the coronavirus disease in the absence of a vaccine or a cure - test, trace, and isolate. And it is proof that better tracing and prompt (and stringent) isolation can lead to flatter infection curves.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 1 -- Mindless and incessant forwarding of WhatsApp messages without verifying the correctness of such messages is leading to spread of fake news and such messages assume racial and religious overtones, Supreme Court judge Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul said on Sunday.

Kaul also made a case for individual discretion and responsibility with respect to sharing fake news. "Any regulation of social media may impinge on free speech and right to privacy. The struggle is to regulate social media without affecting free speech, so it is everybody's responsibility to see that content is verified before it is sent."

Justice Kaul was speaking on the topic 'Fake News and Misinformation' at an online lecture series organised by Madras Bar Association.

"There are a lot of messages about Covid (coronavirus disease) including its 'remedies', the origin, people who are 'helping spread of the virus' and so on. These messages can take religious and racial undertones," the SC judge warned.

"When the press is writing, they are accountable... they write with a certain sense of responsibility. But others may not have anything at stake and no accountability..." he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 19 -- A new study by US scientists has sought to dispel speculation that the novel coronavirus had been created in a laboratory and leaked from a bio-warfare facility, triggering the pandemic the world is struggling to contain, concluding instead that Covid-19 indeed had natural origins.

Based on publicly available genome sequence data of the virus released earlier by Chinese scientists, researchers at the Department of Immunology and Microbiology at the Scripps Research Institute found that the virus could not be a "laboratory construct" or "purposefully manipulated."

The study, published in Nature Medicine journal on Tuesday, proposed two natural scenarios through which the virus, also known as SARS-CoV-2, may have originated. It flies against unconfirmed reports, blogs and discussions on Twitter and other social media that the virus was a bio-weapon. The novel coronavirus has left at least 7,529 peopledead.

Scientists analysed the spike protein - the sharp point on the outside of the virus that it uses to penetrate the outer walls of human and animal cells. They found that the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein (a hook like structure that grips host cells) had evolved to effectively target the ACE2 receptors, responsible for regulating blood pressure in humans.

The SARS -CoV-2 spike protein was so effective at binding the human cells, in fact, that the scientists concluded it was the result of natural selection and not the product of genetic engineering, according to ScienceDaily, a website on science and research news. Scientists also found that the molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2 was similar to those of bats and pangolins.

"By comparing the available genome sequence data for known coronavirus strains, we can firmly determine that SARS-CoV-2 originated through natural processes," said Kristian Andersen, associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research and corresponding author on the paper in ScienceDaily.

The two scenarios suggested by the authors of the study are that the virus may have evolved through natural selection of an intermediate host animal and then transferred to humans from that animal. There are no documented cases of direct bat-human transmission. The other scenario suggested a non-pathogenic (an organism that does not cause disease) version jumped from an animal host on to humans and then gradually transformed into a pathogenic state within humans.

Co-author Andrew Rambaut of the University of Edinburgh said it was difficult to ascertain at this point which of the scenarios was most likely. "Even before this study within the scientific community it was clear that the virus was not designed on purpose. This is simply because the genetic sequence and molecular structure of coronaviruses in earlier outbreaks like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) was very different," said Shashank Tripathi, assistant professor and Wellcome Trust India Alliance intermediate fellow, Microbiology & Cell Biology Department, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

Tripathi, commenting on the issue in his individual capacity, added: "The structure of SARS-CoV-2 is too far apart from those and that it was not designed or replicated. The closest match of the virus structure is in fact those found in horseshoe bats and pangolins."

"Having said that we need to know what kind of research was going on in the Wuhan Institute of Virology with respect to coronaviruses. China needs to be forthcoming on that," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The first images of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease from India have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, by real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 9 -- The Boris Johnson government on Thursday eased lockdown restrictions further after what it called "huge progress" in dealing with the coronavirus pandemic, and allowed live music, art and theatre shows in the open, besides permitting gyms and pools to re-open.

As on Thursday, the UK had recorded 44.602 deaths and 287,004 positive cases, but daily and weekly rise in new infections and deaths have been dwindling, allowing for progressively more economic sectors and areas of public life to re-open from later this month.

Stating that the UK is now a "step closer" to normality, culture secretary Oliver Dowden said:

"The reopening of gyms is the news millions across the country have been waiting for with many people desperate to jump on a spinning bike or dive into a pool".

"Our comprehensive guidance will ensure gyms, pools and leisure centres have the support they need to reopen safely for their customers and staff. Helping people return to gyms safely will also help the nation get match-fit to defeat this virus".

Officials, however, said the people will still need to remain cautious and follow guidance about social distancing, wearing face covering and limiting interaction with people outside their immediate family and friends circles.

Leisure centres and indoor gyms, along with swimming pools and other indoor sports facilities, have been closed in the UK since March 21. Various organisations have lobbied the government to allow them to re-open in recent days.

Dowden said: "The reopening of gyms is the news millions across the country have been waiting for with many people desperate to jump on a spinning bike or dive into a pool. Our comprehensive guidance will ensure gyms, pools and leisure centres have the support they need to reopen safely for their customers and staff".

"Helping people return to gyms safely will also help the nation get match-fit to defeat this virus," he added.

Leicester in the east Midlands remains under lockdown, unlike the rest of England, where pubs, restaurants and galleries are among those allowed to re-open. Testing in the city with a large population of Indian origin has shown falling number of infections.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 15 -- Shilpa Shetty and her husband, Raj Kundra, welcomed their baby girl Samisha on February 15, 2020, via surrogacy. The little one came as a blessing into their lives; they had been trying to have a second child for five years. They are also parents to a seven-year-old son, Viaan.

In an Instagram post, Shilpa had shared the happy news. "Our prayers have been answered with a miracle. With gratitude in our hearts we are thrilled to announce the arrival of our little Angel. Samisha Shetty Kundra. Born on 15th February 2020 Junior SSK in the house," she wrote.

The post also revealed the beautiful origin of the baby girl's name. "'Sa' in Sanskrit is 'to have', and 'Misha' in Russian stands for 'someone like God'. You personify this name - our Goddess Laxmi, and complete our family," the actor wrote.

Also see: Zack Snyder's Justice League trailer teases intense faceoff between Batman and Joker. Watch

As Samisha turns one, here is a look at some of her adorable pictures and videos:

Not long after Samisha's birth, the country went into a lockdown on account of the Covid-19 pandemic. However, Shilpa made the most of this time, attending to her children.

"My role as a mother takes precedence over everything. I wanted time to myself because I was like, 'I have a new baby, how will I manage?' God has his special ways of working things around for you. This break, unfortunately, came at a time which isn't a happy situation for people suffering from it. For me, it was a much-needed break for my two kids," she told Hindustan Times in an earlier interview.

On the work front, Shilpa will be seen next in Sabbir Khan's Nikamma, which marks her comeback to acting after more than a decade. She also has Priyadarshan's comedy, Hungama 2, ready for release.

When Samisha turned six months old, Shilpa had reflected on how fast she was growing up. "One moment they are so tiny, your arms seem too big for them... you blink and they've outgrown it! As our little angel Samisha turns 6 months old today, she's started turning onto her tummy... signs of being 'independent' already. Soon, she'll be sitting up, crawling, and then... my workouts will mainly comprise of running behind her. We'll cross that bridge when we get to it, but for now, I'm loving this time with her. Watching her grow, crossing new milestones every day is a complete blessing and I'm not complaining one bit. Happy 1/2 birthday, our Angel," the actor wrote.

Shilpa is all set to return to the big screen after a hiatus of 13 years. She will be seen in Sabbir Khan's Nikamma alongside Abhimanyu Dassani and Shirley Setia. She also has Priyadarshan's comedy Hungama 2 in the pipeline.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The coronavirus pandemic has infected around 600,000 people across the globe and claimed more than 24,000 lives worldwide, the World Health Organisation states.

From China, the virus spread quickly to the rest of the world, finding a new epicentre in Europe and the United States. For the first time for any country, US Covid-19 figures crossed 100,000 surpassing China's record of over 81,000 Covid-19 cases.

Here are key Covid-19 developments from across the globe.

1. The United States continues to lead with 101,657 cases followed by Italy, China and Spain.

2. Covid-19 has already plunged the global economy into recession, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said on Friday.

3. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, UK health secretary Matt Hancock and chief medical officer Chris Whitty test positive.

4. Death toll in Italy surged by 919 to a total of 9,134. It's the highest number of deaths in a day.

5. If the rate of growth in Covid-19 cases continues, the New York City area will suffer a more severe outbreak than those experienced in Wuhan, China or the Lombardy region of Italy, says a New York Times analysis. Death toll in New York jumped to 519, 40 per cent of US.

6. A New York hospital has started sharing on ventilators, putting two patients on each.

7. US President Donald Trump signed into law an unprecedented $2 trillion rescue plan Friday to salvage an economy crippled by coronavirus.

8. US President Donald Trump also used for the first time war-time powers under the Defense Production Act, under increasing pressure from state governors, to force a private company, General Motors, to ramp up production of ventilators needed to treat severely ill Covid-19 patients.

9. The US, France, Germany and other countries are engaged in hectic efforts to evacuate close to 14,000 of their nationals stranded in India following the suspension of commercial flights around the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

10. Chinese President Xi Jinping on Friday called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 30 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Govt may plan scheme for welfare, jobs of migrants

The Narendra Modi government may consider an ambitious, targeted programme to ensure welfare and jobs for millions of migrants who have returned home during the Covid19 pandemic. Read more.

Meant to eradicate locusts, pesticides affect soil, crops

The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations said on Friday that it may declare the locust invasion a plague if it takes a turn for the worse after breeding by the voracious, crop-crunching insects in India, Pakistan and West Africa. Read more.

Centre may announce 2nd stimulus to increase demand after lockdown is lifted

The government may unveil another stimulus package of fiscal, monetary and policy measures to boost demand in the economy after the nationwide lockdown imposed for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic is completely lifted, three officials familiar with the development said on Friday. Read more.

Potterheads, take note: Alia Bhatt joins Daniel Radcliffe, Eddie Redmayne on Wizarding World to read Harry Potter And The Philosopher's Stone

The words from J.K. Rowling's magical world have magicked their way into our hearts and how! The 7-part Harry Potter series, J.K. Rowling's most famous work to date, has been touted to be a children's books. Read more.

Radhika Madan describes taking a flight during Covid-19 times: 'It was like a scene out of an apocalyptic film'

Actor Radhika Madan, who flew to New Delhi from Mumbai during the coronavirus pandemic, has described the experience as "a scene out of an apocalyptic film." Read more.

How to use Google's AR tool Sodar for social distancing

Google and Apple are working on a contact tracing tool but in the meanwhile Google has found a way to help you practice social distancing and adjust to what just might become the 'new normal'. Google's AR-based tool Sodar is what you need to try out. Read more.

Back India's call for reform of WHO: Italian Minister | WorldView

Italy wants an independent inquiry into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic in China and backs India's calls for reform of multilateral bodies such as WHO, Italy's minister for European Affairs Vincenzo Amendola tells WorldView in an interview over Skype. Watch video.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Sept. 7 -- The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) on Sunday said it is all geared up to resume services, and meet all challenges including crowd management, after a five-and-a-half-month-long hiatus from Monday.

With transport experts expressing concerns over the issue of crowding inside the network and outside the transit stations, DMRC officials said it has put necessary arrangements in place to maintain social distancing and hygiene, which is crucial to control the spread of Covid-19 infection.

In an interview to HT last week, DMRC chief Mangu Singh had said that crowding is indeed a concern and they will make efforts to "break the peak".

Singh had told HT, "We want to ensure that there is no peak in crowding; that there is an even flow. We want people to support us and plan journeys accordingly because this is the best way to utilise the system. And we will also be able to provide the best service."

The DMRC has issued a detailed advisory for commuters about the dos and don'ts while travelling in Metro in the new normal post-coronavirus pandemic. Anuj Dayal, executive director, corporate communication, DMRC, on Sunday said, "Besides 'break the peak', DMRC appeals to commuters to talk less during travel in the Metro to prevent the possibility of short-range aerosol transmission."

The other concern, raised especially by medical experts, is of strict enforcement of social distancing norms.

With the Metro, which is the transport lifeline of Delhi and NCR, starting its services with reduced capacity -from 360-400 passengers to 50 passengers per coach-experts say crowding at stations and outside is bound to happen. The DMRC has decided that if the train is full or there is a crowd at the station, the train will skip the station.

Experts say crowding is likely on stations which are immediately on the line after the point of origin. "Not many people take the Metro for short distances. The train is bound to be full at the starting point. So, what happens to passengers who will be waiting at the third or the fourth station?" said Mukti Advani, principal scientist, transportation planning division, CSIR-Central Road Research Institute.

She added, "For this, the DMRC can spread out the starting point, that is the trains can start from multiple stations so that those on station falling in the middle of the corridor are also able to travel without waiting for too long."

DMRC officials say that a plan has been worked out to avoid such a situation. Dayal said, "To prevent crowding in trains/stations, we may have to opt for starting certain empty trains from terminal stations or short loop some trains to manage the crowded zones on a particular route/section."

He added, "This dynamic regulation of train movement will be based on the ground situation at given hours and one may have to skip a train or two, leading to extra time in completing the travel."

The measures planned by DMRC for crowd management inside the network, experts say, might result in congestion outside the station. While the situation inside might be good, transport expert Sewa Ram said, there could be chaos on the streets outside the station. "They should set up queuing areas outside the station so that people can wait in case the station gates have to be closed due to rush inside," said Sewa Ram, professor at School of Planning and Architecture.

To begin with, the DMRC is starting its service on the Yellow line (HUDA City Centre to Samayapur Badli) and subsequently open another line. By September 12, the entire network will be operational.

This is when the DMRC's crowd management plan will be put to test, especially at interchange stations. Transport experts say that it is impossible to know how many people at any given point of time will exit the trains at interchange stations.

"To manage crowds at interchange stations will be a real challenge. For this, the DMRC can work out a service plan in which it can ensure that all trains might not stop at a particular interchange station. Also, the DMRC should open all the Automated Fare Collection gates," said Amit Bhatt, director transport, WRI India.

With DMRC increasing the dwelling time at each station by 10-20 seconds for boarding-deboarding and extra time to sanitise the trains at the terminal stations, the frequency of trains is likely to drop. Bhatt said, "Efforts should be to increase the frequency of trains."

The DMRC has decided to push all the trains into service to minimise the frequency gap. It has also advised passengers to keep 15-30 minutes of extra time while planning their journey.

While the medical fraternity is divided over the decision to resume metro services, those in favour say that the DMRC should ensure strict enforcement of the safety norms needed to contain the spread of the infection.

Dr Jugal Kishore, head of community medicine at Safdarjung Hospital, said, "The most important thing is that people don't take off their masks inside the trains. They should deploy a person on trains to check that people wear masks properly. I personally feel that there is no need to leave a gap of one seat as long as people wear a mask. Those standing inside the trains will be touching multiple points and should be very careful."

Smita Nair, a resident of Janakpuri, said that the opening of Metro will be a huge relief to her. "I am an IT professional and I work in Noida. Our team was called back from June and ever since, I either have to pay a hefty amount for cab rides or depend on my husband to drop me. Metro station is barely two kilometres from my place and commuting now will be extremely convenient," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- The European Union-drafted resolution to seek a probe into the origin of the coronavirus disease that has killed over 300,000 people and the WHO's response has gained the support of over 100 countries including India, according to documents filed ahead of the World Health Organisation's (WHO) biggest annual event on Monday.

The World Health Assembly, the WHO's key policy making body, is meeting Monday afternoon, 3.30 pm IST. This is the first time that the meeting is being held via video conference. The conference will be wrapped up in two days for now and resume once the world gets a grip on the virus that has infected millions of people.

The resolution seeks a probe into the source of the virus, now called Sars-CoV-2, and the route of its introduction to the human population. Coronavirus, the disease that the pathogen causes, was first detected in China's Wuhan city.

But Beijing, which has been accused of trying to conceal the disease in the early days of its detection last year, occasionally insists that it could have originated elsewhere. More than one Chinese foreign ministry official has pointed to the United States.

Australia, who had played a lead role in building support for the resolution that targets China, has welcomed the growing support for the probe, according to news agency Reuters. Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said the resolution is "an important part of the conversation we started".

Australia has also borne the brunt of Beijing's anger for this role. Chinese authorities have threatened to impose heavy duties on barley imports and already suspended beef imports from four Australian suppliers.

Chinese foreign ministry has denied that the decision was linked to Australia's push for the Covid origin inquiry that it has described as "highly irresponsible" and could "disrupt international cooperation in fighting the pandemic".

Australia, backed by the United States, however, stayed the course and kept up its efforts.

An updated document on the WHO's website indicates that support for the resolution has been growing.

Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the 54-nation Africa Group have also signed off on the resolution that not only puts China's role but also that of the WHO leadership under scrutiny. In particular, WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

The draft resolution asks the WHO chief to start an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response including an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington/New Delhi, May 27 -- US President Donald Trump on Wednesday waded into the tense border standoff between India and China, saying he was "ready, willing and able to mediate" between the two Asian neighbours, a statement that could irk Beijing more than New Delhi.

Shortly before Trump made his offer through a tweet, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at a press conference in Beijing that the situation on the China-India border was "generally stable and controllable." The sides were communicating through both their front-line military units and their respective embassies to "properly resolve relevant issues through dialogue and consultation," Zhao said.

China is committed to abiding by agreements signed by the sides and to "maintaining peace and stability in the border area between China and India", he said.

China's ambassador to India, Sun Weidong, made a pitch for putting ties back on an even keel. Without referring to the border standoff, Sun told a webinar that the two sides "pose no threat to each other" and should "never let the differences shadow the overall. bilateral cooperation". At the same time, he added, they should seek "understanding through communication and constantly resolve differences".

There was no official reaction to both developments from Indian officials, but people familiar with developments acknowledged that the two sides were in contact through diplomatic channels in both New Delhi and Beijing to address the situation.

The Indian side has already made it clear that it won't allow any unilateral alteration of the status quo along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) even as it works towards a peaceful resolution of the worst stand-off since the 73-day face-off between border troops at Doklam in 2017.

Trump, who has in the past repeatedly offered to mediate between India and Pakistan on the issue of Kashmir and been rebuffed by New Delhi, said he had informed India and China of his offer. However, this couldn't be independently confirmed.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute. Thank you!" he tweeted.

The US has been closely tracking the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and Trump's remarks came a week after his administration's outgoing pointperson for South Asia, Alice Wells, strongly backed the Indian position in the standoff and said such disputes are a "reminder of the threat posed by China".

The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical", Wells told reporters on May 20. "And so whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had said.

Chinese envoy Sun Weidong, while fielding questions during the webinar organised by the Confederation of Young Leaders (CYL), underscored the importance of developing bilateral relations and deepening understanding of the "important consensus reached" by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping.

Without any reference whatsoever to the standoff, Sun said: "We should adhere to the basic judgment that China and India are each other's opportunities and pose no threat to each other. We need to see each other's development in a correct way and enhance strategic mutual trust.

"We should correctly view our differences and never let the differences shadow the overall situation of bilateral cooperation. At the same time, we should gradually seek understanding through communication and constantly resolve differences."

The "'Dragon and Elephant dancing together' is the only right choice for China and India" as it serves the fundamental interests of both countries, which should also strengthen cooperation in investment, production and other fields, Sun said.

Sun referred to the responses of both countries to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and said China "will continue to provide assistance to India within our capacity" to fight the pandemic. He also said the two sides will try to celebrate the 70th anniversary of diplomatic relations in various ways despite the pandemic.

Meanwhile, the Indian Army's top brass discussed security issues, including the border row with China in eastern Ladakh, where thousands of Indian and Chinese soldiers are locked in a standoff at multiple points, officials said.

Soldiers from both sides are eyeball-to-eyeball at four locations along the LAC and several rounds of talks between local military commanders have failed to break the deadlock.

The situation in eastern Ladakh was discussed in detail at the three-day army commanders' conference that began on Wednesday. "The apex level leadership of Indian Army will brainstorm on current emerging security and administrative challenges and chart the future course for the army," an army spokesperson said on Tuesday.

Trump's offer to mediate came against the backdrop of steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the US over the Covid-19 outbreak, which followed months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over alleged theft of intellectual property.

People closely involved with India-US discussions said Trump's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful hawks in his administration.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely, much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students," said a person familiar with these matters on condition of anonymity. "China believes it belongs to a more senior class, the argument goes, and will not take kindly to being monitored with India by a higher authority."

India is likely to reject Trump's offer, as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter of policy, which has bipartisan endorsement from all political parties.

Trump and his Republican allies have attacked China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak in a bid to hold it responsible for its spread in the US. Trump has also called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak and American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan.

About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a study conducted by Pew Research Center in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration (January 2017)," the research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Baba Ramdev claims to have prepared first ayurvedic medicine for Covid-19

Not an immunity booster but a cure, claimed Baba Ramdev on Monday as he unveiled, what he calls, the first ayurvedic vaccine against the coronavirus, even as the scientific community the world over is fighting hard to come up with a cure for the deadly disease. Read more

In push to 'Make in India' and 'Aatmanirbhar Bharat', govt makes mandatory for sellers to mention 'country of origin' on products for GeM platform

In a bid to promote Aatmanirbhar Bharat (self-reliant India) and push India's 'Make in India' cause, the government's procurement portal, Government e-Marketplace (GeM), has made it mandatory for sellers to mention 'country of origin' on products they wish to sell through the platform. Read more

China could set up border outposts in encroached territories: Nepal govt document

Massive road development projects in the Tibet Autonomous Region have led to rivers changing their course and expanding China's boundary into northern territories of Nepal, a document by Nepal's agriculture department has warned. Read more

Milan Fashion Week: Dior revives fashion shows, sans front row A-listers

French luxury label Christian Dior said on Monday it would press ahead with a calendar of fashion shows for this year starting in July with an Italian catwalk display - but without the celebrated front-row audience of A-listers. Read more

How Covid-19 is still accelerating, Djokovic under fire for Adria Tour

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top stories you need to know. Sunetra talks about the number of covid-19 cases in India, why the pandemic is still accelerating in the world, doctors apprehensive about issuing recovery certificates, Novak Djokovic faces criticism for Adria Tour after his coach and other players test positive and more. Watch to know more

What to say to your 'party-animal' friends who ask you to 'get together?' Mumbai Police answers

Who would have thought that a line from the song Ek Main Aur Ek Tu from 1975 romance-thriller Khel Khel Mein could be used so creatively to send across an important message on social distancing. Read more

Your iPhone will be your 'Car Key' in iOS 14: Here's how this Apple feature works

There were several announcements made by Apple during WWDC 2020 conference, with iOS 14 being one of the important ones. This new software will be coming to iPhone SE (1st gen) and later models with new features and several upgrades. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 3 -- After inaugurating Atal Tunnel in Himachal Pradesh's Rohtang, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a public rally in Solang and said the tunnel will help draw tourists to Himachal Pradesh from all across the world.

As the country is unlocking itself after Covid-19 lockdown, the tourism sector will also start getting back on track soon, the PM said, adding that the state is bound to see a rise in tourist footfall due to the tunnel.

He also took the opportunity to talk about farm laws that were passed in Parliament last month and said that the laws, just like Atal Tunnel, will help small farmers in the long run.

Small farmers who wish to sell their produce in markets far away from their origin would be able to do so with the help of this tunnel, PM Modi said.

"Our country is bound to change for the better. An example of this is the introduction of farm bills. For us, the priority is our farmers, for earlier governments it was elections," PM Modi said.

"Dreams of youth of Himachal Pradesh and all of India are important to us. These developments will help fulfil them. I would like to congratulate the state and the country again for the inauguration of Atal Tunnel," he added.

Along with the inauguration of Atal Tunnel, another decision was taken for the people of Himachal, the PM said, adding that a 66 MW Dhaulasidh Hydro Electric Project in Hamirpur was recently approved. "This project will not only give electricity to the country, it'll also give employment to the youth of Himachal," PM said.

Defence minister Rajnath Singh, Himachal Pradesh chief minister Jairam Thakur and Union minister Anurag Thakur also attend the Solang Nala rally.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Jan. 17 -- As India begins its Covid-19 vaccination drive, it must protect against leaving its population with partial or subpar immunity to the coronavirus that may ultimately risk triggering mutations, experts who have tracked the launch of immunisations in the US and the UK have said, advising careful focus on speed as well as accuracy.

Viruses mutate due to what is known as selection pressure and - in addition to evolution within immunocompromised people - this could also happen in case of vaccines if the doses are given in a manner does not to lead to highest efficacy, or if they offer inadequate protection. "We know that the virus mutates... A subpar immune response may give immunological advantage to the virus and it may induce more genetic diversity within the virus," said Maria Elena Bottazzi, the associate dean, National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, in an interview to HT.

Bottazzi was speaking in the context of a debate in the US and the UK on whether to delay the second doses to ensure that vaccine inventories are used up to inoculate as many people as quickly possible - a strategy that may not be scientifically sound.

India has decided not to follow this model, and to give the vaccine at the 28-day intervals recommended by the manufacturers. "Scientifically, it is very clear that you need the doses at the right time to really get a robust immune response with good neutralising antibodies. So if we don't vaccinate people on time, they might end up with a subpar level of immune response and that could be complicating because we know the virus mutates," Botazzi said.

"I understand the anxiety of trying to have as many people vaccinated but I think it should be on the basis of how much inventory we have. Yes, vaccinate as many people as possible but you have to make sure that each individual has the required second dose."

A similar threat is also posed if the vaccines are not as effective. "A partially effective vaccine could drive the evolution of new variants, which would be a serious problem," said John P Moore, leading virologist and professor at Cornell University's Weill Cornell Medicine in an interview over email. Concerns over efficacy have surrounded one of the vaccines that India rolled out on Saturday since Covaxin, made by Bharat Biotech, is yet to reach the clinical trial threshold where it can be determined if and by how much the vaccine is able to offer protection from disease.

At the time of its approval, authorities said that it is likely to be a better option in fighting mutations that have been seen in several countries since it uses a whole virion to train the body to recognise the pathogen, instead of just the Spike protein that most other vaccines mimic for an immune response. "There is no reason why an inactivated virus vaccine would automatically be superior to an adenovirus vector vaccine. Only data can show which is better," said Moore, while adding that such remarks by administration members could be "based on the national origins of the vaccines". "That has happened in the UK too, where the British government speaks very, very highly of the Oxford vaccine," he added.

The two experts also said that it is important to ensure that immunisation programmes avoid controversy that could fuel vaccine scepticism. For instance, the approval to a vaccine without efficacy data "was not a good idea", according to Moore. "It would not happen in the US, or in Western Europe. The Russians and Chinese have done this. I don't think it's a good idea, as it could harm public confidence in what they are being asked to take," he said.

The concerns surfaced on Saturday, when at least two doctors groups - the Tamil Nadu doctors' association and a group of doctors in Delhi's Ram Manohar Lohia hospital - indicated they were reluctant to take Covaxin.

Like Covaxin, the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine (called Covishield in India), dose also elicited some controversy after its trials were found to have been conducted with unplanned dosing and threw up varying efficacy numbers. However, both vaccines have in early clinical stages have proven safety and an ability to trigger an immune response.

When they cleared the Oxford-AstraZeneca dose, regulators in UK said second doses can be delayed by up to 12 weeks in order to focus on reaching as many people as possible for first shots since even those can provide some immunity. The approach, however, was not part of clinical trials.

The authorities were partly driven by the fast spread of the B.1.1.7 variant of the coronavirus (also known as VOC202012/01), which has been linked to higher infectivity. Following its discovery, several other variants have been found - some of which have raised fears that vaccines may be rendered obsolete.

"We are concerned with any mutation that occurs in the spike or particularly in the RBD (receptor binding domain - the portion of the virus responsible for entering a host cell). There is initial data that is giving us optimism that some of this may not alter the ability of producing neutralising antibodies with the vaccines," said Bottazzi, whose team at Baylor is also developing a DNA recombinant vaccine with Hyderabad-based Biological E. The vaccine candidate is in Phase I/II trials.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 23 -- Two of the world's closest neighbours, India and Nepal, are locked in a cartographic, diplomatic, and to an extent, a political stand-off. The dispute is over the ownership of nearly 330 sq km of land called Kalapani near Nepal's western tri-junction with India and China.

The dispute was triggered in November 2019 when India issued a new map to indicate the changed status of Jammu and Kashmir into a Union Territory. Nepal raised objections because the Kalapani area was shown as being in India. Indian maps have always shown it that way; therefore, there was no change in the map. This was followed by Nepal's objections to the inauguration of a road from Darchula to Lipu Lekh Pass, aimed at strengthening India's defence supply lines as well as facilitating smooth passage for pilgrims to Kailash Mansarovar in Tibet. Nepal said this road is an encroachment on its sovereignty. There have been street protests, parliament has agitated, and now the Nepal government has issued its map showing Kalapani as its territory. New Delhi has reiterated that the area belongs to India, and would be willing to resolve the dispute through diplomatic negotiations after the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) crisis is over.

Nepal's claims are rooted in the Sugauli Treaty signed with the British in March 1816. In this, Nepal renounced "all claims to or connextions (as in original text) with the countries lying to the west of river Kali..." (Art.V). The land east of the Kali thus remained with Nepal. This claim is reinforced by some old revenue records and gazette notifications.

India accepts this position, but its claim arises from the ambiguity in the treaty on the identification of the Kali river and its origin. According to India, the river originates from Lipu Lekh and then merges into other streams and tributaries to become the Mahakali. Nepal's contention is that Kali originates from Limpiyadhura and the stream originating from Lipu Lekh is called Lipu Khola. Hence the dispute. The area between these two streams is Kalapani. The treaty underwent some revisions to accommodate Nepal in the Terai (southern part) and was finally endorsed by the British government on November 15, 1860.

The maps issued by the British between 1816 and 1860 generally favour the Nepali position. But, the maps issued afterwards endorse India's position. It is possible that the British administration changed this position through proper surveys or subsequently decided to manipulate this position, to serve its larger strategic and commercial interests in using the Lipu Lekh pass for access to Tibet. Independent India was handed over access to Kalapani and Lipu Lekh by the British.

Blaming India for any encroachment is baseless. It must be borne in mind that much before the British came, or the Gurkha kings annexed Kumaon and Garhwal regions - then surrendered under the Sugauli Treaty - Indians were using this route for the pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar. The route has deep spiritual and civilisational significance for India. China accepted Lipu Lekh as one of the cultural and commercial transit points with India under its 1954 Peaceful Co-Existence Agreement. This was reiterated in 2015 in a joint statement during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to China.

Nepal has endorsed India's position for nearly 150 years. It used Indian maps showing Kalapani, Limpiyadhura and Lipu Lekh in India. Objections to this were raised in the 1980s, but were ignored by the royal regimes. Since 2000, the two surveyed the length of their boundary to resolve outstanding issues, except in two areas, including Kalapani. It is mutually agreed that these issues will be resolved through diplomatic negotiations.

Why then has the Nepal government turned up the heat on the Kalapani issue? Prime Minister KP Oli faces serious internal opposition at the moment, including from within his ruling Nepal Communist Party. This is largely on account of his governance failures and lack of action on combating the pandemic. He has consolidated his nationalist image since 2015 by fighting India's ill-advised diplomatic intervention on the constitution issue and the counterproductive economic coercion (partial economic blockade) that followed. He perhaps hopes that this face-off with India on Kalapani will give him a new lease of political life.

The strategic community in India apprehends that Nepal is also being prompted by China to get India out of Kalapani. Indian Army chief General MM Navrane's indirect reference in an Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses lecture may be recalled here. This apparently conflicts with China's endorsement of the Indian position in 1954 and 2015. However, China is seldom straight in diplomacy. It is unhappy with India's growing strategic proximity to the United States. It has also objected to India's defence infrastructure upgradation projects all along the border. The Darchula-Lipu Lekh road is one such project. Needling India and alienating Kathmandu from New Delhi serves China's broader purpose. This explains why is it is playing an active role in preserving the unity of the Nepal Communist Party and protecting the Oli regime.

Prolonging this stand-off is not in the interest of either Nepal or India. It will be exploited by the third parties to their advantage. India and Nepal, keeping in mind their mutual stakes and concerns, should through resilient and mutually accommodative diplomacy, resolve this.

SD Muni is professor emeritus, Jawaharlal Nehru University, and a former ambassador

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Aug. 18 -- The government is in the process of setting up a system to secure the country's financial sector from cyber attacks after agencies pointed to its vulnerability due to the increase in number of digital transactions over the past few months on account of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic, and threats from hostile countries such as China and Pakistan, three officials aware of the plans said on condition of anonymity.

At present, the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) deals with all types of cyber security threats but officials in the administration have been discussing the need for a specialised agency, which could be called Cert-Fin, the officials said, asking not to be identified.

"This is a work in progress. Several rounds of discussions have been held at the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) on the matter of securing the financial sector from cyber attacks," one of the officials said.

FSDC is an apex body for coordination between the various regulators of the financial sector, and is chaired by the finance minister.

Its members include top bureaucrats and heads of financial sector regulators such as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi), the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority of India (PFRDA), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the Forward Markets Commission (FMC).

"The government may set up a Computer Emergency Response Team for Financial Sector (CERT-Fin). This has been also discussed at FSDC, but a final decision is awaited as the government wants to take a comprehensive view of cyber security" a second official said. CERT-Fin was first proposed on February 1, 2017 by then finance minister, the late Arun Jaitley.

Banking and ATM networks have been the target of cyber criminals for several years, with attackers often disrupting operations and attempting to steal sensitive data. In one of the biggest attacks of this kind, the data of 3.2 million debit cards used in India was stolen after a malware was injected in a back-end banking system in 2016.

A third official said cyber security, in general, tops the government's agenda since it can disrupt social and political harmony and dislocate financial systems.

Based on inputs from agencies such CERT-In and complaints received by agencies, the government recently decided to ban 59 mobile applications mostly of Chinese origin over what it said was concerns that they may be jeopardising user data.

The security of the financial system has been accorded high priority ; Prime Minister Narendra Modi raised the matter in his Independence Day speech on Saturday. CERT-In functions under the ministry of electronics and information technology (MeitY).

The finance ministry and MeitY did not respond to queries on this matter.

The PM announced on Saturday that a draft of new cyber security policy would be unveiled soon. He said that the government was aware of cyber threats "to the social fabric" and the "economy".

According to the proposal under consideration, Cert-Fin will draw expertise from various financial sector agencies such as the ministry of corporate affairs (MCA), the Employees Provident Fund Organization (EPFO), the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO), the Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) and the Goods and Service Tax Network (GSTN).

RBI's latest Financial Stability Report also flagged the issue of cyber threats to the financial sector. "Cyber security preparedness requires continuous and synchronous efforts from multiple stakeholders with varied levels of cyber security preparedness," it said.

Quoting a report by VMware Carbon Black, Shree Parthasarathy, partner and national leader- Cyber Risk Services at Deloitte India said that hackers from various countries attempted over 40,000 cyber attacks on India's Information Technology infrastructure and banking sector over five days in the last week of June.

Cyber attacks against banks and financial institutions globally have increased 238% amid the Covid-19 crisis between February and April 2020.

Ransomware attacks increased by nine times during the same period.

"Cyber threats are fast evolving and the threat landscape is dynamic. It will be foolhardy to assume current set of controls are adequate," he said adding that "the CERT-Fin is necessary though it may not be adequate."

"The combination of a sudden pandemic, quarantine and unconventional work from home situations has exacerbated this security threat," said GV Anand Bhushan, partner at law firm Shardul Amarchand Mangaldas & Co.

"India was ranked 23rd in the UN Cyber security Index amongst 165 nations. We need to view India as a 'maturing' and 'evolving' category of countries which are continually trying to improve cyber security measures," he added.

Bhushan described CERT-Fin as a grand vision.

Unfortunately till date there has been no budgetary allocation for setting up such a body, he said, adding that it was however clear that CERT-In alone would not be able to meet the emerging challenges in the space.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, June 22 -- US President Donald Trump on Saturday told supporters at an election rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma that he had ordered officials to slow down testing for Covid-19 as it led to more cases.

"You know testing is a double edged sword," Trump said,. "When you do testing to that extent you're going to find more cases. So I said to my people slow the testing down."

His remarks came as Covid-19 cases in the US rose the most in three weeks as infections topped 30,000 for a second straight day on Sunday, adding to concern about a resurgence. Tulsa county, where Trump held the rally, on Sunday reported a record high of 143 cases in the last 24 hours.

The campaign of presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden slammed Trump's admission on testing as an "an outrageous moment" that showed he "is putting politics ahead of the safety and economic well-being of the American people".

Trump unleashed months of pent-up grievances about the coronavirus, which he dubbed the "Kung flu," a racist term referring to its origins in China. He also tried to defend his handling of the pandemic.

But his intended show of political force featured thousands of empty seats and six new coronavirus cases on his own campaign staff, hours before the rally began.

Based on an estimated 1 million RSVPs, the campaign had planned an indoor rally and one outdoors for the spillover crowd. No one showed up for the outdoor event.

Evidently surprised and embarrassed the campaign sought to blame protestors and media for the low turnout.

"Radical protestors, coupled with a relentless onslaught from the media, attempted to frighten off the President's supporters. We are proud of the thousands who stuck it out," Tim Murtaugh, a campaign spokesman, said.

There were sporadic incidents of clashes between Trump supporters and protestors, but not as widespread or of a scale as portrayed by the Trump campaign.

Police used pepper balls in once instance, Tulsaworld, a local news publication, reported. One protester was arrested, but he was demonstrating peacefully.

In a speech lasting almost two hours, the president slammed Biden seeking to tie him to the antiracism protests that have ripped through the country over the past weeks, marked by violence, looting and clashes with law enforcements forces.

On Sunday, White House official Peter Navarro said the Trump administration was preparing for a second wave of Covid-19 . "We are filling the stockpile in anticipation of a possible problem in the fall," he told CNN.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 16 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other updates from Hindustan Times.

Parliament monsoon session: Former PM Manmohan Singh, 15 others to remain absent

Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is among the Rajya Sabha MPs who have sought the Upper House's permission to remain absent for a part of or the entire monsoon session. Read more

'No infiltration reported along Indo-China border during last six months': MHA in Rajya Sabha

The Union home ministry on Wednesday said in Parliament that no infiltration has been reported along the border with China in the last last six months. Read more

'Investigate Karan Johar's party video': Politician files complaint with NCB against Deepika Padukone, Vicky Kaushal and others

Former Shiromani Akali Dal MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa, perhaps encouraged with the current conversation around Bollywood's alleged drug abuse problem, has once again raked up Karan Johar's house party video. Read more

IPL 2020: Five penalty runs will stop teams from Mankading, says Muttiah Muralitharan

Without bowling, life is 'boring' for Muttiah Muralitharan. So at the slightest of excuses, cricket's greatest spinner is found doing what he does best: befuddling batsmen. His recent outing came at a Sunrisers Hyderabad (SRH) training session, because there were "not as many net bowlers." Read more

Study of cities reveals Delhi saved 3 days of commute time during Covid lockdown

In a study of how much time commuters in global cities saved between March and July, New Delhi has come out on top with 79 hours that would have otherwise been spent in getting from one location to another. Read more

Apple Watch 6, Watch SE, iPad Air, iPad 8th gen go official, check India prices here

Apple made a host of announcements late last evening through a virtual Apple Event. Unlike every other year, Apple did not announce a new iPhone lineup this September and unveiled four other devices instead - the Apple Watch Series 6, Apple Watch SE, the 8th generation iPad and a new iPad Air. Read more

Vishwakarma Puja 2020: Significance, Date, Timing and Muhurat

Vishwakarma Jayanti, also known as Vishwakarma Puja, marks the birth of the Hindu god, Vishwakarma, who is believed to be the creator of the world, and is referred to as the divine architect. Read more

Covid-19: India hits 5 million, cases yet to peak; Sputnik V trials to begin

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top stories you need to know. Sunetra talks about the number of Covid-19 cases in India so far; country's hotspots witnessing a rising curve; trials for Sputnik V to begin in india; scientist revives 'lab-origin theory'; rise of cases in the national capital. Watch

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 18 -- The British Association for Physicians of Indian Origin (Bapio) on Friday said it has joined a legal challenge by two doctors against Britain's health authorities for allegedly inadequate provision and guidance on personal protection equipment in the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic.

The challenge has been brought by doctor-couple Nishant Joshi and Meenal Viz. A high court judge will decide whether to grant permission for a judicial review. The legal papers also include a witness statement by Bapio president Ramesh Mehta.

Over 300 health and social care workers have died due to the virus. The review is sought to challenge the lawfulness of the PPE guidance published by the Department of Health and Social Care and Public Health England, which the petitioners say exposed the workers to the virus.

Mehta said: "This case by Joshi and Viz is vital in establishing the obligation of government and its official bodies in the protection of health and social care workers against a second wave of Covid-19 and future pandemics".

Bapio said that as the largest organisation representing doctors, nurses and other care workers from the non-white communities, who have suffered disproportionately in terms of infections and fatalities, it commissioned and published several surveys on their experience.

Mehta said it was the first medical organisation to write to the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, expressing concern about the disproportionate deaths of non-white doctors. Fatalities include several doctors and nurses of Indian heritage.

Joshi and Viz, who have applied to the high court for permission to bring judicial review proceedings, have named Bapio as an interested party. The PPE guidance in focus allegedly included advice to use plastic aprons in hospitals, if gowns run out.

Hospitals across the UK faced a severe shortage of PPE in the initial stages of the pandemic, until the Boris Johnson government imported large quantities, including some from India, besides making procurement from within the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- The government on Tuesday announced 200 new trains a day from June 1 in addition to the Shramik Specials for migrant workers and the premium passenger trains connecting Delhi with 15 cities. The new non-AC trains are expected to cater to small towns, in a fresh step to boost connectivity that has been thrown off track by the lockdown imposed to stop the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). On the vaccine front, Moderna's experimental vaccine has emerged as a front-runner in global efforts to stop the pandemic.

From June 1, govt to restart 200 trains but without ACs, bookings to start soon

Indian Railways will run 200 special passenger trains a day from June 1 and online ticket booking will begin soon, railway minister Piyush Goyal said on Tuesday, in a fresh step aimed at gradually resuming normalcy in the services of the national carrier. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

Is Mumbai India's New York? And is Maharashtra, India's New York State? The questions are in the context of the coronavirus disease. New York State accounts for 356,278 (as of Tuesday morning) of the total of around 1.51 million cases in the country - around 23.5%. Read more

22 migrant workers killed in road accidents across 5 states

Twenty-two people were killed in separate road accidents in five states on Tuesday, taking the death toll in such incidents involving migrant labourers to at least 162 during the lockdown imposed to stop the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Read more

Faster vaccines likely if Moderna effort succeeds

Moderna's experimental vaccine against the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has emerged the front-runner in the global effort to stop the pandemic after an early trial showed it produced virus-neutralising antibodies similar to those found in recovered patients. Read more

Virus ideally suited to infect humans: Study

The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infecting human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has, until Tuesday, killed over 318,000 people and sickened more than 4.8 million globally. Read more

Temperature, humidity may do little to halt the spread of Covid

Higher temperature and humidity may do little to arrest the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, a new study has found, adding to a growing body of literature that indicate that the correlation between local climate conditions and virus transmission is weak. Read more

Whole new ball game in art of swing

Saliva is out. The International Cricket Council's (ICC) Cricket Committee, led by Anil Kumble, recommended a ban on using saliva and allowed only sweat to shine the ball, as part of its guidelines to resume the game in the time of Covid-19. Read more

'Mutations in virus not specific to India,' says Harsh Vardhan

The Sars-CoV-2 viruses causing coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has three major strains, but no key mutation specific to India has been found that affects infectiveness or disease severity, said Minister of Health and Science & Technology Dr Harsh Vardhan in his first interview after Covid-19 cases crossed 100,000 in India on Monday. Read more

Donald Trump shoots letter to WHO, threatens to exit world body

US President Donald Trump on Monday threatened to pull America out of the World Health Organization (WHO) and permanently stop US funding for the world body if it did not "commit to major substantive improvements" in the next 30 days. Read more

ICMR releases guidelines for testing suspected Covid deaths

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has directed all hospitals to take nasal swab samples from dead bodies of suspected coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases, to test for the virus, in a detailed autopsy guideline for patients. Read more

Covid-19 crisis: 100,000 samples tested for second straight day

Over 100,000 samples were tested for Covid-19 in India on a second consecutive day (101,475) on Tuesday and took the total number of tests to more than 2.4 million in about four months, officials aware of the matter said. Read more

Shramik Specials:Consent of receiving states no longer required

Consent of states where trains ferrying migrants terminate is not needed to run the special Shramik trains, the government said on Tuesday, reversing an earlier order that called for the mutual agreement of both sending and receiving states in order to transport stranded labourers to their hometowns. Read more

Cong offer on buses for migrants sparks UP tussle

The Uttar Pradesh government and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's office continued to exchange letter (over e-mail) and charges related to the latter's plan to send 1000 buses to help transport migrants in Uttar Pradesh. Read more

Sonia Gandhi to chair Oppn leaders' meeting

Congress president Sonia Gandhi will on Friday chair an opposition leaders' meeting via video-conferencing to discuss the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown, the Centre's Rs 20 lakh crore package, the plight of migrants, farmers and the suspension of labour laws in Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-ruled states. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 13 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US... The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month, we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last , of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Civid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analyses clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17.

Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study, dismissing conspiracy theories about the lab origin of the virus.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "The chances of similar outbreaks are lower if the virus infects humans and then evolve its highly pathogenic properties. The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat. "I believe the coming reality for the world will be one where we are always defending against this enemy. A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoys on Covid-19, told Hindustan Times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 18 -- The government's decision to open the gates for private facilities to test for the coronavirus infection has the potential to urgently scale up the country's testing capacity that experts say is necessary to effectively fight the deadly disease that has claimed 7,500 lives worldwide.

But experts warn that if diagnosis criteria is not relaxed and more people allowed for testing, the benefits of allowing private labs might be nullified and India left fighting an uphill battle against the infection that can dramatically expand in reach over a few days.

Currently, the Indian authorities limit testing to only government facilities for only people with a history of travel abroad, who have come in close contact with someone testing positive for the virus, or health workers. Only people showing symptoms are tested.

But the strict eligibility criteria and limited number of testing centres - 72 in a country with a population of 1.3 billion people - has ensured that many people are finding it difficult to get tested.

Moreover, the need to rope in more labs and private players is made clear by the problems plaguing government testing and sample collection centres, where experts admit there exists a clear infection risk because of long hours of waiting and overcrowding.

India currently tests the lowest number of people per capita among major countries grappling with the coronavirus outbreak: a mere 8.6 tests per million, compared with 4,831 per million in south Korea, 2,820 in China and 533 in the United Kingdom, which has been criticised for not testing enough and reversed its "herd immunity" policy after grim projections.

"We do need to do more testing. I have made that clear. You don't know what you are dealing with until you test. What is the harm in testing?" asked Dr Gagandeep Kang, director of Translational Health Science and Technology Institute.

A number of experts have called for private players to be roped in, testing eligibility relaxed and more aggressive diagnosis protocols adopted.

"There are enough PCR [polymerase chain reaction] machines and we have the ability to make reagents for testing. Open it up to the Indian companies. They are good at reducing cost. They can develop tests that are cheaper," said Kang.

Even in the national capital, patients have complained of many problems. Overcrowded hospitals have turned away travellers who travelled from affected countries and wanted to get tested on the basis that they didn't show symptoms, even though research has shown that symptoms may take up to 14 days to appear.

"I was impressed by the response of the Indian government, till I reached the sample collection centre. I have been standing here for over two hours and now I just feel like running away," said a 27-year-old Australian national, who was standing outside the sample collection centre at Dr Ram Manohar Lohia hospital. She had travelled to Delhi for work.

On Tuesday morning, the Australian woman called the government helpline number and informed them she was fatigued and had a sore throat. "They came to my hotel and picked me up in an ambulance. All the health care workers were in complete protective gear. It was scary but it was also good. Then, they just dropped me here with my bags and asked me to wait," she said.

For almost an hour, she couldn't figure out what to do because none of the hospital staff posted outside the sample collection centre spoke English. "They took me inside the hospital to find someone who could explain what I needed to do," she said.

If she had the infection, she may have infected people inside the hospital.

And it is not just her. In the corridor outside the two rooms collecting the samples at the collection centre, close to 70 people sat next to each other waiting for up to two hours. Open on all sides, several people passed by this "restricted area" all day round. There was no check on who entered the corridor.

RML hospital collects nearly 70 samples for Covid-19 each day.

But the corridor outside has hundreds of people waiting. Many reached the hospital without checking with a helpline or a doctor and waited in the queue.

Many of them were likely to be turned away after hours of waiting, and potentially exposing themselves to the coronavirus infection.

"The person I brought to the hospital today has been given the token number of 318, I think," said the ambulance driver stationed outside the centre. It will be hours before she gets her turn.

Safdarjung hospital collects samples only for suspected patients admitted to its isolation ward. Sample collection facilities will soon start at 14 Delhi government and corporation hospitals.

"Who has the time to wait for three hours? We have a flight tonight and we just wanted to get tested to get a certificate declaring that we are virus-free. And, we were told to come to this centre but if we sit around here we are more likely to get the virus," said Ravi Shingari, an Australian citizen of Indian origin. He and his wife travelled to London before coming to India.

Another 25-year-old woman, who did not want to be named, filled out the form asking for her contact details, address, symptoms, and travel history. But she did not wait for her turn. "I have been sitting here for a while now. I have to be somewhere now, so I am leaving. I don't think they will even come to know who left," she said.

She had come to the testing centre on her own after meeting up with a friend who had travelled abroad.

Some wait it out, only to be refused at the door. "In the last two hours, I have seen around 10 people being refused the test after they reach to the front of the line. They must have been waiting for a couple of hours. And, what if one of these people actually has the disease? That's why I am waiting my turn here a little farther away," said one of the persons waiting near the sample collection centre.

Getting information on testing is difficult on the helplines as well, with only one of the 30 calls made by the HT reporter to the toll-free number getting through.The government helpline advise people with cough and fever but no travel history to maintain personal hygiene and get in touch with district surveillance officers or a local physician.

Experts say cramped government facilities pose a clear danger.

"This is an infection risk, naturally. We are advocating social distancing and here are people who need to get tested for the disease sitting close to each other. The government has to make arrangements for a large waiting area.. or start more sample collection centres because clearly there is a need," said Dr MC Mishra, former director of the All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.

He added that there was a need to ensure that people who didn't need the tests to not show up because they are at a higher risk of getting the infection. "Someone needs to be stationed outside the centres to ask people who do not need testing to leave rather than them waiting for hours before leaving," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Here's one more issue to add to the bonfire of tensions with China brought on by the coronavirus pandemic. The country is reportedly reopening its wet markets, the fresh produce stalls associated with Covid-19's early spread in Wuhan.

It's understandable that countries now in the grip of the first wave of infection might be outraged. Many blame wet markets for starting the outbreak in the first place. Opening them again, at a moment when thousands are dying overseas, seems emblematic of Beijing's increasingly chauvinistic approach to world affairs.

Animals in wet markets are penned and slaughtered or sold live right next to stalls selling fruit and vegetables. Conditions, as my colleague Adam Minter has written, are often less than hygienic.

Places where a range of common and exotic animals mix together while bodily fluids flow freely may seem a fertile breeding ground for the virulent novel diseases that cross the species barrier to humans and occasionally become pandemics.

At the same time, let's put the outrage on pause. Wet markets are increasingly losing ground to supermarkets in China. If they're showing resilience as suppliers of fresh goods, it's precisely because consumers regard them as a healthier and more sustainable alternative.

That perception isn't inaccurate. The prevalence of food-borne microbial illness in developing East Asia suggests that far from being cesspits of disease, wet markets do a good job of providing households with clean, fresh produce. And while the origins of coronavirus remain obscure, they may have at least as much to do with more worldwide activities such as intensive farming as practices specific to Asia.

The attraction of wet markets isn't so different fromthat of farmers' markets in Western countries. In contrast to a supermarket model where multiple layers of retailers, wholesalersand logistics companies stand in between the consumer and the grower, wet markets offer a personal and direct connectionbetween shopper, stallholder and farmer.

Consumers know the food is fresh because there's generally little refrigeration, so everything must be sold on the day. If in doubt, they can ask the stallholder what's in season and which produce is best at the moment. If they think one market looks unsanitary, they can choose to shop at another.

That helps explain how wet markets have managed to hold their own in spite of the growth of store-based retail in recent years. Supermarkets now account for about half of all grocery spending in China, up from about 36% in 1995, according to Euromonitor International. Add in convenience stores and the like and so-called modern groceryhas about 68% of China's retail wallet, giving wet markets less than a third.

Still, that store-based spending is overwhelmingly concentrated in packaged, rather than fresh produce. Foreign retailers that once hoped to dominate China's staple goods sector such as Carrefour SA and Metro AG have struggled and sold out of local ventures -but wet markets are still going strong.

The evidence suggests this consumer loyalty isn't misplaced. One 2015 study for the World Health Organization compared the number of years of life lost per 100,000 people due to food-borne sickness, disability and death. The region encompassing the wet market zone from China and South Korea down through most of Southeast Asia has the best record for microbial infections outside the Americas, Europe and the rich countries of the Pacific Rim.(1)

What about Covid-19 itself, though? There's good evidence that the virus has genetic characteristics from another pathogen found in pangolins, an exotic mammal sometimes sold in Chinese markets. And it circulated extensively around one of Wuhan's seafood and meat markets last December, although the earliest infections don't seem to have been connected to the site.

Only a small minority of wet markets sell such exotica, though, so you can close down the wild animal trade without shutting the places where most Chinese people get their daily sustenance. And don't overlook the possibility that a key ingredient in Covid-19's genetic cocktail isn't wild game, but domesticated livestock. The high-density conditions on farms are far more conducive to cooking up novel diseases, as we've written- and even pangolins are farmed in China these days.

To the extent that the mix of the raw and the cooked in Asia's wet markets is a health problem, it can easily be mitigated by better building design (such as separating meat,vegetable and livestock areas and keeping markets fully enclosed), plus the sort of mandated cleaning regulations found in places like Singapore, Hong Kong and South Korea.There's plenty to complain about in the way that China downplayed and hushed upthe initial outbreak until it was all but inevitable it would become a worldwide pandemic. Closing all wet markets, though, isn't the solution.

(1) Indeed, the data suggest the problem with Asia's appetite for 'warm meat' isn't that fresh-slaughtered produce is less healthy than the chilled meat from an abattoir, but that local preferences for undercooked meat and fish lead to unusually high burdens of tapeworms, flukes and other parasitic worms. That's not something different retail formats can solve.

(This story has been published from a wire agency feed without modifications to the text. Only the headline has been changed. )

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 25 -- Back in the autumn of 2012, a senior faculty member at the Mhow-based Army War College published a paper on the China's war zone campaign (WZC). Beijing would, the army officer argued, seek to coerce smaller adversaries into acceding to China's demand through graded threat of force or actual use of force till its ends are met.

The officer, then Brigadier Manoj Mukund Naravane, wrote that the political objective of this Chinese concept is unveiled by "occupation of certain un-held tract of land or high value targets'. This would be done through elite forces.

The first would be the domination-cum-deterrence (DCD) phase where the People's Liberation Army (PLA) would focus on building up its presence in the territory in question to deter the enemy. In the second phase, Gaining Initiative by Striking First (GISF), it would deploy rapid reaction units to strike first to wrest the initiative from the enemy. The last stage is the Quick Battle Quick Resolution where the PLA would use a dedicated division level force. But the PLA, the senior army officer said in his seminal paper published in Scholar Warrior, a journal published by the Delhi-based think tank Center For Land Warfare Studies, expects to achieve its objective in the first two phases.

As the Indian Army Chief now, General Manoj Mukund Naravane is faced with a WZC situation along the 3,488 kilometre long Line of Actual Control (LAC) with PLA opening multiple fronts in western and eastern sectors while the world including India battles the Covid-19 pandemic that has its origins in central China's Wuhan city. The Chinese aggressive manoeuvres also entail the PLA moving support elements in depth areas of eastern Ladakh.

Although Gen Naravane didn't refer to it in his 2012 paper, national security planners say the key to the Chinese WZC concept is deception coupled with state of the art intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities.

The top army officer was clear that the only way to counter the WZC strategy is to thwart Chinese designs in the initial two, DCD and GISF, stages.

Beijing did have the initial advantage when it moved soldiers to Galwan Valley and Pangong Tso in eastern Ladakh. The Chinese army had built roads right up to their claim line and could move in troops quickly, once it decided to activate them.

This advantage now stands neutralised with Indian force levels building up over the past weeks. The Indian Army is also staring at the aggressor with troops holding their positions and not allowing the Red Army to brow beat them at Galwan Valley and Pangong Tso.

Top government officials told Hindustan Times that the security establishment did realise that India's northern borders would remain turbulent for some time to come after New Delhi decided to upgrade its border infrastructure in 2014.

For decades, India had been debating the extent and pace of creating border infrastructure along the Line of Actual Control with China. Beijing, meanwhile, kept building railway tracks and roads.

This meant that the Chinese PLA patrols along the border often went uncontested.

This started to change after India matching up the build up to a degree and earmarking its claim line through regular patrols. And this friction is expected to continue unless both sides exchange maps of their respective positions in both the eastern and the western sector.

The situation in the middle sector is far better after both sides exchanged maps in 2002. So both sides now know the exact disputed territory. The western sector maps were shared but never exchanged at the behest of Chinese; the eastern sector maps were not even shared.

While China openly covets Arunachal Pradesh as its territory, its long term game in eastern Ladakh could be to cut through Galwan-Murgo axis to provide an all weather alternative to the Karakoram highway, which enters Pakistan through Khunjerab Pass and not Karakoram pass north of Indian positions of Daulet Beg Oldi.

However, with the Indian Army digging into its positions to face the aggressor, the long drawn out mobilization may not work for the PLA as the law of diminishing returns comes into play like in the protracted 1979 Sino-Vietnam war. Status quo ante is the only viable option as it leaves both sides with a win-win situation.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 9 -- It is too early to lift the ongoing lockdown, foreign secretary Dominic Raab said on Thursday as Prime Minister Boris Johnson continued to improve in the intensive care unit, while the UK's death mounted by another 881 to 7,978.

"Thank you for your sacrifice but we're not done yet. We must keep going. The measures will have to stay in place until the evidence shows we have moved beyond the peak", Raab, who is deputising for Johnson, said at the daily briefing. The number of cases rose to 65,077.

"The early signs suggest they are having an impact. We mustn't give the coronavirus a second chance to kill more people. I know it is tough going but this is a team effort. The measures will have to stay in place until we have got evidence that shows we have moved beyond the peak".

Chief scientific adviser Patrick Vallance said social distancing is helping to stop the virus spreading within the community. There "might even be some flattening" of new cases, he said, because had it not been flattening, there would have been "many, many more" cases.

Meanwhile, initial data and anecdotal evidence of medical professionals suggested that 35% of critically ill coronavirus patients are of Indian and other non-white origin in the UK, with London boroughs with large Indian population figuring among the most afflicted.

The London area has the largest number of cases in the UK, followed by the Midlands (including Birmingham, Leicester). The London boroughs with high number of cases include Brent, Barnet, Ealing and Harrow - each with a high presence of Indian-origin people.

Kamlesh Khunti, a medical expert at the University of Leicester, told BBC: "A lot of people have been concerned about this issue based on anecdotal reports and now this data is showing a signal regarding a higher number of black and minority ethnic populations being admitted to intensive care units."

NHS doctors who have died so far are all from minority origin, including Jitendra Kumar Rathod. Nurses who have passed away also include some of Asian origin. Their deaths have been highlighted by anti-racism campaigners who hail their contribution to the NHS.

According to Khunti, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the figures, despite accounting for only 14 per cent of the UK population, include many coming from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, working in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 27 -- Even as the world grapples with the pandemic unleashed from Wuhan, China is back to the business of great power politics - building military infrastructure, conducting naval exercises and sinking the fishing boats of other nations. While the rest of the world has come to its knees, in no small part due to China's behaviour, Beijing is busy reaping the dividends of this global disorder.

If, at one level, it is using this coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to project itself as a global leader by supplying medical kits and expertise to nations in dire need, thereby trying to distinguish itself from an inward-focused Donald Trump administration, at another level, it is waging an information war in Europe, seeking to create internal rifts within the European Union.

It is extraordinary to witness the full play of great power politics at a time which, according to most liberal institutionalists, should have been a case study of greater global coordination. Global pandemics were widely viewed as non-traditional security threats which would lead to greater cooperation among major powers, and not as arenas of contestation among major powers for relative gains. And international institutions were supposed to help the international community navigate these security challenges.

But the state of the world today should disabuse us of all these fallacies. If anything, the fault lines between the United States (US) and China have been accentuated because of the crisis. Historically, China and the US have tried to work together to manage various global crises in the past. But not this time. Trump's "America First" approach has meant antagonising even close allies by diverting medical supplies, outbidding the original buyers, or forcing American companies to stop exporting hospital-grade N95 masks.

The lack of leadership shown by Washington has made China a necessity for many nations even in the West which had to import faulty Chinese medical kits for lack of any alternative. While a large part of the world remains furious with China for its initial concealment of adequate information, they are forced to take Chinese help. This has allowed China to expand its influence under the garb of helping the world during this pandemic, a crisis which would have been much less severe had the country behaved responsibly initially. Europe is now pushing back strongly with French President Emmanuel Macron questioning China's handling of the outbreak, saying things "happened that we don't know about" and British foreign secretary Dominic Raab suggesting that "hard questions" would have to be asked about how the outbreak started "and how it couldn't have been stopped earlier." Yet, the ability of these nations to take on China directly remains severely limited.

As a result, the world will continue to transition to a phase where the jostling between China and the US will get exacerbated and the biggest loser will be global governance. The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) held its first session on the pandemic, some four months after the deadly contagion emerged as the biggest security challenge since World War II. After assuming the presidency of the UNSC last month, China's Ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, made it clear that Beijing does not plan to discuss the pandemic situation in the Council during its presidency as there was no need to panic, even adding that the world is not far from the defeat of Covid-19 "with the coming of spring." Washington and Beijing remain divided on the scope of the joint resolution with the US insisting that the UNSC resolution should be explicit about the origin of the virus in Wuhan, China, much to Beijing's annoyance.

But more serious has been how the World Health Organization (WHO) has dealt with this once-in-a-lifetime crisis. Far from being the nodal agency to coordinate a global response to this pandemic, it seems to have made itself subservient to Chinese interests, losing credibility in the eyes of its other stakeholders. WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus was forced to declare an international public health emergency only at the end of January after calling it off just a week earlier under Chinese pressure. Tedros repeatedly defended China's handling of the crisis with the WHO even tweeting in mid-January that "preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission".

Tedros suggested at the end of January that "WHO doesn't recommend limiting trade and movement". This has generated an intense backlash in Washington which is WHO's largest single funder with President Trump not only accusing the UN agency of being "very China-centric" but also following it up by halting US funding "while a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization's role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus." Though Trump's move to cut funding has led to political bickering in the US, senior members of the US Congress have also called for a Congressional investigation into the WHO's handling of the crisis, ostensibly in cahoots with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

Great power politics has continued unabated even when many expected greater global solidarity. The international order was getting fragmented and major power rivalry was beginning to shape the global contours before the present crisis. That process has been galvanised by the Covid-19 crisis. Where on the one hand, the CCP stands exposed for its shenanigans during the pandemic, the vulnerabilities of the US and the West in general too are out in the open.

Nations like India should be prepared to navigate the externalities of this challenging environment.

Harsh V Pant is professor, King's College London and distinguished fellow, Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- Bihar has ordered 50,000 rapid antibody diagnostic kits from public sector enterprise HLL Lifecare Limited in a bid to increase the screening of more vulnerable coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pockets in the state such as Siwan, Gopalganj, Munger, Gaya, Begusarai and Patna. The Covid-19 positive cases have gone up to 60 until Friday morning, but the viral outbreak is restricted to 10 districts so far and mostly among patients with known foreign travel history.

Siwan and Gopalganj are the two districts from where a large section of people work in the Persian Gulf countries and many have returned home in March because of the pandemic.

HLL Lifecare Limited, under the Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW), has developed the rapid antibody diagnostic kit for Covid-19 from human serum, plasma and/or whole blood obtained from patients showing symptoms of respiratory infection. The Pune-based National Institute of Virology and the Indian Council for Medical research (ICMR) have approved the kit's use.

Sanjay Kumar, principal secretary, department of health, Bihar, said that besides HLL, ICMR would also make its test kits available to the state.

"We'll follow the ICMR advisory. There has been no evidence of community spread in Bihar so far. However, we're on our guard, as some Covid-19 positive cases are being reported from Begusarai," he added.

Alarm bells of community transmission started ringing after one person with known foreign travel history infected 16 of his family members in Siwan, and more may be at risk.

The health authorities are finding contact tracing of Covid-19 positive cases in Begusarai a bigger challenge.

"We're trying to trace the origin of infection in Begusarai. At some places, we've been able to track the infection and take appropriate action such as a village has been sealed in Siwan. It's high time that people with travel history must volunteer to undergo tests if they show sign of symptoms, else their family members would be at a higher risk," said Kumar.

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has also extended its helping hand to the state government by providing 15,000 Covid-19 test kits that arrived a couple of days ago. On Thursday, Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar thanked the foundation for its assistance.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 27 -- The death toll from Covid-19 of patients categorised as 'Indian' in official figures crossed the grim milestone of 1,000 on Friday, making the community the worst-hit among non-whites and complementing studies that showed non-whites have been disproportionately hit by the virus.

As of Thursday evening, 1,029 Indians had passed away in England's hospitals and care homes, according to the National Health Service (NHS). The Indian ethnic group is followed by Pakistanis, with 889 deaths, and Caribbean ethnicity with 739 deaths.

Funeral companies catering to the Indian and Asian communities have been busier than ever this year, particularly in towns and areas such as Leicester, Birmingham, Manchester, Southall, Brent and Harrow.

Those from the Indian community who succumbed to the virus include several doctors, nurses and pharmacists on the frontline of treatment. The largest number of health professionals in the NHS, after those who trained in the UK and EU, are from India, besides such UK-trained personnel of Indian origin.

Health professionals of Indian heritage who passed away include Jitendra Kumar Rathod, Manjeet Singh Riyat, Krishan Arora, Rajesh Kalraiya, Pooja Sharma, Jayesh Patel, Vivek Sharma, Kamlesh Kumar Masson, Amarante Dias, Sophie Fagan, Hamza Pacheeri and Amrik Bamotra.

According to Kamlesh Khunti, a medical expert at the University of Leicester, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the Covid-19 figures, despite accounting for only 14% of the UK population, include lower socioeconomic backgrounds, work in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

Several research reports published this year concluded that non-white communities have been disproportionately affected by the virus.

People of Chinese, Indian, Pakistani, Other Asian, Black Caribbean and Other Black ethnicity have between 10 and 50% higher risk of death when compared to White British, according to a report of Public Health England.

It said: "When compared to previous years, we also found a particularly high increase in all cause deaths among those born outside the UK and Ireland; those in a range of caring occupations including social care and nursing auxiliaries and assistants; those who drive passengers in road vehicles for a living including taxi and minicab drivers and chauffeurs; those working as security guards and related occupations; and those in care homes".

A report by think-tank Runnymede Trust found that, besides structural inequalities, non-white groups are at greater risk from Covid-19 for various reasons.

They are more likely to be working outside their home, using public transport, working in key worker roles, and living in multigenerational, overcrowded housing and therefore less able to self-isolate and shield from the virus, it said.

They are also less likely to be rotected with personal protective equipment, it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- President Donald Trump on Saturday said China should face "consequences" if it was found to have been "knowingly responsible" for the novel coronavirus outbreak.

"It could have been stopped in China before it started and it wasn't, and the whole world is suffering because of it," Trump said at the daily briefing by the White House task force on coronavirus.

"If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake," he added. "But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences."

Follow latest updates on coronavirus here

President Trump began pointing to China as the origin of the pandemic first by identifying the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus", which fuelled anti-Asian sentiments already coursing through the country. Other US officials chose to call it the "Wuhan virus", after the city where the epidemic is believed to have started.

Some US officials and Republican lawmakers attacked China alleging it was concealing the true magnitude of it outbreak; they cited intelligence reports .

As the American president came under mounting criticism for his administration's delayed and botched response to the epidemic, he went after the World Health Organization, accusing it of helping China conceal the magnitude or its outbreak and mismanaging its own response to the crisis.

China has since revised its numbers upwards, by 50% in Wuhan.

The coronavirus pandemic had killed 159,510 people around the world till Saturday evening and infected 2,317,759. The United States has been the worst hit 38,664 fatalities and 732197 reported cases; going up by 3,847 and 31,905 over the past 24 hours respectively.

President Trump has previously said China numbers are "larger" than America's and that it has the "most" in the world. But he has presented no evidence to back that claim.

Also read: Early measures reason for fewer cases in India, says WHO regional director

"Does anybody really believe this number?" Trump said Saturday, referring to China's reported mortality rate of 0.33 per 100,000 people, on a chart presented at the briefing by Deborah birx, coordinator of the task force.

Birx said that she had included China on the chart to show how "unrealistic"those numbers are. The US mortality rate is 11.24 per 100,000, in comparison, which is much higher in comparison to China's reported numbers, but much lower than some of the other countries such as Belgium, which led the world with 45.2 fatalities per 100,000, followed by Spain with 42.81, and Italy with 37.64.

Click here for complete coronavirus coverage

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- A top Chinese official on Wednesday dismissed accusations that China did not share all data with the World Health Organization (WHO)-appointed researchers tracing the origin of the Covid-19 virus.

The denial comes a day after the publication of the WHO-China joint report on the origins of Covid-19, following which WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Beijing withheld relevant data from the team of scientists who visited Wuhan in January.

Tedros was quoted as saying the investigation was "not extensive enough" and that experts had struggled to access raw information during their four-week visit to the central Chinese city of Wuhan where the virus first emerged in December, 2019.

Additionally, at least 14 countries, including the US, Australia, Canada, and the Czech Republic, raised concerns over the report released by the WHO on Tuesday into the origin of the coronavirus, citing delays and a lack of full access to data.

Speaking on the report on Wednesday, Liang Wannian, co-leader of the joint study, said Chinese and international researchers had access to the same data throughout the probe period and that the claims about lack of access were not accurate. "Of course, according to Chinese law, some data cannot be taken away or photographed, but when we were analysing it together in Wuhan, everyone could see the database, the materials - it was all done together."

Rejecting complaints about the report being delayed, Liang said "every sentence, every conclusion, every piece of data" needed to be verified by both sides before it could be released. "Throughout, we always upheld the principle of "quality comes first"," said Liang, chief of a Covid-19 experts' committee set up by the China's National Health Commission.

Liang had earlier told state media that to ".accomplish the arduous task of scientific cooperation and exchange, the Chinese side brought together the relevant institutions and hundreds of scientists and did their best to collect and collate data and conduct a preliminary analysis".

Liang said the origin tracing of the virus is a continuous work, adding that further tracing will be carried out around the globe, based on the findings of the study in China.

China was the first country to report Covid-19 cases, so the global tracing of virus origins was first conducted here, Liang said.

Separately, the Chinese foreign ministry on Wednesday called on all parties to respect science and the opinions and conclusions of the WHO report that found it's extremely unlikely the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The WHO said work could also be carried out in laboratories around the world if further evidence was available and needed, ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said, adding that China hopes that other relevant countries will cooperate with the WHO in the same open and transparent manner as China has done.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 8 -- Students participating in India's biggest coding Olympiad will fill the gap in technology-related education in Delhi government schools, deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia said at the launch of the Hindustan Times Codeathon on Thursday.

The Delhi government has partnered with Hindustan Times to train 12,000 students from its schools in coding.

"Modern technology-related education is what is missing from our system. With this programme, we will train our students as professionals of tomorrow. Our government was working on computer labs when we were approached by She Codes to train girl children in coding. Once the foundation was laid, then came the partnership with Hindustan Times to challenge our students in coding," said Sisodia at Veer Savarkar Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya in Kalkaji on Thursday.

The launch was also attended by Udit Prakash Rai, Delhi's director of education, Rajeev Beotra, senior executive director of Hindustan Times, and Rupinder Kaur, founder-president of the She Codes training programme.

"Now that there is excitement about coding in our schools, I received a call from an Indian-origin technocrat from the United States to work with our teacher and students and mentor them in coding. Everything fit in place at the right time," Sisodia said.

The HT Codeathon will provide students from classes 6 through 9 from across India a virtual platform to learn coding in languages such as HTML, CSS and Python. The students will be scored when they complete the tutorials and quizzes, and the top 100 performers will participate in a finale in December.

At the event, the animations made by six students from class 6 who had learnt some coding under the She Codes programme, launched in January this year, were presented. The animations, which were conceptualised and designed completely by the students revolved around topics like good touch and bad touch, the need for conservation, educating the girl child, and awareness about Covid-19.

Speaking about the short videos, Sisodia said, "We have seen in these videos how coding promotes thinking, and creatively presenting messages. There was a video where the girl child says she is helpless, and all I could think was that now she is not helpless - she is a coder".

Rai emphasised how the Codeathon would lay the groundwork for making teaching coding a continuous part of educating children. "This was a small dream for our education department, and a big step for our students. I am a student of a government school from Uttar Pradesh and saw a computer for the first time when I went to study engineering. Today children in our schools are learning how to code. This will promote a coding culture in our schools. This process should not end in the next two or three months, it should be continuous," said Udit Prakash Rai, director, education.

Senior executive director of Hindustan Times, Rajeev Beotra said, "The students will have to just register and start learning through an interactive platform that will have many videos, tests and tools. The programme will train children in classes 6 and 7 in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript and those in classes 8 and 9 in Python as well. Every student will have a personalised dashboard that will track the progress of the students. This dashboard will be accessible to the parents and teachers as well to know how the students are performing. And, there will be a leaderboard with the rank of the student."

Over 22,000 students have already registered for the Hindustan Times Codeathon, which will provide training, mentorship from technical experts, and opportunities to win laptops or smartwatches.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- Never has the international community been so divided and so paralysed in the face of common threats to humanity. How did we get here? More importantly, where do we go from here?

We have been facing a "synchronised global crisis" for some time now. The crisis has entailed great power rivalry, conflict, terrorism, trade wars, climate change and now a pandemic: all occurring in synchronised fashion. In an ideal world, this level and scale of crisis might have elicited coordination and cooperation among all the stakeholders. Instead, what we are witnessing today is not just an absence of global cooperation but worse, finger pointing and blame game among major powers.

The UN Security Council has been in limbo for the last few years now. And given the state of relations between the US on the one hand and Russia/China on the other, the prospect of this forum doing anything meaningful is diminishing by the day. If the UNSC cannot get its act on Yemen, Libya and Afghanistan, then what hope for this conflict-ridden world?

The World Trade Organization (WTO), whose mandate it is to provide a predictable framework for international trade at a time like this, is itself facing a serious crisis. Powerful members of the WTO have to take the blame for bringing this organisation to a grinding halt. As for Climate change, the less said the better. There could not be a more existential threat to humanity, yet countries have behaved in a "devil take the hindmost" fashion that beggars belief.

It is against the above backdrop that the coronavirus hit the world, beginning with China. As outlined above, the timing could not have been worse. Already, the global institutions set up in the aftermath of World War II had atrophied to such an extent as to become dysfunctional. Add to that a high degree of mistrust between the great powers for a variety of reasons.

When the deadly virus happened, China committed the cardinal sin of trying to cover up. Authoritarian societies have both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage is ramming through measures and seeking compliance from its population. The disadvantages are lack of transparency, arguable accountability and absence of a vigilant press. China appears to have taken a huge gamble by seeking to cover up the truth in the beginning, hoping that the strong state can then beat this virus through draconian measures. It may have overlooked the fact that the coronavirus is an equal opportunity infector and does not spare anyone. If in late December or even early January, China had acknowledged the problem and sought international cooperation, things might have been different. But then, trust and confidence between major powers was so low that China may have been more keen on saving face and in asserting its great power status than in seeking outside help.

As often happens in such cases, the initial cover-up led to subsequent lies and subterfuge by the Chinese Communist Party. One of the most egregious things that China did was to either mislead the World Health Organization or worse, bulldoze the organisation into asserting in January that there was no evidence of human transmission by this dreaded virus. If this complicity is established, the WHO stands enormously diminished as an organisation whose fundamental objective (Article 1 of the WHO Constitution) is the "attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health".

Then, there is the "small" matter of how or where this virus originated. Against massive evidence, China refuses to accept even to this day that the virus began in a wet market in Wuhan. Instead, it has consistently sought to change the narrative by floating outlandish theories that the virus may have had an American origin! China is currently desperate to prove that as a Great Power, it has brought the issue under control, even while the West is floundering around.

There is now little doubt that China will use this global crisis to gain geo-strategic advantage. Take the simple case of masks, of which there is a global shortage. China already produced 50 percent of world supply and is now all set to ramp up production. France, a country battling the coronavirus, for instance depends 100 per cent on China for supply of masks. Italy presents an interesting example of how China plays the strategic game. Just as the EU was dragging its feet in meeting Italy's request, China rushed supplies and medical teams earning Italy's gratitude. Chinese assistance, whether it is for Italy/France or indeed for Africa, is nevertheless based on quid pro quo rather than any altruism.

The world got here because the liberal international order was showing signs of collapse even before the coronavirus hit us. The fact that there was no global leadership at this juncture led to geo-strategic paralysis. Based on evidence so far, China will try to assume the mantle of global leadership but it is unlikely to be smooth going. Indeed, a leadership struggle in China is not inconceivable. Meanwhile, expect more churn, more disorder and more jostling for strategic influence by major powers. Can India, along with others like Japan, try and foster multilateral cooperation using the G-20 framework? It will be a long haul and success by no means guaranteed, but may be worth a try.

(Dr Mohan Kumar is a former Indian Foreign Service officer and retired as the Indian Ambassador to France)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 21 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last, of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analysis clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17. Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "...The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat.

"...A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoy on Covid-19, said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infect human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has until Tuesday killed over 3.18 lakh people and infected more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ". SARSCoV2 is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

A team of four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus' "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

Also read: 4,970 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours push India's tally past 1 lakh-mark

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and is now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

An independent expert spoke to HT and said the research was plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin.

China has consistently cited international research to deny that the virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology. The central Chinese city of Wuhan is where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

Also read: Covid-19 response, China's offer of help - All about day 1 of WHO session

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with Covid-19 is that we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow, in the past, been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky, a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh - both are bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India - and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia. Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human are not rare and have been regularly witnessed in diseases like Ebola, bird flu, MERS etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far, no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.

However, the evidence for that kind of an incident in a lab is thin in the paper, Ebright added.

"However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were researching bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross-contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether Covid-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 30 -- The long-awaited report on the origin of the coronavirus (Covid-19) will be released on Tuesday by the World Health Organization (WHO). Speaking at a news conference on Monday, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus confirmed receiving the full mission report over the weekend. "All hypotheses are on the table and warrant complete and further studies," he said during the briefing.

The report has been drafted by a team of international experts appointed by the WHO who visited China's Wuhan city earlier this year. The seafood market in Wuhan was the Covid-19 cluster of human cases in December 2019. Since then, the infection has now spread to almost all the countries killing more than 2.7 million people.

According to the preliminary information on the study, the researchers have found that Covid-19 most likely transmitted to humans via animals. However, the report offers no conclusive answers to the origin questions.

The report is being closely watched by scientists around the world as the findings can help them prevent future pandemics.

What are the findings?

The researchers have listed four possible scenarios through which Covid-19 could have transmitted to humans, various news agencies reported. The reasons are mentioned in order of likelihood and a possibility of Covid-19 transmission from bats through another animal tops the list.

Direct spread from bats to humans is listed as likely in the report, while the possibility of Covid-19 spreading through the packaging of "cold-chain" food products is "unlikely".

The report listed a possibility of the virus' leakage from the laboratory under the "extremely unlikely" category.

The team has proposed further research in every area except the lab leak hypothesis. It also said the role played by a seafood market where human cases were first identified was uncertain.

Doubts remain

The expert report has a troubled past. From delay in publication to China's resistance to giving access to diplomats, all of these hurdles have raised questions about whether the Chinese side was trying to skew its conclusions.

Emphasizing more information is required to ascertain the origin of Covid-19, Matthew Kavanagh of Georgetown University said, "It is clear that that the Chinese government has not provided all the data needed and, until they do, firmer conclusions will be difficult," news agency AP reported.

United States' Secretary of States, Anthony Blinken also raised concerns regarding the methodology and the process of the investigation. "We've got real concerns about the methodology and the process that went into that report, including the fact that the government in Beijing apparently helped to write it," Blinken was quoted as saying by CNN.

The top expert of infectious diseases, Anthony Fauci said he would like to read the report first then decide about its credibility. "I want to read the report first and then get a feel for what they really had access to - or did not have access to," AP quoted Fauci as saying.

"I'd also would like to inquire as to the extent in which the people who were on that group had access directly to the data that they would need to make a determination," he also said as per an AP report.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Jan. 17 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 1 PM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

China 'systematically prevented' probe into Covid-19 origins, says US as WHO team begins work

The United States State Department has released a fact sheet on the activity at Institute of Virology in China's Wuhan, the city where the outbreak was first reported late last year. Read more

India vs Australia: Washington Sundar becomes third Indian to achieve unique feat

At the start of the series, it did not look like Washington Sundar will get a chance in the Test series. Read more

Apple foldable iPhone: Company tests flexible Samsung screen but with its own tech

We have already heard a lot about the 'Foldable iPhone'. As per recent rumours, the firm seems to be testing two kinds of foldable designs as well. While one has a Samsung Galaxy Fold design, the other prototype has a Galaxy Z Flip folding design. Read more

Fabulous Lives' Neelam Kothari, Maheep Kapoor, Seema Khan and Bhavana Pandey are in Rajasthan: 'The squad's back'

The stars of Fabulous Lives of Bollywood Wives - Bhavana Pandey, Neelam Kothari Soni, Maheep Kapoor and Seema Khan - are in Rajasthan and in work mode. All of them shared pictures and videos from the tourist hotspot, Jodhpur. They have gathered there to shoot for the second season of their hit Netflix show. Read more

Mom gets puppy as gift, her reaction is too cute to handle. Watch

An adorable video which shows the reaction of a woman after meeting her tiny new puppy for the first time has created a buzz online. Shared on Reddit, the video is all about love and happiness. Read more

New bride Gauahar Khan slays comfy athleisure look in chic sweater and pyjamas

The newlywed couple Gauahar Khan and Zaid Darbar have been posting a lot of adorable images with each other and their families on social media since they tied the knot in December. Gauahar, who was recently seen in Tandav has been sharing about the way she is spending time after marriage with her fans, it involves a lot of shooting and family time. Read more

Rhino strays into a residential area in Assam's Nagaon

A rhinoceros was spotted in a residential area in Assam on January 16. The rhinoceros had entered a residential area of Kaliabor in Nagaon district. The rhinoceros is suspected to have strayed out from Kaziranga National. Watch more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 3 -- The interstate bus services in Delhi resumed from Tuesday as the three interstate bus terminals (ISBTs) in the national capital was reopened after being shut for more than seven months because of nationwide lockdown due to coronavirus disease (Covid-19). The number of buses coming from different states, however, will be capped at 50% of pre-Covid times.

As many as 145 buses carrying around 5,800 passengers from the neighbouring states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand arrived in Delhi till 9:30 am on Tuesday

Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot on Monday reviewed preparations made ahead of the resumption of interstate services and asked officials to ensure strict compliance of the standard operating procedures (SOPs).

The states that run their buses to and from Delhi include Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana and Chandigarh. The decision to reopen the ISBTs was taken on October 23 in a Delhi Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) meeting chaired by lieutenant-governor Anil Baijal.

India reported 38,310 new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and 490 related deaths in the last 24 hours, according to the Union health ministry on Tuesday, which have taken the country's tally to over 8.26 million. The number of active cases of the coronavirus disease also fell to 541,405 from 561,908 on Monday.

Here are all the SOPs to be followed:

1. According to the guidelines prepared by the Delhi government, the interstate buses will be sanitised by the respective depots of bus operators at the point of origin and before their departure from the respective ISBTs.

2. Thermal checking of both passengers and the bus crew at boarding and at the point of entry to ISBTs will be a must.

3. It will be mandatory for passengers to wear face masks. Buses will run to their seating capacity and no standing passengers will be allowed.

4. Social distancing will be ensured at the ground station, at the time of boarding of passengers and inside the bus. 5. Social distancing will be done through markers on the ground and waiting areas, similar to the ones in all buses and the metro.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- A major new study released on Friday says that people of Indian and other south Asian origin are more likely to die after contracting coronavirus due at least in part to a higher prevalence of pre-existing diabetes than others with similar disease conditions.

The study by experts at the University of Edinburgh of nearly 35,000 patients in 260 UK hospitals says that Indians and other sections categorised as ethnic minorities are more likely to be admitted to critical care and receive invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) than Whites.

Ewen Harrison, study lead and professor of surgery and data science at the university, said: "These findings once again put ethnicity at front and centre in determining the effects of Covid-19. It is tragic to see any group in society to be at increased risk compared to others".

"Diabetes is more common in South Asian people and this is likely to explain some of these findings, further research is needed to understand this association and the underlying reasons for this increased risk".

"There are important implications for policy - South Asian people are more likely to be in public facing jobs particularly in health and social care. Policy makers should account for ethnicity when developing future guidelines around Covid-19," he added.

The findings released before publication in a journal add to recent reports by Public Health England and other bodies that highlight the disproportionate impact of the virus on the ethnic minority population in the UK; the reasons include pre-existing economic inequalities.

The study researchers recruited hospitalised patients with suspected/confirmed Covid-19 from 260 hospitals across England, Scotland and Wales, collecting data directly and from records between February 6 and May 8 with follow-up until May 22.

Of 34,986 patients enrolled, Indian and other ethnic minorities were younger and more likely to have diabetes (type 1/type 2) but had fewer other co-morbidities such as chronic heart disease or dementia than the White group, the study says.

No difference was seen between ethnic groups in the time from symptom onset to hospital admission, nor in illness severity at admission. Critical care admission was more common in South Asian, Black, and other ethnic minority groups compared to the White group, after adjusting for age, sex and location.

The study says: "This was broadly unchanged after adjustment for deprivation and co-morbidities. Patterns were similar for IMV. Higher adjusted mortality was seen in the South Asian, but not East Asian, Black or other ethnic minority groups, compared to the White group.

"18% of the excess mortality in South Asians was mediated by pre-existing diabetes", it adds.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 10 -- Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal took to Twitter to share a video of YouTuber Karl Rock. The chief minister praised Rock for donating plasma at Delhi government's plasma bank at the Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences (ILBS) hospital located in Vasant Kunj.

"Karl Rock, a New Zealand origin Delhiite donated plasma at Delhi govt's plasma bank. You must watch his video about his experience. I am sure this will encourage many more to come forward to donate their plasma and help save lives," the chief minister tweeted.

The video opens with the YouTuber explaining how he had battled coronavirus and now he is on his way to donate plasma to help people who are fighting against the virus. "It is a privilege to give plasma and help other people," he says in the video.

In the next few minutes, he is seen donating the plasma and also explaining the process. Alongside, he also encourages others, who have fought and won over corona, to come forward and donate their plasma.

He concludes the video by saying how he distributed the money he received from Delhi Government for the donation of plasma among the workers in his housing society.

Since being shared a few hours ago, the video has gathered over 61,000 views. Additionally, it has also gathered more than 4,100 likes and close to a 1,000 retweets.

Rock, in his reply, thanked the CM for calling him a Delhiite and also wrote:

People couldn't stop praising Rock for his actions and there were some who even called him a "rockstar".

Take a look at what people wrote:

"I support every single step which can save even 1 life in Delhi. Kudos," wrote a Twitter user. "Salute to all donors," wrote a second.

The country's first plasma bank was opened at ILBS. It is set up to create a pool of plasma from those who have already recovered from Covid-19. The CM has also laid out detailed criteria for the donors.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday when officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,400 people who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several foreign nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of the country such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz -- which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters -- such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practiced here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors, with the basement and the ground housing a kitchen and a communal dining area. Officials fear that such a nature of the facility may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on Feb 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others. The six who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 12 -- An India-Nepal body overseeing the implementation of development projects funded by New Delhi is set to meet in Kathmandu next week, the first high-level contact between the two sides since ties were hit by a border row that erupted last year.

The joint oversight mechanism, which was launched in 2016 and reviews progress in bilateral projects, is scheduled to hold a meeting on August 17, people familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity.

The meeting between Indian envoy Vinay Mohan Kwatra and Nepal's foreign secretary, Shanker Das Bairagi, who jointly chair the mechanism, is being seen by some quarters in Kathmandu as a positive development after the border row took relations to a new low.

"The mechanism will only focus on the implementation of India-funded projects in Nepal. However, it could help break the logjam in relations," said a person.

A second person described the scheduled meeting of the mechanism as "part of regular interaction between India and Nepal". He added, "This oversight mechanism was set up in 2016 to review ongoing bilateral economic and development projects and meets on a periodic basis."

During its seventh meeting in July last year, the mechanism reviewed the implementation of projects such as cross-border rail links, petroleum pipelines, roads, bridges, integrated border check posts, energy, irrigation, and post-earthquake reconstruction.

The border row erupted late last year after Nepal objected to the inclusion of the Kalapani region, which is claimed by Kathmandu, in a new map showing the union territory of Ladakh that was issued by India. The row was exacerbated in May, when India opened a new road to the Lipulekh region on the border with Tibet, as this area, too, is claimed by Nepal.

Nepal responded by issuing a new map that showed Kalapani, Lipulekh, and Limpiyadhura, which are all controlled by India, as part of Nepalese territory. Kathmandu also said New Delhi has not responded to several requests for talks on the border issue, though India said a meeting couldn't be arranged because of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nepal's foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali told The Kathmandu Post on Tuesday: "We don't have alternatives to talks...We can't hold our entire ties hostage to the differences over the boundary issue."

Gyawali said Nepal is confident its partnership with India will move in a positive direction. "For the time being, the boundary issues can be isolated...Differences over one issue should not overshadow our entire bilateral relations...We believe in constructive engagement, and the upcoming meeting is just one positive step towards that end," he added.

In recent weeks, the two countries have also engaged in a war of words over the origins of historic figures such as Lord Ram and Gautam Buddha.

Nepal on Sunday responded to external affairs minister S Jaishankar's remarks that Gautam Buddha was one of the two greatest Indians for people around the world by saying historical and archaeological evidence shows the founder of Buddhism was born in Nepalese territory. India clarified that Jaishankar had referred to the shared heritage of the two countries.

Last month, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli sparked a controversy with his remarks that the "real" Ayodhya is in Nepal and that Lord Ram was Nepalese. He also said Nepal had "become a victim of cultural encroachment" and its history was manipulated.

Following protests in India, the Nepal government clarified Oli's remarks were "not linked to any political subject" and there was "no intention...to hurt the feeling and sentiment of anyone".

Nischal Pandey, director of the Kathmandu-based Centre for South Asian Studies, was quoted by the Nepalese media as saying: "A weekly war of words between Indian and Nepali officials and subsequent issuance of clarifications does not bode well for bilateral ties."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 16 -- The Covid-19 pandemic, besides taking a toll on human life, has brought to focus the underbelly of society. The well-off segment of Chandigarh (the smug bourgeoisie), have always blamed politicians for peopling the city with 'bhaiyas' (pejoratively used for migrant labour) only for building their vote-banks. I have often been confronted by friends with the question, "When, for God's sake, will you ever come out of the colonies?"

When I came to Chandigarh as a college student in 1965, I saw labourers staying in temporary shacks near construction sites even in a sector like 17. Their makeshift shanties lacked amenities and their children played on the sand and gravel dumps as the parents slogged for paltry wages.

Concomitant with the growth of the city, grew the need for more workers. Households and commercial establishments needed helps for diverse jobs. As those from the region did not consider it rewarding enough to shift here for low-paying manual jobs, there began an inflow of workers from other states, leading to unauthorised squatting on government land. Owners of land that was yet to be acquired found it profitable to let out rows of small plots with narrow lanes to migrant labour. A modicum of civic services such as a few toilets, water stand posts and open drains came to be provided later.

Pawan Kumar Bansal ()

REHABILITATING WORKERS

Waking up to Le Corbusier's Edict of Chandigarh being compromised by the growth of unhygienic shanties in a modern city, which by then had become a Union Territory, the wrangling states of Punjab and Haryana, the UT administration came up with schemes to build tenements or allot vacant plots in planned colonies for the rehabilitation of labourers in the peripheral areas or even within the city.

Before that, it was only the 'cheap houses' that were built for the dhobis (washermen) or for the government sanitation staff etc. Besides this, an otherwise elaborate plan of the new city did not provide for adequate socio-economic integration in the form of general low-cost housing. The smallest size of a plot for non-government houses was four marlas (100 sq yd) in this oasis of affluence.

SLUM-FREE CHANDIGARH

On getting the privilege of representing Chandigarh in the Lok Sabha in 1991, a priority I marked for myself was making the city slum-free. There was gradual progress, but it was only under a scheme of 2006 that a need of about 25,000 dwelling units was projected to achieve the zero-slum target. Funds under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) came in adequate measure. No new squatters' colony has sprung up since and only one colony stands on private land.

The migrant labourers were, in the meantime, cursed for being a burden on others: for eating away subsidies, for paying no taxes, for making the city unclean, for generating heaps of garbage, for crime and what not! "If they work for us, they get paid for it," has been our self-righteous attitude towards them. Analyses of the last two elections point to these people moving away from me, yet my belief in them remained unshaken.

Then came this invisible micro-organism called novel coronavirus. Its spread forced a lockdown on over 130 crore Indians, including the 12 lakh plus people of Chandigarh. With just a four-hour notice, all movement of humans stopped; shops, factories, educational institutions, hotels, restaurants, theatres, cinema halls, salons, parlours, private clinics, even normal OPDs in government hospitals came to an abrupt halt.

There were no vendors selling fruits and vegetables, balloons, or other knick-knacks for children in deserted streets, no maids for household chores, no access to gyms for the fitness freaks, no entry to parlours and salons or services of a beautician at home.

LEFT HIGH AND DRY

We stood deprived of all services that we had so far taken for granted. The effect of the lockdown began to sink in and the importance of the role that migrant labour plays in our lives became more and more pronounced. On the other hand, the migrants, holed up in one-room tenements, losing their source of daily bread, came to the brink of starvation. With no cash in their pockets, most of them stared at starvation. In desperation, they embarked upon a trek to their places of origin, even a thousand kilometres away.

Covid-fearing officials along the state borders aborted their plans. Now, the Indian Railways have started running special shramik (workers) trains to ferry the migrants desirous of rejoining their separated families. The registration centre in Sector 43 now overflows with people clamouring for a ticket back home.

LOCKDOWN HIGHLIGHTS INEQUALITY

Tell-tale stories of agonising hardships normally highlight the inequality in a 'welfare' state. This only stands more pronounced during this lockdown. Yet, it has thrown up a situation where, for once, we who constitute the upper crust of society feel the pinch of having to do without the services that had been available for the asking. Only a few thousand persons, including women and children, have boarded the special trains so far, but a change is already perceptible.

We now want the departing ones to stay on. They are no more a burden on society; they pay all (indirect) taxes included in the retail prices of goods that they are able to afford, they consume less and, therefore, generate less trash; their areas are not cleaned daily and, therefore, the heaps of garbage that give them company 24x7.

The entrepreneurs know what the economists have said: Labour's contribution to production is more than that of capital. For the wheel of progress to keep moving, the migrant worker is indispensable. This is the truth that Covid-19 has brought home to us.

The writer is a former Union minister

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 7 -- French President Emmanuel Macron dialled Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday evening to discuss a wide range of issues including the digital and strategic autonomy, deepening defence cooperation, Indo-Pacific, and the security environment in Asia and the West Asia.

PM Modi conveyed to President Macron his condolences for the terror attacks in France, and reiterated India's full support to France in the fight against terrorism, extremism and radicalism, the Prime Minister's Office said. The leaders also discussed other bilateral, regional and global issues of mutual interest including improving affordability and accessibility of Covid-19 vaccines, post-Covid economic recovery and climate change.

People familiar with the matter said the two leaders are learnt to have decided to set up a hotline between the two leaders. The move comes against the backdrop of France's greater focus on the Indian Ocean and China's aggressive posture across the region that had prompted President Macron to appoint one of France's most senior diplomats, Christophe Penot, as the country's first special envoy for the Indo-Pacific in October this year.

But French President Macron has been vocal about countering China for much longer. Two years ago, he was among the first to call for building a strategic alliance between India, France and Australia that could respond to challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and the growing assertiveness of China. This initiative had taken baby steps in September when the top diplomats of the three countries had their first meeting over a video conference.

Like India, France believes in both strategic autonomy and plural democracy and is concerned about Chinese moves in the South China Sea and the French territory spread across dozens of islands in the South Pacific, New Caledonia, an official said.

India and France's strategic partnership dates back to 1998; it was then New Delhi's first. Over the next few decades, the two countries have established a strong institutional mechanism to deepen cooperation in space, counter-terrorism, maritime security, as well as dialogues among defence chiefs and National Security Advisers.

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval had spoken to his French counterpart last month and the strategic dialogue between the two countries is expected to take place in January 2021.

The partnership between the two countries has particularly deepened over the last few years, coinciding with PM Modi's decision to buy Rafale fighter jets. The two countries are also exploring joint manufacture of fighter jet engines and ancillaries in India that can power India's indigenous LCA Mark II with a higher engine thrust.

That Paris had recently asked Qatar, which had also bought the Rafale fighter jet, not to allow Pakistan-origin technicians to work with the plane is indicative of the sensitivity that France has demonstrated to New Delhi's security concerns, an official said.

New Delhi had reciprocated such gestures of the French leadership in October this year when it issued a sharply-worded statement condemning personal attacks targeting the French President from some Islamic countries such as Turkey and Pakistan for his stand on Islam and radicalism.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 17 -- Ravi Solanki, a doctor working on neurodegenerative diseases, is among 19 individuals and teams selected for awards to honour exceptional achievements in tackling Covid-19 in the UK, the Royal Academy of Engineering announced on Monday.

The President's Special Awards for Pandemic Service recognises teams, organisations, individuals and projects across specialities, disciplines and career stages within the UK engineering community who have contributed to addressing the challenges of the pandemic.

Solanki and Raymond Siems, an engineer working in machine learning, created in a matter of days a secure website in the early stages of the pandemic to bring together health professionals in the National Health Service (NHS) and members of the public who wanted to help.

The charity organisation Healthcare Extraordinary Response Organisation Education and Support (HEROES) was created by NHS cardiologist Dominic Pimenta, supported by former premiership footballer Joe Cole, and the race to build a secure and functioning website began.

Solanki and Siems started building www.helpthemhelpus.co.uk hours before Cole appeared on television to promote the newly launched charity. The website included a crowd-funding page and resources for NHS staff as well as directing the public to Covid-19 information.

Their website allowed the charity to tap into public sentiment and collect donations quickly so that NHS workers could receive the support they needed when the Covid-19 crisis was at its peak, supporting 90,000 NHS workers in three months.

Jim McDonald, president of the Royal Academy of Engineering, said: "The Covid-19 pandemic is the biggest public health crisis of our time and has presented society with multiple challenges. Engineering expertise and innovation has been central to the global fight to save lives and protect livelihoods".

"I am also incredibly proud of engineers everywhere who have worked round the clock to maintain essential services, critical supply chains and infrastructure in unprecedented circumstances, using their training and skills to find innovative solutions to a host of problems and to help mitigate the impact of Covid-19 on our daily lives."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 28 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cases in December 2019.

The images of the virus from Covid-19 cases from Kerala show Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images will help study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help us understand how the virus moved from animals to humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on development of drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly. Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ul sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, March 28 -- Chinese President Xi Jinping on Friday asked his US counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" in order to improve bilateral ties as the two countries that are worst-hit by the Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on the origin of the virus, among other things.

Their phone conversation was heldtook place in the wake of Covid-19 cases in the US surging past China's and Beijing's late- night decision on Thursday to close down its borders to foreigners amid fears of a second wave of infections from abroad. China's decision to ban foreigners from entering the country was preceded by the call to limit incoming international flights to one every week from every country.

The US had at least 85,755 confirmed Covid-19 cases, as compared to 81,340 reported by China's national health commission (NHC).

During the phone call, Xi told Trump that bilateral relations were at a "critical juncture" and both nations stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation, adding that cooperation is the only correct choice for them.

According to Chinese state media, Xi "called for joint efforts from both sides to bolster cooperation in areas such as epidemic containment and develop a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation".

"Working together brings both sides benefits, fighting hurts both. Cooperation is the only choice," he said.

"China has always shared information on the Covid-19, including the genetic sequence of the virus...with the World Health Organisation and countries including the US in an open, transparent and responsible manner," the Chinese president said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- US President Donald Trump on Wednesday announced the suspension of all travel from Europe to the United States for 30 days starting Friday, further shuttering up the country against coronavirus, which he called a "foreign virus", as a leading expert warned lawmakers the situation "will get worse".

The restrictions, in addition to travel bans on China (the origin and epicentre of the outbreak), South Korea and Iran, will be extremely disruptive for the US and the world. Cargoes were also covered by the restrictions, Trump had said in his speech before reversing himself with a tweet just minutes after.

The ban won't apply to Americans trying to return home - though they will be subject to "enhanced" health screening - or to citizens of the United Kingdom.

Indians headed for the United States over the next month would have to either book on direct flights or those that do not transit through Europe.

There are now more than 1,000 cases in the United States and least 38 people have died of the virus.

"This is the most aggressive and comprehensive effort to confront a foreign virus in modern history," the American president said in an address to the national from behind his table in the Oval Office, before he went on to announce the travel restrictions castigating Europe for not being vigilant enough.

"The European Union failed to take the same precautions and restrict travel from China and other hotspots. As a result, a large number of new clusters in the United States were seeded by travellers from Europe," he said in a move seen by his critics as an attempt to shield himself from political fallout of an out-of-control outbreak with an eye on his re-election bid coming November. The Trump administration is being seen by critics to be more eager to play down the outbreak than deal with it.

Officials at the forefront of the US fightback are cognizant of the real threat, however. "I can say we will see more cases, and things will get worse than they are right now," Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said at a congressional hearing. "How much worse we'll get will depend on our ability to do two things: to contain the influx of people who are infected coming from the outside, and the ability to contain and mitigate within our own country."

Airlines have been slashing their flight schedules, especially on international routes, to cope with a sharp decline in travel demand among fearful customers. Business travel is slowing as companies impose restrictions on employee travel and major conferences are cancelled.

With air travel and airline revenue plummeting, airlines are losing their appetite for new planes. On Wednesday, Boeing's stock fell 18 per cent - its biggest one-day percentage drop since 1974 - and the iconic airplane manufacturer announced a hiring freeze.

In January, the US issued a similar ban on people coming into the country from China. That policy was later extended to people who had been in Iran.

The World Health Organization has labeled Covid-19 a pandemic, citing its alarming spread and severity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- The European Union's medicines agency said on Tuesday it has moved up a meeting to assess the Pfizer-BioNTech coronavirus vaccine for provisional approval in the 27-nation bloc to December 21. The agency said it made the decision after receiving additional data from the vaccine makers.

The announcement came after Germany's health ministry publicly demanded that the agency move quicker than its previously planned December 29 meeting at which it was to discuss approving the vaccine.

Meanwhile, British authorities are set to hold talks on Christmas coronavirus rules after a surge in infections fuelled demands from medical experts to stop households mixing over the holiday. Cabinet office minister Michael Gove was expected discuss the issue with his counterparts from the devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland later on Tuesday.

Unemployment in the UK surged in the three months through October, exposing the brutal impact of the pandemic on the economy. The number of people looking for work surged by 241,000 in the period, taking the jobless rate to 4.9%, the highest since 2016, the Office for National Statistics has said.

Also, the 1.5 million-strong Indian community in the UK has been the group most affected by the pandemic among non-whites in the UK, according to new figures released on Tuesday. The data shows that their mental health was particularly affected, and in England alone, 1,105 people of Indian origin have died.

An 89-year-old resident of a care home in Quebec became the first Canadian to receive a Covid-19 vaccine shot as the country is among the first to roll out its vaccination programme. Gisele Levesque received the Pfizer-BioNTech jab in Quebec City.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- The government barred all commercial international aircraft from landing in India from March 22 and instructed states to enforce work-from-home protocol for all private sector employees, except essential services, amid a raft of measures aimed at staving off the coronavirus epidemic that has claimed four lives in India.

In a statement by the press information bureau, the government said no commercial flights will be allowed to land until March 29. All children under 10 have been asked to stay at home and citizens above 65 - except public representatives, medical professionals and government servants -- were instructed to not venture outside.

"States are being requested to enforce work from home for private sector employees except for those working in emergency/essential services," the statement read.

The government also suspended all concessional travel on trains and flights, except for students, patients and disabled people. All group B and C central government employees have been asked to attend office on alternate weeks, with staggered timings.

The statement came hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses the nation at 8pm on Thursday.

India is currently grappling with stage 2 of the coronavirus outbreak, with 169 cases and four deaths. The Indian Council of Medical Research has ruled out community transmission - where the origin of the infection is not known -- as of Thursday morning.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- As per data from the Pune Municipal Corporation's (PMC's ) health department, out of the 44 patients who died due to Covid-19 (coronavirus) virus, 36 did not report any foreign travel history.

Dr Ramchandra Hankare, chief of PMC health department, said, "International flights have been stopped in the country almost 15-16 days ago so there is no question of infection through foreign travel. Most of the deceased are those who are close contacts of the infected person, maybe family members and in slums neighbours too. Travel history is no more a criteria now for the spread of infection."

As of April 17, 49 deaths have been reported in Pune city and rural areas and 33 have been discharged after full recovery.

Out of the 45 deaths reported as of April 16, maximum, 15 were from Bhawani peth, 5 each from Kasaba-Vishrambaugwada, and Wanowrie-Ramtekdi area, three each from Shivajinagar, Hadapsar, Yerawada and Dhole Patil road and remaining from other areas.

Currently, most of the patients are being reported from the red zone, but the officials are unable to trace the origin of the infection. With regards to hospital, out of the 49 deaths, Sassoon reported 40, one was reported from Aundh civil hospital, one from Naidu, two from Noble hospital, one from Inamdar, one from Jehangir and one from Sahyadri hospital at Karvenagar and two deaths were reported in rural hospitals.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- Till last year, International Yoga Day that is celebrated on June 21 used to be a group activity on a large scale, but this time Covid-19 guidelines of social distancing have changed the way the event is being observed. This time, the theme for the day says it all: 'Yoga at home, yoga with family'.

For the first time, since its inception in 2015, there will not be a mass gathering at centralised places for group yoga. To mark the day and engage more people, government authorities and different yoga associations have opted for virtual yoga.

Since the United Nations passed a resolution to celebrate June 21 every year as International Yoga Day, there has been a manifold increase in the number of yoga enthusiasts. Covid-19, however, has driven people to include breathing exercises in their daily lifestyle to boost the immune system to fight the pandemic. Yoga has turned out to be one of favourite fitness regimens during the lockdown.

ONLINE CLASSES AND SESSIONS

"Though this time we won't have any mass gathering to celebrate International Yoga Day, the count of people doing yoga on a regular basis has increased as compared to pre-Covid times. Many of our passouts, who are professional yoga instructors, are already taking online yoga classes on a daily basis and they will do it on Sunday too to celebrate the day," says yoga expert Kulwant Singh, who is working as an instructor at Government College of Yoga Education and Health, Sector 23, Chandigarh.

"Every year, we used to hold a yoga camp in the college premises that would culminate with the Yoga Day celebrations on June 21. But this time, because of Covid-19 and keeping social distancing in mind, we started an online camp from June 13. Both morning and evening sessions are held live on the college's Facebook page and YouTube channel and we are getting a decent response. For June 21, we will be having a special session in which six of our college's yoga instructors will be going live online," says yoga college principal Sapna Nanda. "Our institute in collaboration with yoga scholars of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER) organised a webinar on 'Relevance of yoga in present day scenario' in the run-up to yoga day celebrations today."

YOGA FINDS NEW FOLLOWERS

With gyms and other fitness centres closed to check the spread of Covid-19, more people are opting for yoga that has seen many new entrants in the last three months.

"We will be having special online yoga sessions spread across the first-half of the day to mark International Yoga Day on Sunday. Yoga institutes from six countries, including India, Australia, Japan, and Malaysia, will be joining us," says Indian-origin yoga guru based in Australia, Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole, whose organisation Vasudeva Kriya Yoga runs 17 centres in Melbourne and one in Bengaluru.

"We will be having sessions on yoga as therapy, yoga for health, yoga for mobility and strength," said the yoga guru, who has a YouTube channel and website vasudevakriyayoga.com.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 6 -- Israel has suggested 50 topics in health and science where it can cooperate with India to find solutions to the Covid-19 crisis even as it works to bring together private enterprises from both sides to develop technologies to manage and overcome the pandemic.

After successfully controlling coronavirus infections, Israel is sharing its experiences, best practices and strategy for exiting from a lockdown with the Indian side, Israeli ambassador Ron Malka told a small group of journalists via video conference on Wednesday.

"We have started a special form of cooperation for Covid-19 and we've nominated a point of contact in Israel, who is coordinating with Israeli experts. We have offered India 50 topics for cooperation in health and science regarding the coronavirus," Malka said.

At the same time, Israel is working to put together start-ups and entrepreneurs from both sides to work on finding solutions to different aspects of the Covid-19 crisis. The focus, Malka said, is not just on equipment to prevent infections and defeat the virus but also on facilitating new ways of doing things amid the unprecedented lockdown.

"The focus is on top priority areas we want to promote to defeat the virus but also on new methods and equipment to manage the situation," he said, referring to the development by Israel of solutions such as hand washing stations, ultra-violet light technology, 3D printing of face masks and anti-virus fabrics that block and kill viruses.

He also referred to the development of a low-cost ventilator, whose design and codes are open-source, by Israeli researchers from private companies and state-run companies such as Microsoft and Israeli Aerospace Industries, and the breakthrough by the Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR) in isolating an antibody that neutalises SARS-CoV-2.

"I think this crisis brought Israel and India even closer together, given the fact that we are seen as a precious and close friend, given that there is mutual trust and respect between Israel and India, especially in areas of science and technology," Malka said.

Malka also spoke of Israel's use of technology for tracing those who tested positive and the people they were in contact with against the backdrop of a debate in India on privacy concerns related to the Aarogya Setu aap.

"This is a very careful line that we are now playing because we need to balance between.the need not to violate privacy [since] Israel is a democracy respecting the rights of everyone and universal freedom [and] on the other hand, we have this tech that can help us get control and help save people's lives," he said.

The technology is being used for a "limited extent and time" by the executive while the legislative branch works on laws and procedures under the supervision of the judiciary, he said. "The basic thing is trust and understanding. In other times, no one will even dare to offer this kind of tracing," he added.

Israel is also keen to share data on Covid-19 with India as having more data to analyse will help uncover patterns and characteristics of the disease, he said.

Malka, a trained economist, said any exit strategy for a lockdown will be all "about balancing life and livelihood". He said, "We understand health is very important but the economy is also important for the health of the people."

Asked about the call from several countries for an investigation into the origin of Covid-19, Malka said: "The focus now is on trying to defeat the virus, taking the right measures to fully control the infection curve and develop a vaccine or a medicine as fast as we can while we find a balance between the needs for health and the economy.

"The investigation - where did it come from and why - this is something that we can leave for later. I don't think Israel is involved with that and I know we have harnessed all our efforts, our experts and our technology just to defeat this virus."

Israel, which was one of the first countries to go into a total lockdown, has so far recorded more than 16,000 Covid-19 cases and 238 deaths. More than 10,500 people have recovered and only 70 are still in intensive care, the envoy said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 7 -- Health authorities say they are focusing on four areas within a 4km radius in northeast Delhi's Dilshad Garden that appear to be reporting a bunch of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases. Experts suggest limited community spread has begun in the area, after reports that in many of these cases the source of the patient's infection is unclear.

Officials have declared these four places as containment areas. Each of them has a focal patient (the person who might have infected others). Three of these containment areas were declared on Monday - two separate blocks of GTB Enclave and one in Dilshad Colony. Officials have been unable to establish travel or contact history of the focal patients in these areas.

The developments come amid a debate on whether India has entered the community transmission stage of the pandemic, in which the source of a patient's infection could not be traced or isolated.

"One of the blocks (in GTB Enclave) is linked to a nurse from Delhi State Cancer Institute who tested positive and the other is linked to an old man. We are not sure where he got the infection from," a senior Delhi government official said, requesting anonymity.

On Monday, 10 nurses from the Delhi State Cancer Institute in GTB enclave tested positive for Covid-19, taking the hospital's tally to 18 (of which two are doctors and 16 nursing staff). After this, the cancer institute decided to test all 48 of its patients.

"We have sent all samples for Covid-19 testing. If they test negative, patients will be moved to various private hospitals. However, if they test positive, they will be taken to the nearby Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital, which is a dedicated Covid-19 centre," said an official from the Delhi State Cancer Institute.

Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital is one of the two Delhi government hospitals completely dedicated for treatment of the deadly infection caused by the Sars-Cov-2 virus. At present, there are 85 Covid-19 positive and 164 suspected patients admitted to the hospital.

Separately, in the Dilshad Colony containment area, a middle-aged man (the focal patient) with unclear history (meaning no foreign travel or no established contact with a Covid-19 positive case) tested positive for Covid-19.

The fourth containment area is linked to two mohalla clinic doctors who practise in Dilshad Garden. (So far, 34 health care workers and hospital sanitation staff have tested positive for the viral infection across Delhi).

The J and K blocks of Dilshad Garden were declared containment areas after a 38-year-old woman (the focal patient), who returned from Saudi Arabia on March 10, passed on the infection to at least 11 people, including the two mohalla clinic doctors. Six of them are from the Dilshad Garden area. In the same cluster, officials were not able to establish the source of infection of a patient in Maujpur. This patient did not have any direct contact with the woman who returned from Saudi or the two doctors.

"In hot spots, some community spread may be occurring," said Randeep Guleria, director, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and a member of the national task force on Covid-19.

Although a Union health ministry document late last month said limited community transmission of the Covid-19 disease has begun in India, authorities maintain that the country is not witnessing large-scale community spread.

Jacob John, professor emeritus and former head of virology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, said community transmission was happening in the Dilshad Garden containment areas.

"Now, we should not focus so much on getting the history of the patient and figuring out where they might have got the infection from.We must focus on keeping people out of hospitals. And, to slow the community spread, everyone must wear masks," he said.

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Pune,, Sept. 20 -- The tourism at Mahabaleshwar and Panchgani, the two popular hill stations near Pune has taken a hit in light of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.

Police checkpoints have been installed on the Pune-Bengaluru highway where the officials take a note of the travellers, destination, origin point and phone number.

However, the road to Mahabaleshwar was deserted. In the hilly town, horse riding and Venna lake boating has been shut down for tourists.

The roads leading to various tourist points like, Sunset point, Arthur point, table land point have been closed for tourists.

"I had been inside the four walls during this whole lockdown period, I got to breathe some fresh air at Mahabaleshwar even though all points are closed," said Deewakar Dutta, a resident of Wagholi.

Sanjay Hogade, a shopkeeper opposite Mapro garden, Gureghar who has been running his business for 16 years said he opened his shop yesterday after a six-month break.

"I have to bear a heavy loss since most commodities have expired like cold drinks, chikki, and biscuits," Hogade said.

The famous Mapro garden has opened for dine-in but has seen only a few tourists at the restaurant. The tables have been placed at a distance of seven feet from each other.

Apoorva Pandey, a tourist said he missed his favourite strawberry cream at Mapro as it wasn't available due to the less production of strawberry in the garden.

A worker at Mapro said the garden has opened from September 5th but is seeing a lukewarm response, even though they are following all sanitization rules.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- The World Health Organisation (WHO) is "extremely anxious" to know the origin of the pandemic-triggering novel coronavirus first found in the central Chinese city of Wuhan and is ready to help the ongoing Chinese investigation looking into the roots of the pathogen.

So far, the WHO, which the world's top UN body for public health, has not been involved in the multi-layered and critical probe - set up to find the virus' animal origin and the exact sequencing of the animal-to-human interface.

The coronavirus pandemic or the Covid-19 disease has until Sunday morning killed more than 5840 people and sickened over 157000 globally, a vast majority of them in China.

"The WHO would be ready, but currently the investigation is being done by the government, into the origin (of the virus)," Gauden Galea, the organisation's China representative said, adding "As far as we can see, we have not been involved in it".

"We are extremely anxious to know where the virus came from".

"The animal origins may take a very long time to identify. If you look at SARS, it took 10 years to identify the source after it happened; if you look at MERS, we are seven years down the line, and we are not yet sure still. So, this is not a story that is going to end quickly," Galea said.

"There are several areas where additional research and inquiry is necessary to help the global community respond to this outbreak and prevent an outbreak in the future. WHO has discussed the question of animal-origins of Covid-19 on multiple occasions and is prepared to join China's efforts to research this issue".

Bats and pangolins have been said to be the source of the virus but scientists are still researching aspect, and whether an intermediate animal host played a part in the zoonosis.

The initial sequences of the transmission aren't clear either.

For example, it's not clear if the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan was the only source or there were multiple sources in the city, Galea, working at WHO since 1998, said.

"There's a big lesson that has been learned. But at this point, we still need that fuller investigation to know was it (the market) really the origin or was it one of the multiple events that had happened in Wuhan over a period? And that can only be done with further investigation," Galea said.

Galea said it was very important for the investigation to be done to ensure such an outbreak doesn't recur from the same source - "and before it fades from memory".

"The epidemiology has to be done and, and chased through to the first case if it's possible and to the first exposure," Galea said in an interview with the HT in Beijing over the weekend.

The WHO has been involved with the Chinese government in monitoring and containing the outbreak formally since January 3, preceded by three days of "informal" exchanges from December 31.

By January 3, the WHO had put in place an "incident management team" comprising members from its Beijing office, regional headquarters in Manila and the Geneva headquarters.

"We know for certain that there was a cluster associated with the Huanan seafood market (in Wuhan) in December. And, that was very clear. You can see that from the environmental samples, from the geographical distribution and from the time connections between the cases and so on. It was a very clear cluster," Galea said.

Not all cases were connected to the market, however.

"We do know that even in the first cluster there were cases that were not reportedly associated with the seafood market and those cases need to be investigated".

"It is our understanding that the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention is looking into these cases. It is important to do this and do it fast before memories fade way. It is very important to be able to go back to the origins," the WHO's China head said.

"Independent of who identifies, when identifies, the epidemiological investigations (into) the human side, as well as the human-animal interface, need urgent and detailed investigation," Galea said.

"We do not want whatever source originated it, to do it again unexpectedly.If you don't have the sources, you are always open to it happening again. On this part, we cannot be more anxious to get the answers," Galea said.

Galea headed the first WHO team that went to Wuhan on January 20 and January 21.

Later, in February, a WHO-China joint team also visited Wuhan and Beijing among other places.

Galea hopes China will continue to share information.

"We continue to ask questions," Galea said, adding until now China has shared "a new package of knowledge" whenever identified by the authorities.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 8 -- The tragic crash at the Kozhikode airport on Friday --- an Air India Express plane with 190 on board overshot the runway and fell into a gorge --- has turned the spotlight on the challenges pilots face while operating from table-top runways and the hazards of overshooting during take off and landing, three commercial pilots HT spoke to said on the condition of anonymity.

Eighteen people, including the two pilots, were killed in the crash.

"The most obvious challenge of a tabletop runway is the fact that on a normal runway if you run out of space you would still be on the ground. On a tabletop, you may find yourself on ground several hundred feet below," said one of the pilots cited above.

A report on the 2010 Mangalore air crash, prepared by a three-star officer, noted tabletop airports require extra skill and caution while carrying out flight operations.

Tabletop runways, located on a plateau or a hill, can also create optical illusions for pilots when they move from the instruments to the visual segment of the flight especially during bad weather, said a second pilot.

"It can be tricky as the pilot may get the illusion of not being on the correct flight profile. Add-ons like heavy rain, wet runway and pilot fatigue can complicate things further," he said.

Tabletop airports have limited space at the ends of the runway, and several international airlines had stopped flying bigger aircraft into Kozhikode due to safety issues over the length of the runway. However, pilots flying smaller aircraft are not immune to the hazards.

"The runway is at a height which is higher than the surrounding areas and the weather conditions also differ. Sudden changes in wind pattern on approach is a common phenomenon which a pilot has to tackle. On an approach till such time you hit the tabletop you may be under the influence of some winds which vary suddenly when you reach the table making the approach management that much more difficult," said a third pilot.

Possible variation in instrument indication when the transition to the tabletop happens is another key challenge.

"For example, the radio altimeter which calls out the height of the aircraft may call out 500 feet and a second later may call out 100 feet because you have entered the table zone. This transition to the table top is also when the winds may change which at times becomes a little tricky to manage," the third pilot said, adding that the degree of difficulty increases manifold during the monsoons.

The Air India Express flight from Dubai was a repatriation flight carrying Indian citizens back to the country under the Vande Bharat Mission, meant to bring home stranded people from other countries amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

Wing Commander Deepak Vasant Sathe (retd), the captain of the aircraft, was a top notch Indian Air Force fighter ace who learnt his trade flying the unforgiving Soviet-origin MiG-21 fighter planes during his 22-year military career.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 24 -- Two Indian-origin doctors exposed to coronavirus patients have launched a legal challenge to the Boris Johnson government on the allegedly inadequate provision and guidance on personal protection equipment in hospitals; including advise to use plastic aprons if gowns run out .

Over 80 medical professionals have passed away in the UK after being infected by the virus in recent days.

The challenge has been launched by Meenal Viz, a clinical fellow in medicine, and Joshi, a trainee general practitioner employed by the National Health Service (NHS). Bindmans, the legal firm representing them, said they are married and Viz is pregnant.

They are challenging the official guidance on the bases that it is not in line with the international standards set by the World Health Organisation or domestic legislation regarding health and safety at work.

Besides, it is claimed that the guidance exposes healthcare workers to a greater risk of contracting Covid-19 and fails to address the greater risks faced by non-white healthcare workers; and it is allegedly unclear and has resulted in inconsistent practices.

Joshi and Viz said in a statement: "We are incredibly concerned at the ever-growing numbers of healthcare workers who are becoming seriously unwell and dying due to Covid-19. It is the government's duty to protect its healthcare workers, and there is great anxiety amongst staff with regards to safety protocols that seem to change without rhyme or reason".

"All we ask for is accountability from decision-makers, and that all evidence leading to these decisions should be published and transparent. We are doctors, we are nurses and we are healthcare workers - we will be there for you in your time of need. We will be there for your family. The government needs to protect us, so that we can protect you", they added.

Basmah Sahib of the law firm said a formal letter before action has been sent to Public Health England and the Department of Health and Social Care, seeking a response by Monday.

The challenge is against guidance of April 17 that permitted medical staff to wear plastic aprons with coveralls when full-length gowns run out.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 8 -- Hari Shukla, a retired teacher and race relations campaigner in north England, is among the first people to get the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine on Tuesday, which marks the first day of the UK's largest mass vaccination programme in history.

Shukla, 87, and his wife Ranjan, 83, will receive the first of the two-dose vaccine at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle. They are among the over-80-year-olds prioritised to receive the first of the 800,000 doses in 50 hospitals across the UK. The vaccine is administered in two doses, 21 days apart.

Awarded the royal honours of MBE, OBE and CBE for his work in race relations, the Uganda-born Shukla said: "I am delighted to be doing my bit by having the vaccine, I feel it is my duty to do so and do whatever I can to help. I feel very comfortable and happy to be the first one".

"As far as I'm concerned, I'm excited about it. We were waiting for this vaccine for a very long time. Having been in contact with the NHS staff, I know how hard they all work and I am grateful for everything they have done to keep us safe during the pandemic."

The UK has ordered 40 million doses of the vaccine and is expected to receive 4 million more by the end of this month. The UK regulator is also evaluating the clinical data of the University of Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna vaccine candidates.

Shukla, widely seen as a local hero, added: "We hope that everybody will participate in it and get back to next to normal. I have been following the news and our scientists have done a wonderful job. I have no doubt in my mind they are the best in the world."

Several individuals such as Shukla and Ranjan receiving the vaccine is being publicised widely by the UK's health authorities to overcome anti-vaccine anxieties among some people, as well as content on social media.

Queen Elizabeth, 94, and Prince Philip, 99, are also expected to be among the first to receive the vaccine.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said: "Today marks a huge step forward in the UK's fight against coronavirus. As the programme ramps up in the weeks and months ahead, it is as important as ever to keep to the Covid winter plan - following the rules in your area and remember the basics of hands, face and space."

Simon Stevens, NHS England's chief executive, called the start of the vaccine programme a "turning point", and said: "The deployment of this vaccine marks a decisive turning point in the battle with the pandemic. NHS vaccination programmes which have successfully helped overcome tuberculosis, polio and smallpox now turn their focus to coronavirus."

As of Monday evening, 61,434 people have died in UK hospitals and care-homes, making it the worst affected country in Europe, including over 1,000 people of Indian origin. The number of cases has climbed to 17,37,960.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- Senior Congress leader from West Bengal Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury has written to the railways minister Piyush Goyal on May 1, 2020, with a request to make time for a telephonic conversation regarding the return of migrant labourers from West Bengal who are stranded in different states due to the ongoing nationwide lockdown.

Chowdhury's letter states that his request for a conversation with the minister over the phone has been pending for the last four days and he finds it "regretful". The letter further says that the leader of the Congress party in Lok Sabha is in an urgent need to speak with Goyal over the issue of migrant workers from Bengal.

"It is regrettable to note that for the last four consecutive days, I have been seeking a little time from Railway Minister over phone, but to no avail. Hon'ble Railway Minister again I, am imploring to you to grace me by calling me back over phone as I, am in urgent need to have a few words with you regarding the return of stranded persons of West Bengal from different state," the letter says.

Chowdhury's letter to Goyal comes amidst demands for resumption of limited train services to carry the hundreds of thousands of migrant workers, stranded in different parts of the country, home. The home ministry has cleared their travel by buses and the states have argued that it was not feasible to transport such a huge mass by buses over long distances.

According to rough estimates, around 10 million migrant labourers could be in need of interstate transport after their employment was suspended due to the coronavirus outbreak. The migrant workers have been put up in relief camps in various states and are said to be restless to get back home.

Chowdhury's letter says that he has spoken to Prime Minister Narendra Modi over the "distressing" condition of the migrant workers and other stranded people after the imposition of nationwide lockdown on March 25.

The railways, in a one-off service, transported around 1,200 migrants from Hyderabad's Lingampalli to Jharkhand's Hatia (near state capital Ranchi). The arrangement was made on a request by Telangana chief minister K Chandrashekhar Rao.

The HT Guide to Coronavirus COVID-19

The guidelines issued last week by the Centre allows interstate movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, students and other stranded people through road transport only and it must be done following strict protocol for screening at both ends-the place of origin of travel and the destination. The order also specifies that the movement of migrants, tourists and students has to be restricted to non-containment zones.

For Coronavirus Live Updates

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 21 -- The number of daily deaths and new cases is showing a steady decline, particularly in London, but new figures on Thursday revealed the UK-wide death toll had reached a cumulative figure of 36,042 (including 695 'Indians' in England) and 250,098 cases.

According to NHS England, 695 members of the non-white community categorised as 'Indian' died after contracting coronavirus as of May 19. The UK-wide death toll of 36,042 includes a day rise of 338.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson faced renewed calls from within and outside the ruling party to scrap the immigration health surcharge levied on Indian and other non-EU health professionals who need to pay 400 pounds per person per year to access the National Health Service (NHS).

Senior Conservative party called it 'immoral and monstrous' that migrants putting their lives at risk to treat coronavirus patients had to pay the surcharge, which amounts to them for it twice, since they also pay income tax, which funds the NHS. The surcharge is levied on all non-EU migrants, and the demand is to scrap it for doctors and other healthcare professionals.

Johnson told the House of Commons that he recognised the contribution of migrants and recalled his own recent life-saving treatment at the hands of nurses from outside the UK, but refused to scrap the surcharge on the ground that the NHS needs the funding.

The surcharge, payable at the time a migrant applies for a UK visa, is to rise to 624 pounds per person per year from October. Various organisations, including the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin have campaigned the the surcharge to be waived.

There are indications that some flights will operate from early June to selected holiday destinations within the UK and Europe as part of plans to gradually reopen the economy while maintaining social distancing and other curbs.

The Home Office meanwhile extended the offer of permanent stay (indefinite leave to remain), free of charge, to the families and dependants of non-EU NHS support staff and social care workers who die as result of contracting coronavirus. It will be applicable retrospectively.

Home secretary Priti Patel said: "Every death in this crisis is a tragedy, and sadly some NHS support staff and social care workers have made the ultimate sacrifice in the pursuit of saving the lives of others".

"When I announced the introduction of the bereavement scheme in April, I said we would continue to work across government to look at ways to offer further support. Today we are extending the scheme to NHS support staff and social care workers".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 31 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Loan apps scam: Chinese national arrested, police say he was overall head of operations of 4 firms

The Hyderabad police on Wednesday arrested a Chinese national in connection with its probe related to mobile applications providing instant loans through their call centres. These approval of loans is quickly done on these platforms but the lenders then harass the borrowers over repayment. Read more

Uttarakhand submits plan to court for monitoring Gangotri glacier region

Uttarakhand government on Wednesday submitted an action taken report to the state high court, listing the steps it is planning to take for monitoring Gangotri glacier region at the mouth of the Gaumukh glacier, the origin of the river Ganga. Read more

Infighting, factionalism led to defeat for Congress in Panchkula MC elections

Factionalism and infighting have once again led the Congress party to admit defeat in a closely-contested election of the Panchkula municipal corporation (MC). Losing the mayoral race to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) by a narrow margin, the Congress will sit in opposition with just seven seats in the House of 20. Read more

Russia to distribute over 1 mn Sputnik V shots at home by year end, says minister

Russia will have supplied more than 1 million doses of its Covid-19 vaccine Sputnik V to its own national inoculation programme by the end of this year, a government minister said on Wednesday. Russia, which began rolling out the vaccine in early December, has so far produced over 2 million doses in total industry minister Denis Manturov told state television. Read more

Tests: You win one, you lose one

The Melbourne Test victory was a historic win because it came after a historic loss, a loss where India folded for 36, the lowest Test innings score they've ever made. Next Test though India bounces back and beats the very same team, with no changes, that brought Indian cricket to its knees. Read more

Amazon to launch computer science education program in India soon

Amazon has big plans for India in 2021. The company is planning to launch its computer science education program, Future Engineer, in India soon. For those of you who don't know, Amazon had launched its Future Engineer program in the US last year. Read more

Aishwarya Rai-Abhishek Bachchan are proud parents as they capture Amitabh Bachchan, Aaradhya make music

Amitabh Bachchan is in no mood to take a break from work even as his industry colleagues flock to distant locations for holidays. The 78-year-old is currently making music with none other than his 9-year-old granddaughter, Aaradhya. The actor has shared pictures from their recording session. Read more

Google Doodle: Special New Year's Eve animation with twinkling lights and confetti poppers wins hearts

While we all are gearing up to ring in the New Year, Google is also taking part in the celebrations and trying to get us in the party mood. Google is quite famous for its adorable trending doodles and their animated doodle for this New Year's Eve has taken things up a notch. Read more

NASA shares 4 most liked 2020 Hubble images, asks netizens to pick their fave. Which one is yours?

The official Twitter account for the NASA Hubble Space Telescope shared many educational and entertaining posts this past year. Now, as we start the last day of the year, take a look at some of the most liked Hubble images from 2020 tweeted by the account. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- Britain's health officials do not disclose names or ethnicities of those succumbing to coronavirus, but individual stories behind the statistics are emerging: of the Indian-origin grocer who delivered supplies to a hospital, only to pass away in it days later.

Or that of Uber driver Rajesh Jayaseelan, 45, who moved to the UK from Bengaluru 10 years ago: he drove to Heathrow to collect a passenger, showed symptoms soon after, and died in the Northwick Park Hospital on April 11.

Raj Aggarwal, 51, dropped off groceries for medical staff at the Glenfield Hospital in Leicester, continued to support local causes through the crisis, but passed away after a short battle with the virus on April 9. Krishnasamy Chiyamalan, another retailer in the city, died a week earlier.

Kin of those afflicted are unable to be around them in their dying moments, as hospital visits are prohibited due to the likelihood of the infection spreading, adding to their anxiety and grief. London boroughs with large populations of Indian origin have a high incidence of the virus.

Also counted among the nearly 14,000 dead in UK are Jitendra Kumar Rathod, a 'greatly respected' doctor in Wales; Pooja Sharma, a pharmacist in east Sussex, and her father Sudhir Sharma, an immigration officer at Heathrow.

Foreign secretary Dominic Raab reflected concern over statistics concealing individual stories behind them during the daily briefing on virus-related developments in Downing Street on Thursday.

He said: "Every time I come to this lectern, and I read out the grim toll of people who have so sadly passed away. I walk away from here, and I think about what their sons and their daughters must be going through right now".

"Their brothers and sisters. Their grandchildren. All the loved ones left with their unbearable, long-term, grief. It makes me and it makes this government focus even harder on what we must do".

Initial hospital data suggests that the minority non-white people in the UK constitute 35 per cent among those in critical care hospitals, prompting an inquiry. Most of the medical staff who died in recent days are non-white.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 4 -- After US President Donald Trump officially announced on Twitter that he and First Lady Melania Trump have been tested positive, the question that has intrigued the world is how Covid-19 could enter the White House and incapacitate the world's 'most powerful man'.

The questions have inevitable led the focus to the crowded Rose Garden event held on September 26, and something more.

Donald Trump has been on the campaign trail for quite some time now. Going over his precaution pattern, the nature of meetings that he had, the Rose Garden event has been zeroed in on as a possible 'superspreader', but might not be the origin of the Trumps' infections.

Here are the points highlighted by several experts who traced back the journey of Covid-19 in the White House

1. It was a crowded event. Social distancing was not maintained. Even not everybody had a mask on, going by the photographs.

2. It was an event to formally announce Trump's nomination of Amy Coney Barrett for the Supreme Court. Videos and photos of the event have revealed that those who were present at the event shook their hands, even hugged each other.

3. Social distancing norms were thrown to the wind as far as seating arrangements were concerned. The chairs were not at all six feet apart.

4. Gatherings of more than 50 people at an event are banned under Washington DC, but the White House is exempt.

5. Seven people who attended are now confirmed to have the virus. They are New Jersey ex-Governor Chris Christie, Kellyanne Conway, who resigned as Mr Trump's senior adviser in August, Mike Lee, a Republican senator from Utah, North Carolina senator Thom Tillis, Reverend John Jenkins, president of the University of Notre Dame - apart from Trump and Melani. A journalist has also tested positive.

6. Donald Trump and Melania Trump were not wearing masks. Kellyanne Conway was sitting in the second row - just behind Melania, and was also without a mask.

7. Chris Christie and John Jenkins were sitting in the next two rows. they were also without masks. Mike Lee and Thom Tillis were sitting on the other side. Thom Tillis, however, was wearing a mask.

8. Amy Coney Barrett who was standing next to the President has however tested negative.

9. While the event might be a superspreader, it is not clear whether the Trumps got their infection from the event. They got themselves tested after Hope Hicks, Trump's communication director who travelled with Trump extensively in the recent past, tested positive. She was not present at the Rose garden event.

10. Several reports said Trump held an indoor fund-raiser with his supporters - before the Rose Garden event - while the White House was aware of Hope Hicks' test results.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday gave in to mounting international pressure for a probe into the origin of Covid-19 and a review of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic. President Xi Jinping told the World Health Assembly that China had acted with 'openness, transparency and responsibility' when the disease, which has impacted billions of people across the world, first broke out.

President Xi, who had been invited to speak at the opening ceremony after the European Union-drafted resolution to push for a probe was supported by more than a 100 countries, said Beijing supported calls for a comprehensive review of the global response but felt this exercise should be carried out after the world gets a grip on the situation. The world's immediate priority should be saving people.

"China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to COVID-19 after it is brought under control to sum up experience and address deficiencies," President Xi told the assembly, the UN global health body's policy making body.

China had previously opposed calls for such investigations from Washington and Canberra.

The health assembly is expected to formally take up the resolution backed by over 120 countries tomorrow. "It is a formality now. No one is objecting to it now," a diplomat in Geneva told Hindustan Times.

President XI's argument at the assembly mirrored the one presented by World Health Organisation director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus after a barrage of criticism, much of it emanating from the United States in the initial days.

Tedros has been blamed for backing Beijing's narrative and showering praise on President XI for his handling of the disease around the same time that there was growing evidence of efforts to play down the spread of the disease in January. He was seen standing with Beijing again when the United States restricted flights from China.

There is no need for measures that "unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", the WHO chief said on February 3.

At Monday's World Health Assembly, President Xi reciprocated, telling the 194-member body that the WHO's contribution under Dr Tedros had been applauded by the international community.

"At this crucial juncture, to support WHO is to support international cooperation and the battle for saving lives as well," President Xi said.

The draft resolution that had been pushed by Australia and the European Union had proposed an inquiry into the animal to human transmission of the Sars-CoV-2

President Xi's comments, made during a video speech to the World Health Assembly, come as a resolution pushed by the European Union and Australia calling for a review of the origin and spread of the coronavirus disease picked up momentum.

By the time the truncated virtual meet started, the 54-nation Africa Group also extended support. This includes Ethiopia, home to Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus who made history in 2017 when he was elected WHO chief.

Tedros was not just the first African to hold the post but also the first WHO chief not to be a medical doctor. The former Ethiopian minister holds a masters in immunology of infectious diseases and a Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in community health.

Tedros, who spoke minutes after President XI, said the inquiry would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and provide recommendations for future preparedness.

"We all have lessons to learn from the pandemic. Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience. WHO is committed to transparency, accountability and continuous improvement," Tedros said.

The review must encompass responsibility of "all actors in good faith," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 26 -- Former Rajya Sabha MP Ahmed Patel, who died of Covid-19 on Wednesday morning, has often been described as Congress' crisis manager. Here are five instances of how Patel solved problems for his party

Curbing the rebellion of the G-23, 2020

This was perhaps the most recent instance of Patel's crisis management. When several of his Rajya Sabha colleagues Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma, and Kapil Sibal wrote a scathing letter asking for internal elections in the party and for introspection, it was Patel who carefully dissipated the tension and rebellion within the party. Patel's USP from the time he became parliamentary secretary to Rajiv Gandhi has been unflinching loyalty to the family. The letter was seen as a clear attack on the family and on Team Rahul Gandhi for the way the 2019 election campaign was carried out and for Rahul Gandhi's refusal to take charge of the party. Patel's strategy was clear-he set into motion a strategy of reaching out to individuals while alienating the hardline dissenters. Patel personally went and met Sibal and spoke to Azad. He also convinced the party's chief ministers Ashok Gehlot and Bhupesh Baghel to give public statements in support of the Gandhi family. Within a day or two, some letter writers like Jitin Prasada and Akhilesh Prasad gave public statements saying all their concerns had been addressed. Also, Patel and his colleagues carefully orchestrated a meeting of the Congress Working Committee (CWC) on August 24, just two days after the dissent letter became public. In what was seen as a well-choreographed move, leader after leader praised Sonia Gandhi's leadership and requested her to stay on as Congress president till a new person was elected within six months. Azad was attacked by most other members of the CWC and with announcements about a timeline for elections, the immediate crisis was averted. The ones who weren't placated-Azad, Sibal and Manish Tiwari-have started discussions once against post the Bihar election embarrassment.

Also Read: Ahmed Patel: A low-profile troubleshooter and a high-power strategist

The Sachin Pilot rebellion, 2020

This was the month-long rebellion that preceded the G-23. On July 12, the deputy chief minister of Rajasthan and member of Rahul Gandhi's inner team, Sachin Pilot, took 18 MLAs and went AWOL from Jaipur. He refused to come back before he was made chief minister instead of Ashok Gehlot. While Pilot spoke to Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, the person the family trusted to iron things out and the one who worked out the compromise formula was Patel. While Patel was part of the old guard, many of the younger leaders found him accessible and willing to hear them out. Pilot's aides also say that when Patel (who was known to be close to Gehlot) set up the committee and promised to have his grievances sorted, they knew that his word would be adhered to. A month later, not only was Pilot back in the Jaipur assembly, but without upsetting chief minister Gehlot, a tough balancing act.

Impossible alliances: Maharashtra, 2019

In 2019, when the Maharashtra government formation was uncertain, Patel spent 10 days in Mumbai. According to his aides, he had handled many big elections but never before had he operated from somewhere other than his Wellington Crescent bungalow in the capital. While Sonia Gandhi was reportedly reluctant to join hands with a party that had a Hindutva ideology, Patel heard out their newly elected legislators and understood that the mood in Mumbai was to strike against a BJP government. That's why party leaders credit Patel as one of the key architects of the Maharashtra Vikas Aghadi (MVA) coalition. There were several hiccups like getting all the letters of support, but Patel refused to move from Mumbai till Uddhav Thackeray and the MVA government was sworn in.

Also Read: The centrality of Ahmed Patel in Indian politics

Manmohan Singh trust vote, 2008

The Indo-US nuclear deal was a key moment for Dr Manmohan Singh who was determined to go ahead with it even if his government was threatened. The threat posed by his Left allies, led by Prakash Karat with 59 members of Parliament, was real. It left the United Progressive Alliance short of numbers and that's when Patel's relationships with other parties came in. Patel reached out to Samajwadi Party leader Amar Singh. The party had 39 MPs and would make up for the vacuum created by the left. The two roped in several key leaders-most importantly, former President APJ Abdul Kalam who convinced Mulayam Singh Yadav (with a lesson in the benefits of nuclear power) to vote with the Manmohan Singh government. The result was that the SP's vote ensured a comfortable 275 vote for the UPA government. Patel told HT that it was one of the key moments that he worked closely with Pranab Mukherjee to deliver the trust win.

Delivering for Sonia Gandhi

But perhaps more than batting for the Congress party, Ahmed Patel will be known for his loyalty to Sonia Gandhi. It was his appointment as her political secretary that made him really come into his own. She trusted his self-effacing, away from the limelight manner, and he ensured that her aura remained spotless. One of the key instances is the way he rallied support for Sonia Gandhi soon after she became party president in 1998. It wasn't just the Bharatiya Janata Party that led the attack on a foreign-origin leader but that was when Sharad Pawar also left with Tariq Anwar and Purno Sangma, raising the slogan against her foreign origin. At that time, it was Patel who used his good relationship with key alliance partner Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Lalu Yadav to issue a statement in her favour. In the midst of all the attacks, Yadav called her "Bharat ki bahu" (India's daughter-in-law) which went a long way in showing a vote of confidence for the new and inexperienced Congress president.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The first US fatalities from the novel coronavirus took place weeks before previously known, according to autopsy results released Tuesday of two individuals in Santa Clara, California who had died on February 6 and February 17, way ahead of the February 29 death in Washington state considered the first .

"Each one of those deaths is probably the tip of an iceberg of unknown size," Sara Cody, the chief medical officer of Santa Clara county, told the New York Times. "It feels quite significant."

These new fatalities change the US timeline by a quite a bit, specially as President Donald Trump has come under mounting for not doing enough in the month of February after restricting the entry of travelers from China, which he has tended to portray as the high-point of his administration's response.

The deadly pathogen would tear through the United States shortly and catapult it to the top of the casualty list for infections and fatalities. The toll went up by 2,751 in the last 24 hours to 45,075 and by 39,460 is to 825,306 confirmed cases. Deaths in New York state, the American epicenter of the epidemic, were up to 19,118 and 14,887 in New York city.

These number may not reflect it, but the country is past the peak in terms of new cases, and some states have begun spooling back the restrictions alarming critics, but not the White House which has looked on indulgently, in line with the president's backing of lockdown protestors.

The president has also stoked anger against China with increasing attack on its role, alleging it may have misled the world on the origins of the epidemic, which Americans are saying could have started from a virology lab in Wuhan, the city that became the epicenter of the Chinese outbreak; and the then the exact magnitude of its crisis.

Missouri state on Tuesday filed a lawsuit in a federal court alleged gross mismanagement of the crisis by China and sought damages. "Chinese authorities deceived the public, suppressed crucial information, arrested whistleblowers, denied human-to-human transmission in the face of mounting evidence, destroyed critical medical research, permitted millions of people to be exposed to the virus, and even hoarded personal protective equipment-thus causing a global pandemic that was unnecessary and preventable," said the first of its kind lawsuit filed by the state's Republican attorney general Eric Schmitt.

Beijing dismissed the lawsuit as "malicious". China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman Geng Shuang told reporters., "These so-called lawsuits are purely malicious abuses."

"Such abuses are not conducive to epidemic prevention and control in the United States, and also run counter to the current international anti-epidemic cooperation," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 20 -- Kamala Harris will on Wednesday be sworn-in as the 49th Vice President of the United States of America, alongside Joe Biden, who will take oath as the 46th President. Before Harris, who is of Indian-origin, no woman has been the US President or Vice President. Previously, Hillary Clinton has been a presidential nominee, and lost to Donald Trump in 2016, while Sarah Palin was the running mate of John McCain in 2008, when they lost to Barack Obama and Biden.

As Vice President, Harris will be the first in the line of presidential succession. Here's a look at some prominent female leaders, current and former:

1. Angela Merkel (Germany): Consistently ranked as the most powerful woman in the world, and also among its most powerful leaders, Merkel has been the Chancellor of Germany since November 2005. Currently in her fifth term, Merkel will step down this year.

2. Jacinda Ardern (New Zealand): Currently in her second term as prime minister, Ardern is among the youngest heads of government in the world. Praised for her handling of the Covid-19 pandemic in her country, Ardern is the third female New Zealand PM, after Jenny Shipley and Helen Clark, respectively.

3. Sheikh Hasina (Bangladesh): The daughter of the country's first President, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Hasina is also its longest-serving prime minister. Currently in her fourth term, Sheikh Hasina has been Bangladesh's PM since 2009, having first held office between 1996 and 2001.

4. Tsai Ing-wen (Taiwan): The first female President of Taiwan, Tsai Ing-wen is also the seventh holder of the office. She first won in 2016 and repeated the feat four years later.

5. Indira Gandhi (India): The first, and thus far only female prime minister of India, Gandhi was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, the first PM. She was the third prime minister, and the second longest-serving PM after her father.

6. Margaret Thatcher (UK): Dubbed as the "Iron Lady," Thatcher was the first female prime minister of the United Kingdom. She was three-term prime minister, from May 4, 1979 to November 28, 1990.

7. Theresa May (UK): The second female prime minister of her country, May took office after the resignation of David Cameron in 2016. As PM, she carried out Brexit negotiations with the European Union (EU). She resigned in 2019 and was succeeded by the incumbent Boris Johnson.

8. Golda Meir (Israel): Born in what is present-day Ukraine, Meir was her country's fourth prime minister and the first woman to hold that office. She was dubbed as the "Iron Lady" of Israel.

9. Benazir Bhutto (Pakistan): The first female head of government of a Muslim-majority nation, Bhutto was a two-term prime minister of Pakistan. The daughter of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, a former President and PM of Pakistan, she was the first and thus far, the only female PM of her country.

10. Michelle Bachelet (Chile): Currently serving as the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Bachelet was a two-term President of Chile, the first woman to hold that position.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- India provided support for a slew of connectivity and cross-border development projects and extended currency swaps and financial support in the region spanning from Bangladesh to the Maldives, even as China invested more than $4 billion in the neighbourhood this year. China's investments and contracts remain cloaked in opacity, with virtually no official figures available, though reliable estimates showed $1.93 billion, or almost half of its investments and construction contracts in India's neighbourhood, had gone to its traditional ally Pakistan.

India's support for connectivity and development projects in the neighbourhood picked up pace soon after the border standoff with China emerged in the open in May, and New Delhi has pumped in hundreds of millions of dollars for key schemes and to extend financial support to the governments of countries such as Sri Lanka and the Maldives that were impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Indian side provided currency swap facilities of $400 million each to Sri Lanka and the Maldives to bolster economic revival. India also provided a soft loan of $250 million to the Maldives as budgetary support.

Another $500 million, including a grant of $100 million, was provided for the Greater Male Connectivity Project, which is set to be largest infrastructure project in the Maldives with 6.7 kilometre-long bridge and causeway links between the national capital and three islands.

New Delhi also handed over 10 broad gauge locomotives to Dhaka, launched the first cross-border container train service and began shipping goods from Kolkata to Tripura in the northeast via Bangladesh's Chattogram port.

Also read: India slips a spot in UN's human development index, ranks at 131 now

Some eight railway projects are being implemented for Bangladesh under lines of credit, including the $78-million Kulaura-Shahbazpur rail line and the $389 million Khulna-Mongla rail line that are expected to be completed in 2021. During their virtual summit on December 17, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Bangladesh counterpart Sheikh Hasina are set to launch the revived Chilahati-Haldibari railway link, which was snapped during the 1965 war with Pakistan.

Last month, work was launched on the third integrated check post on the Nepal border, which is being built at Nepalgunj at a cost of almost $20 million to streamline and boost cross-border trade. In August, India provided $5 million under a border area development programme to Myanmar, where the country's total development cooperation is worth almost $1.4 billion.

According to figures collated by the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), which closely tracks China's investments and construction projects around the world, Chinese investments in India's neighbourhood this year included $1.93 billion in Pakistan, $1.25 billion in Bangladesh, $450 million in Sri Lanka and $280 million in Myanmar.

The investments in Bangladesh, Myanmar and Sri Lanka were all under China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), according to AEI.

Amit Bhandari, a fellow at Gateway House who tracks China's economic activities in the region, said the figures could be significantly higher, given the lack of transparency regarding such investments, especially by Chinese state-run firms.

"Recent estimates showed 60 per cent of the FDI in Pakistan, more than 40 per cent in Myanmar and more than 30 per cent in Sri Lanka came from China, which has a bigger cheque book to throw around. Such large investments in what aren't vibrant economies are aimed at generating geo-political influence but also lead to badly designed projects that make problems worse. For instance, rates for power generated by China-backed projects in Pakistan are 20 per cent to 50 per cent more than in India," he said.

Also read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

India, Bhandari said, had improved its performance but is yet to match China in implementing big-ticket projects. Experts also have concerns about the pace of work on India-backed projects despite the external affairs ministry streamlining its development partnership administration by creating sections that focus on specific projects and regions.

For instance, though the 130-kilometre-long India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline was launched in September 2018, the ground-breaking for the construction of the pipeline to supply fuel from Numaligarh Refinery in Assam to Dinajpur in Bangladesh was done only on December 4 this year.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 5 -- "The commercial music industry needs to take more risks," says composer AR Rahman. "There is a set of commercial expectations in Hindi movies especially. The vibe, the movie, the song. sometimes it's savage, the way it's done. They could take more risks with the box office not being a priority for OTT platforms and should go much deeper into our roots of music and find new ways to express the tradition."

Rahman, 54, has been both part of that industry, and a catalyst outside it for nearly three decades. He wrote his first tune on his father's harmonium at age 5, was performing in a professional orchestra at 11 and began his film career at 25, with Mani Ratnam's Roja (1992), for which he won the first of his six National Awards.

A golden streak followed, with Bombay (1995), Rangeela (1995), Lagaan (2001), Rang De Basanti (2006), Jodhaa Akbar (2008) and Rockstar (2011), among others, and a parallel track in Tamil cinema that included films such as Iruvar (1997), Vinnaithaandi Varuvaayaa (2010), Kochadaiiyaan (2014) and I (2015). In 2008, as part of the Danny Boyle crossover film Slumdog Millionaire's series of wins, Rahman won two Academy Awards, two Grammies, a BAFTA, a Golden Globe and international stardom.

Through these decades, he was also known for seeking out fresh talent to work with. "Most composers have their regular singers, but Rahman has always scouted for new voices. He had a young Baba Sehgal and Shweta Shetty sing Rukmani Rukmani in Roja and a relatively unknown Sukhwinder Singh sing Chaiyya Chaiyya for Dil Se [in 1998]," says Archisman Mozumder, a musicologist with the infotainment platform Rewind.

In 2008, Rahman founded the KM Music Conservatory to train aspiring musicians. A year later, he started Sunshine Orchestra, offering free musical training to children who couldn't afford it.

He's now turned his attention to the struggling South Asian indie artists. He and a trio of Canadian entrepreneurs - Noel Kirthiraj, Sen Sachi and Prasana Balachandran - have launched a platform called maajja (apparently derived from "Majestic"), promising "creative liberty" and "global reach" to independent musicians.

As things stand, there are platforms that aspire but struggle to enable artists, Rahman told Wknd. "There are a lucky few who benefit from the system and rise to great heights, while others continue to struggle."

Maajja seeks to bring data and resources to bear on this problem. "The industry must support itself. We often say it but we don't really do it. Any successful entrepreneurship or idea needs to be able to generate money and it needs to be interesting," Rahman says. "The music market is very segregated and we don't know who is consuming what. Our aim is to unite and create a new ecosystem with deserving talent, good production value for content and a robust platform to showcase it."

Any artist of South Asian origin or catering to an audience in South Asia will be eligible. Aspirants will be able to sign up on the website and reach out through social media or email demos of their work. "It's not surprising that Rahman is launching a concept like this. He is one of a very few musicians in the country who could breach the north-south industry divide," says Mozumder. "Rahman successfully took Indian fusion to the world too."

"Maajja will be giving a window of hope to indie musicians in the country. People won't be discouraged to participate in counter-culture. That's a huge thing," says Tenma, a Tamil indie musician and co-founder of the band The Casteless Collective who is also associated with the new initiative.

Rahman, the Sufi-loving BTS fan with his finger on the pulse of the youth, says he essentially wants to make it easier for other music lovers to make their career dreams come true. "To come into music is not easy. It takes a lot of courage," he adds. Plans for a major music festival to follow the announcement of maajja have been delayed by Covid-19, but it was time to launch the initiative and move towards the festival. "Creative collaboration was the most powerful response to the pandemic," Rahman says.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 12 -- Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau on Tuesday conducted an unexpected cabinet reshuffle following the sudden resignation of Indo-Canadian minister Navdeep Bains.

In a video statement released on Tuesday, the 43-year-old minister of innovation, science and industry said he was retiring from politics to spend more time with his family. Bains was among the prominent Sikhs in Trudeau's cabinet along with minister for national defence Harjit Sajjan.

Bains has also decided against running in the next federal elections. Bains has been a cabinet minister since 2015 after he was elected from the riding (constituency) of Mississauga-Malton.

Bains's resignation precipitated a larger reshuffle in what was the first-ever virtual swearing-in ceremony for ministers in the history of Canada. Foreign minister Francois-Philippe Champagne was placed in charge of Bains's portfolios as minister for innovation, science and industry while transport minister Marc Garneau assumed charge of foreign affairs. Omar Alghabra was promoted from parliamentary secretary to the cabinet and given charge of the transport department. Jim Carr was sworn in as a minister without portfolio and will be the government's special representative for the Prairies.

In his statement, Bains said, "It's time for me to put my family first and I couldn't be happier about it." He said the last year had been hard on his two young daughters and it was time "to focus on the most important job I have in life - being a dad."

Bains's exit could have a significant impact on the calculus for the next federal elections since he is credited with crafting the strategy for the Liberal Party in the 905 region, referring to the telephone area code for the seat-rich suburbs of Toronto like Brampton and Mississauga.

Bains is a veteran within the Sikh community in Canadian electoral politics. He was also an MP between 2004 and 2011.

This is the second reshuffle that Trudeau has undertaken since the Covid-19 pandemic erupted last spring. He gave charge of the finance portfolio to deputy prime minister Chrystia Freeland after the resignation of Bill Morneau last year.

The reshuffle came just before a cabinet retreat already announced by the Prime Minister's Office.

Bains was famously among the four Sikh cabinet ministers appointed by Trudeau in 2015, along with Sajjan. Of the other two, Bardish Chagger remains as the minister for diversity, inclusion and youth, while the fourth, Amarjeet Sohi, was defeated in the 2019 federal polls. Now the cabinet is left with two Sikh ministers - Sajjan and Chagger.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 4 -- It would not have come as a surprise to most people when a recent national survey showed a staggering 93% of Indians expressing confidence in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's leadership in tackling the coronavirus pandemic. In fact, other surveys had shown the public's confidence has steadily grown, from 77% at the beginning of the national lockdown over a month ago to 83% at the end of April.

This was evident to anyone with an ear to the ground, such as the millions of volunteers who have been reaching out to assist those in need, or those who are in touch with many of them to coordinate aid. That confidence was also echoed by the vast majority of domestic and international public health experts monitoring India. Their sentiments were backed by solid evidence of the nation having done remarkably well in managing the pandemic.

Nevertheless, for a group of the usual suspects among international media, and some of their fellow travellers in India, all this might have been happening in a different galaxy. So deeply do they seem vested in purveying bad news about India that they appeared oblivious to the overwhelming evidence that India was a stunningly positive outlier.

In the early stages, this school of reportage and commentary predicted catastrophe for India. They kept emphasising that since first world nations with superior health care systems were in big trouble, India was doomed. Some headlines include: "Callousness of India's Covid response"; "A vulnerable population braces for a pandemic"; "The consequences (in India) will be especially grim"; and even "Mr Modi is in big trouble."

Next, as days went by, they cast doubts on the relatively few infections by hyping the "low level of testing". Never mind that their cynicism - which should have been corroborated by a severe shortage of hospital beds and ventilators, and a sharp rise in respiratory-related deaths - was contradicted by reality. As testing was ramped up dramatically to the hundreds of thousands, and it became clear that far fewer Indians were turning up positive than in Europe and the United States (US), that bogey has mostly been quietly tucked away.

Thereafter, their acknowledgement that India was doing relatively well has been fleeting, and the tone grudging. Some sounded wistful, almost as if hoping that the good news about India were untrue, or if it were, that it would soon be overcome by negative developments. To be sure, the road ahead for India's fight against the virus will be long and arduous. But while it is not the global media's job to exude undue optimism about India, neither should it be to downplay achievements and ooze negativism.

Finally, when the doom and gloom failed to materialise, these purveyors of a rigidly-blinkered narrative on India turned to their favourite charge: Islamophobia. They pounced on the developments surrounding the Tablighi Jamaat, and the public's disapproval of its members' behaviour, to accuse the Modi government and most Indian media of polarising the situation.

Of course, the reports that made this claim invariably omitted mentioning that the government's rules - such as the closure of places of worship - were equally applicable to all religions. Or that the PM's repeated appeals to unite people, including asserting that this virus "does not see race, religion, caste...we are in this together" was exactly the opposite of their allegation. And ironically, even those in the Indian media who went out of their way to be politically correct, more often preferring to use the euphemism "single source" rather than name the Tablighi Jamaat, were nevertheless accused just the same.

Such jaundiced views about India have gradually become commonplace among far-Left, modern liberals within and outside the country. Another aspect that stands out among this group is an excessive empathy for China that defies reason and that has eroded their credibility.

That was visible in the hotly-contested debate about the name of this virus. Although originally termed the "Wuhan virus" and later whitewashed into "SARS-CoV-2," the moment US President Donald Trump called it a "Chinese virus," all hell broke loose. Calling it that has, somewhat oddly, been termed racist by these commentators. More to the point, as the American talk show host and classical liberal - and no fan of Trump - Bill Maher pointed out, all past epidemics have been named after the place of their origin. These include German measles, Japanese encephalitis, Spanish flu, Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome and others.

The reason this should be of interest in India is that none of this cohort objected a few years ago when an antibiotic-resistant bacterial strain was named the "New Delhi metallo beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1)", because it was possibly first acquired here. This sort of hypocrisy only reinforces the perception of an entrenched bias against India among these circles.

As India grapples with the next phase of this pandemic, both in containing it as well as reviving the economy, it will also have to contend with more such determinedly pessimistic portrayals. It would be more appropriate for us to strive for a more balanced global narrative on India.

Baijayant 'Jay' Panda is vice-president, BJP

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 20 -- As US vice president-elect Kamala Harris heads to take oath on Wednesday, her relatives back in India showered praises for her achievements and lauded her for doing it "all on her own."

"There's no message I can give, I didn't help her become VP. She did all on her own. All that I'll tell her is 'do whatever Shyamala(Kamala Harris' mother) taught you. You've been doing fine so far, keep it up.' It's all I can say," her maternal uncle Gopalan Balachandran, who is based in Delhi, told news agency ANI.

Harris' village in Tamil Nadu's Thulasendrapuram celebrated by bursting firecrackers, distributing sweets and performing poojas at the temple as the Indian-orogin Democrat is set to be sworn-in as the US vice president this evening.

The village has been decorated to give a festive look. Sivaranjani, a woman who was making murukku, told ANI, "Today all the people in the village are very happy as our Kamala di is all set to become the Vice President of the United States. We all are very excited. She has surely inspired many women in the village."

Earlier in the day, the US vice president-elect took to Twitter to say that she and president-elect Joe Biden will work to unify the country, tackle the challenges, and renew the promise of America. "Though we may be physically separated, we, the American people are united in spirit," she wrote in another post on the microblogging site.

Joe Biden and Harris will be sworn in by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Sonya Sotomayor respectively in the first-ever curated live stream for "young Americans'' hosted by award-winning entertainer and advocate Keke Palmer. The duo have urged their supporters to stay home because of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic. The National Mall is closed and just a fraction of the tickets usually handed out for an inauguration will be distributed.

Harris, 56, will be the first-ever woman vice president of the US. She will also be the first Indian-origin, first Black and first African American vice president of the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last , of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Civid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analyses clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17.

Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study, dismissing conspiracy theories about the lab origin of the virus.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "The chances of similar outbreaks are lower if the virus infects humans and then evolve its highly pathogenic properties. The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat. "I believe the coming reality for the world will be one where we are always defending against this enemy. A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoys on Covid-19, told Hindustan Times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 1 -- Canada has seen record low growth in its population in the second quarter of the year, mainly due to a fall in migration to the country due to travel restrictions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.

A key highlight of the trend is that the number of Indians arriving in Canada as permanent residents (PRs) this year is set to number less than half the total for 2019.

According to the country's data agency Statistics Canada or StatCan, there was just a 0.1% increase in population between April and June, which is a record low.

StatCan said in a release, "International migration is the main driver of population growth in Canada, accounting for 81.9% of growth in 2019-2020. Therefore, the restrictions placed on international borders and the subsequent drop in international migration levels had the largest impact on population growth in 2019-2020."

Coronavirus-related curbs have markedly affected Indians moving to Canada; they have comprised the largest source group for the country's PRs in recent years. According to data from Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC), Indian-origin PRs in 2019 were at a peak of 85,590, up from 69,980 the previous year.

The category saw the numbers rise during the first quarter of the year, growing from 15,595 to 16,660. However, as Covid-19 restrictions came into place, there was a sharp drop in PRs in the country, falling from 23,825 for the second quarter of 2019 to only 9,945 for the same period this year.

In total, just 29,800 Indians became Canadian PRs till the end of July this year, a pace that indicates the total will be below half of that for 2019.

This is in sharp contrast to the situation last year. StatCan noted that the July-October quarter of 2019 had seen the numbers reach 208,659, growing by 0.6%. It said it was the "highest level of growth for a quarter since comparable record keeping began in July 1971".

However, "the global pandemic began to affect the demographic patterns in Canada at the end of the first quarter of 2020", StatCan said, after Canada recorded its first Covid-19 death on March 9 and curbs, including those on international travel, came into effect about a week later.

Canada had targeted accepting more than 300,000 new PRs each year. The pandemic could possibly make the government wind down those numbers in the near future.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 1 -- Mindless and incessant forwarding of WhatsApp messages without verifying the correctness of such messages is leading to spread of fake news and such messages assume racial and religious overtones, Supreme Court judge Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul said on Sunday.

Kaul also made a case for individual discretion and responsibility with respect to sharing fake news. "Any regulation of social media may impinge on free speech and right to privacy. The struggle is to regulate social media without affecting free speech, so it is everybody's responsibility to see that content is verified before it is sent."

Justice Kaul was speaking on the topic 'Fake News and Misinformation' at an online lecture series organised by Madras Bar Association.

"There are a lot of messages about Covid (coronavirus disease) including its 'remedies', the origin, people who are 'helping spread of the virus' and so on. These messages can take religious and racial undertones," the SC judge warned.

"When the press is writing, they are accountable... they write with a certain sense of responsibility. But others may not have anything at stake and no accountability..." he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" from the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan.

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December that year.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization (WHO) from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- The Australian draft resolution at the World Health Assembly calling for an investigation into the sources of the virus is necessary, and India has rightly supported it. China's decision to treat this as an unfriendly act has given the resolution a political hue. It has also drawn attention to China's absurd refusal to not allow the World Health Organization (WHO) or any international scientific team to study ground zero of the outbreak. Given the destruction the virus has wrought, Beijing could only have improved its battered image by allowing an investigation. The United States, which sees Covid-19 through the prism of great power rivalry, did not join in because China was not directly mentioned.

Having a global scientific investigation into the origins of a pandemic should have been a routine affair. That it has now become a geopolitical battleground is a sign that the international health system, particularly WHO, needs reform. Though a United Nations agency, it was unusual in being funded and directed by non-governmental organisations. This is why it proved so inept at navigating global politics or rejecting the unreasonable demands of Beijing. Member-states should lay the ground for a larger debate on how WHO should be overhauled. The world can't afford another pandemic, and this should be the overriding thought of all countries, including China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 9 AM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Over 500 new Covid-19 cases in a day in India; total number crosses 2,500

The number of people infected with coronavirus disease Covid-19 in the country rose by more than 500 to cross 2,500 - 2,507 to be precise - on Thursday, according to the health ministry. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

Administrators and health care professionals shaping India's response to the pandemic would do well to study what is happening in New York City - what it got right and, more importantly, what it didn't. Read more

Coronavirus: How world reached a million cases in 93 days

At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. Read more

'We won't need to talk while batting': Virat Kohli names 2 batsmen he loves batting with in Instagram live with Kevin Pietersen

Fitness is the top-most criteria for Virat Kohli the cricketer. It was therefore, not at all a surprise when he revealed that he enjoys batting with those who can run fast between the wickets. Read more

Social Distancing Guide: 5 ways to avoid getting bored in your relationship during lockdown

During the current lockdown scenario amidst the coronavirus crisis, it's easy to get into a rut and forget about having fun once you've been in a relationship for some time. Read more

Disney+ Hotstar launched in India: 5 Things you should know about it

Disney has finally launched its video streaming service, Disney+ in India. The service was launched in the country as Disney+ Hotstar and it brings the best content from the two video streaming platforms to the Indian users. Read more

Anushka Sharma interrupts Virat Kohli's live chat with Kevin Pietersen: 'Chalo chalo dinner time'

Actor Anushka Sharma and cricketer husband Virat Kohli may be under lockdown but she is making sure they stick to their time table. On Thursday, Virat joined former England batsman Kevin Pietersen in an Instagram Live video session where both the cricketers discussed a range of topics. However, Anushka made sure Virat ended his chat in time for dinner. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 21 -- Indian Americans have mostly voted for Democrats in the presidential elections. On November 3, they can do more, Democrats believe, and put former Vice-President Joe Biden in the White House.

"The Indian American vote - the AAPI more broadly - can be an absolute difference maker," Tom Perez, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said at a power-packed pitch to them at a virtual ton-hall recently, pointing to their demographics in the three Rust Belt swing states of Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania that put Donald Trump in the White House in a stunning upset in 2016. The broader group AAPI in Perez's remarks, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, include people of Indian, Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Japanese and Indonesian descent.

President Donald Trump won these three states narrowly by 0.2, 0.7 and 0.8 percentage points, respectively - 10,704, 46,765 and 22,177 votes. Together, they gave him their cumulative 46 electoral votes, a 304-227 victory over Hillary Clinton and the White House. (There are in all 538 electoral votes that decide a presidential elections in the US, not the popular vote, which Clinton won, in this instance by more than 3 million; 7 electors voted against their pledges).

Indian Americans of voting age are in sufficient numbers in these states to obliterate Trump's lead and put Biden across the finishing line, Democrats have argued.

There are 125,000 Indian American voters in Michigan, 156,000 in Pennsylvania and 37,000 in Wisconsin, according to an analysis by AAPI Victory Fund, a Democratic group dedicated to ensuring the victory of AAPI candidates that had hosted the town-hall.

The number of Indian Americans who voted in these three states in 2016, or did not, could not be immediately ascertained. But the countrywide turnout for the community was 62%, according to AAPI Data, the study cited by AAPI Victory Fund. It was the highest among AAPI communities with Japanese Americans, and was 6 points above the national turnout of 56%.

There are an estimated 4 million people of Indian origin in the United States, but only about a third are eligible to vote - 1.3 million, according to AAPI Data. The rest are not, because they are either still on Green Card or are awaiting the completion of their naturalization process.

Notwithstanding Nikki Haley and Bobby Jindal, both Republican governors; and Ami Bera, Raja Krishnamurthi, Ro Khanna, Pramila Jayapal and Kamala Harris, members of US congress, and many state and city officials, Indian Americans are not a major factor in US elections yet.

But they can play an outsize role in closely contested battleground states, also called swing states, that are neither deeply committed Democratic (such as New York and California) nor Republican (Texas and South Carolina) and who determine presidential elections.

Apart from Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, the Biden campaign is eyeing five other states that they believe are in play - Arizona, Florida, Georgia, North Carolina and Texas where Indian Americans can help the effort with their votes of 66,000, 193,000, 150,000, 111,000 and 475,000 respectively.

"We know that there are important sectors of the Indian American community through out our country, throughout our battleground states," said Julie Chavez Rodriguez, a senior adviser to the Biden campaign, and added, "And we want to make sure we were engaging and connecting directly" with them, their key leaders in these battleground states. And the key radio stations, newspapers, whatever else outlet it is that are speaking to them.

Vinay Reddy, a new addition to Biden's team of campaign speech writers, chipped in at the virtual town hall with an appeal to "uncles and aunties", deploying a playful inside-joke among second generation Indian Americans about their parents, their "distant" relatives and their friends.

The most poignant moment of the town-hall was Dr Murthy's recollection of his swearing in as Surgeon General, after a brutal confirmation process. He choked up.

"I will always remember what he did at that swearing in before it started when the cameras were off, in the back room behind the stage," Murthy started, in a controlled and steady monotone that has become so familiar from his appearances on the Covid-19 epidemic on national television news networks.

"I was gathered there with my mother, my father, my sister, my wife Alice, and my grandmother, who I was fortunate to still have with me and is still here about 15 feet away from me here in my house today. She was in a wheelchair.

"When the Vice President walked in, he immediately saw her and went straight up to her. He got down on the floor on one knee and he took her hand in his hand and he looked into her eyes and said, 'Grandma, look at what you've done'.

"And he pointed to all the people who had assembled there. He knew our story. He knew that our story and the story of the Indian American community is the story of the sacrifices our parents and the generations before us made in order for us to build a life in America."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 3 -- The Centre on Wednesday announced that it was relaxing visa and travel restrictions for certain categories of foreign nationals who need to come to India.

They include businessmen coming to India on a Business visa (other than on B-3 visa for sports) in non-scheduled commercial/ chartered flights, the Ministry of Home Affairs said in a statement.

International flights have remained suspended in India since the lockdown began on March 25 in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Foreign healthcare professionals, health researchers, engineers and technicians for technical work at Indian health sector facilities, including laboratories and factories are also included in the list.

"This is subject to a letter of invitation from a recognized and registered healthcare facility, registered pharmaceutical company or accredited University in India," the MHA said in its statement.

Visa rules have also been relaxed for foreign engineering, managerial, design or other specialists travelling to India on behalf of foreign business entities located in India. This includes all manufacturing units, design units, software and IT units as well as financial sector companies (banking and non-banking financial sector firms).

Foreign Technical specialists and engineers travelling for installation, repair and maintenance of foreign-origin machinery and equipment facilities in India, on the invitation of a registered Indian business entity will also be eligible for the relaxed visa norms. These could be for equipment installation, or is under warranty, or for after sales servicing or repair on commercial terms.

The above categories of foreign nationals would have to obtain a fresh Business visa or Employment visa, as applicable, from the Indian Missions/ Posts abroad, the statement said.

Foreign nationals holding a valid long term multiple entry Business visa [other than B-3 visa for sports] issued by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad would have to get the Business visa re-validated from the Indian Mission/Post concerned. Such foreign nationals would not be permitted to travel to India on the strength of any electronic visa obtained earlier.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 26 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

It was noted that the world community was still trying to forge a coordinated response three months after the crisis began, though the virtual summit had shown that the world community could come together, the people said.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UN Security Council, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic. The WHO too has faced some criticism for not acting more decisively on the crisis.

The G20 communique said the unprecedented pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

"We will share timely and transparent information; exchange epidemiological and clinical data; share materials necessary for research and development; and strengthen health systems globally, including through supporting the full implementation of the WHO International Health Regulations (IHR 2005)," it said.

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label Covid-19 as the "Wuhan virus".

"The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics. There is a need to empower it so that it can take the lead, and to boost its capacity to provide early warnings, help states develop protocols and to forge common solutions to future crises," said a person.

The people said further discussions of the G20 members were underway to frame an "action paper" with specific steps to be taken to counter the pandemic and its fallout.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 29 -- US President Donald Trump on Thursday signed off on an executive order that seeks to restrict protection to social media companies and underlines the need to seek "transparency and accountability" from these platforms. The order is centered around the argument that social media companies that selectively remove or restrict access to content engage in editorial conduct and should not be shielded by limited liability protection extended to them for users' posts.

Trump, who has often complained about liberal-leaning Silicon Valley companies targeting conservatives by fact-checking them or removing their posts, issued the order days after Twitter started selective fact-checks of his posts and labeled two of them about mail-in voting "potentially misleading".

To make his point, Trump's order also targeted China.

These tech companies, he said, instead of censoring China for promoting aggression and disinformation profited from it.

"One United States company, for example, created a search engine for the Chinese Communist Party that would have blacklisted searches for "human rights," hid data unfavorable to the Chinese Communist Party, and tracked users determined appropriate for surveillance. It also established research partnerships in China that provide direct benefits to the Chinese military," the US President said. He did not name Google.

Trump also referenced the social media campaign launched by Beijing after he held China responsible for the coronavirus pandemic and more.

Companies had accepted advertisements paid for by the Chinese government that spread false information about its mass imprisonment of religious minorities. "They have also amplified China's propaganda abroad, including by allowing Chinese government officials to use their platforms to spread misinformation regarding the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to undermine pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong," his order said.

White House officials, according to Bloomberg, complained that Twitter did not originally append fact checks to China Foreign Ministry Spokesman Lijan Zhao, who without evidence wrote that "it might be" the U.S. military that brought the coronavirus to China. Twitter has since added the fact-check link to his tweets.

Trump later followed up on the China angle of his order, telling reporters that China could have stopped the coronavirus from stopping but did not. He has promised to have a dedicated briefing on China tomorrow.

At his briefing, Trump said the choices that Twitter makes when it chooses to suppress, edit, blacklist, shadow, ban are editorial decisions, pure and simple and should be treated as such. They are editorial decisions.

"In those moments, Twitter ceases to be a neutral public platform, and they become an editor with a viewpoint, he asserted.

Trump also asked a Attorney General-led Working Group to initiate discussions with counterparts in the states that would look at the 16,000-plus complaints of online platforms censoring received from people by the White House's Tech Bias Reporting tool launched in May 2019. This group would also collect material about algorithms to suppress content or users based on their political views and differential policies allowing for otherwise impermissible behavior committed by accounts linked to the Chinese Communist Party or other autocratic regimes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 7 -- The Bombay high court (HC) has refused to accept that the spread of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic in the country is a valid ground to allow a Thai national and a person of Indian origin (PIO), who is engaged in a legal battle with her estranged husband, to relocate her son (12) to Bangkok.

"This ground of Covid-19 pandemic for relocation does not appeal to us at all," said the two-member HC division bench, comprising Justices Amjad Sayed and Abhay Abuja, on October 1, while dismissing the petition filed by the woman, who is married to a Mumbaikar.

The woman, who has been estranged from her husband since 2012, had moved the HC in June, seeking urgent orders to allow her to relocate her son to Bangkok until the time the petition for his custody was decided by the family court at Bandra.

The petitioner had contended that "in view of the rapid spread of Covid-19 pandemic in India, we (the mother and the son) urgently want to relocate to our home country, Thailand, where my parents live, until the time the family court at Bandra decides on my son's custody".

She had stated that she and her son were leading a lonely life in India without any basic medical and financial assistance, maintenance and insurance.

She had claimed that the Covid-19 curve had flattened in Thailand and the South-east Asian country had become "one of the safest places on the earth amid the pandemic crises".

She had drawn a parallel between the viral outbreak in her native Thailand and India and also had given the example of June 18 in a bid to bolster her argument.

She had pointed out that on that day Thailand had reported 3,290 Covid-19 and 58 deaths. On the contrary, India had reported 1.44 million and 32,063 Covid-19 cases and deaths, respectively, on the same day, she had added.

However, the contentions failed to impress upon the court.

The bench noted that the boy is studying in a reputed international school in Mumbai. "In our view, it would not be proper to disrupt the studies of the boy in the middle of the academic year, classes of which are being conducted online," said the bench.

The bench also thought it improper to uproot the teenager at this stage in his life because he has lived in Mumbai all along.

The bench also rejected the petitioner's contention that courts had allowed her nine times earlier to travel to Thailand along with her son.

It said previous concessions would not work in her favour. "It certainly cannot be equated to relocating the boy to Bangkok pending disposal of the Bandra family court's proceedings," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. The story drew little attention, as the world prepared to celebrate the beginning of a new year later that night.

In less than 100 days in the new year - Thursday is the 93rd day to be precise - the virus has infected 1 million people and killed 50,000, ripping through 203 countries in a rampage that will likely exact as severe an economic, social and psychological toll as the number of casualties by the time humanity can beat it. Till now, a little over 200,000 have recovered from the disease.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

In India, infections crossed 2,000 on Wednesday and the country was on course to add 514 more on Thursday -- the first time daily new cases crossed the 500 mark. New fatalities too logged a big jump -- 19 -- taking the total toll to 72 in the country, which is in the middle of a three-week long nationwide shutdown to ensure the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak does not assume the proportions it has in countries such as Italy and the United States.

The United States is now the worst-hit region, accounting for more than a third of all daily new cases around the world. New York has lost 2,200 people and the virus was on course to surpass the 9/11 terror attacks in the next 36 hours as the deadliest tragedy in a city that is at the heart of modern day pop culture.

Almost 10 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the last two weeks.

The United States and Europe are largely being regarded as the current hot spots of the pandemic, with world leaders expecting "the roughest two or three weeks" in their country. "We're going to lose thousands of people," US President Donald Trump said earlier in the week, while projecting that up to 240,000 people could die.

Italy, with a large ageing population that is the most vulnerable to the Sars-Cov-2 pathogen, has seen the highest number of deaths at 13,000. Spain, the United Kingdom, France and Germany together account for close to 20,000 fatalities.

China, where the pathogen is believed to have mutated in either bats or pangolins to jump to humans, has recorded 3,300 deaths - with a rate of growth that slowed into single digits only after what has been a close two months of lockdown in large parts of the country.

Stock markets around the world suffered historic losses in the first three months of the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and London's FTSE 100 saw their biggest quarterly drops since 1987, plunging 23% and 25% respectively.

In India, Bombay Stock Exchange investors lost around Rs 33.38 lakh crore (in market value) in March, the month when the coronavirus contagion spread to equities.

In an age largely defined as the era of social media, Covid-19 has now introduced a new zeitgeist: social distancing. Jobs that can be done are now being done from home -- as are classes for schools and college, and even the UK parliament. As a result, digital pipelines are sagging under the load of unprecedented video streaming and conferencing.

Also Read: Genetic sequencing takes lead in Covid-19 vaccine development

In India, authorities have now begun preparations to deal with what may be an inevitable surge in infections, and chart out strategies to allow at least some people to resume work when the lockdown ends on April 15.

"It is important to formulate a common exit strategy to ensure staggered re-emergence of the population once the lockdown ends," Prime Minister Narendra Modi told chief ministers on Thursday, asking states to send their suggestions for such an exit strategy.

"It can't be business as usual," a government release quoted the PM as saying, perhaps summing up the reality the rest of the world will need to confront - at least for the next 12-18 months by when a viable, mass-produced vaccine is expected to be a reality.

Research labs and pharmaceutical companies in the US, China and European nations are working at full tilt to develop a vaccine that can fight stem the pandemic.

Trials have begun in China, United States and Germany with first participants taking shots of the first vaccine candidates.

A drug used in the treatment of malaria has also held out hope, and prompted India to prescribe it as a prophylactic for medical staff dealing with the cases. Hydroxychloroquine when paired with azithromycin (an antibiotic) has been shown to clear patients of the virus at a much faster rate than seen usually.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Prayagraj, April 10 -- In accordance with the directives issued by chief minister Yogi Adityanath to implement strict measures in areas where corona patients were found in districts, the administration of Prayagraj on Friday implemented intensive lockdown around a masjid between Shahganj police station and gate number 2 of Prayagraj railway station.

According to district magistrate of Prayagraj Bhanu Chand Goswami, the action was taken to prevent any chance of further spread of the virus as the lone Covid 19 case here, an Indonesian national, was recovered from the masjid premises.

"The entire area has been placed under intensive lock down with zero movement on road or places around the masjid," he said.

The ?Indonesian patient, who is presently admitted in hospital in Kotwa in Phulpur tehsil of the district, is one of the seven Indonesian nationals who are members of the Tablighi Jamaat and were recovered along with 30 more Jamaatis of Indian origin from the masjid on March 31.

All 37 stayed at the masjid, said to be the district headquarters of Tablighi Jamaat, in Parayagraj between March 22 and 31.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- With the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) positivity rate - the proportion of samples that return positive among total tested - dipping below 2 per cent, Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain indicated on Wednesday that the city is unlikely to scale up testing.

"The World Health Organisation says that the tests should be scaled up till the positivity rate of less than 8 per cent is achieved. The positivity rate of 5 per cent is considered to be optimum, which means that a sufficient number of tests is being performed. Delhi has had a positivity rate of less than 3 per cent for five days in a row and less than 5 per cent for 15 days in a row. Right now, the positivity rate is about 2 per cent in Delhi. Let us wait and watch how long the positivity rate of 2 per cent is maintained," said Delhi health minister Satyendar Jain, implying that the Delhi government is unlikely to increase the number of tests further.

After a meeting with Union home minister Amit Shah in mid-November, when Delhi was going through the third and the worst surge in Covid-19 cases, the government had decided to scale up the number of tests to between 100,000 and 120,000 a day.

On Tuesday, Delhi reported the highest number of tests conducted in a day - 85,105. Of these, almost half the tests were conducted using the more accurate RT PCR method. The daily number of tests has gone up from an average of 52,617 tests a day in the first week of November to 71,803 on average a day in the last seven days, as per the data shared by the Delhi government.

Also read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

The proportion of RT PCR tests has also gone up from 27.6 per cent in the first week of November to 47.9 per cent on an average during the last seven days.

As for hospitalisations with the viral infection, the minister said that around 50 per cent of the ICU beds were available in Delhi. However, in some of the big private hospitals, the occupancy of ICU beds remained at 80 per cent.

As per the Delhi government's Corona app, on average only 34.8 per cent of the ICU beds - with or without ventilators - were occupied across hospitals as on Wednesday evening. The Delhi high court had asked the government to review its order reserving 80 per cent of the total ICU beds in 75 private hospitals for the treatment of Covid-19.

The HC had initially imposed a stay on the September 12 order reserving 80 per cent of ICU beds in 33 big private hospitals but later withdrew the stay with the surge in cases in November. Subsequently, the government ordered another 42 hospitals to reserve 80 per cent ICU beds.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 11 -- Ever since IT expert Deepak Joshi moved to London in early 2014, guests have flocked to his flat, particularly this time of the year, when sunny and warm weather beckons the Indian elite and others in droves - but not now.

Joshi was expecting at least three confirmed visits over the summer from friends in Delhi, Guwahati, Indore and Goa, but all have cancelled. "Ab kaun ayega yahan (who will come now). London as you know has the largest number of cases in the UK", he says despairingly.

The bigger picture of nearly 9,000 deaths and tens of thousands of cases in UK hospitals is played out at the micro level in individual stories of frustration, adjustments in everyday life, cancellations, and strategies to dodge others in supermarkets and queues.

Almost everyone in the Indian community knows someone who has had the virus, is in quarantine at home, or in hospital. Social distancing is relatively easier in western societies, which even before the virus struck were much more formal in their interactions than Indians, which is reflected in the 'Indian' areas in London.

It is significant that London boroughs with the highest cases are those with large concentrations of people of Indian origin: Ealing Southall, Brent, Barnet and Harrow. "It is frustrating to remain at home, but there is no option", says Maidenhead-based Ravi Singh.

Everyday life in India and the UK is more integrated than ever, with news channels, internet and social media ensuring close connectivity. Singh quips that in India it is no longer a matter of prestige to say that one is 'London-returned'; some may even hide the fact.

Writer Mihir Bose, a long-time London resident, says social distancing is the main problem, but adds that the elderly have discovered the benefits of social media and video-conferencing that enable connectivity in the time of isolation.

"Many of my elderly British friends now meet in virtual drinking sessions. We had several of these; the calendar is booked up."

It is said that if you are tired of London, you are tired of life, but Samuel Johnson never faced such a lockdown. London no longer looks and feels like the London everyone knows; it is as if a giant hoover has sucked life out of its throbbing streets.

The scene is particularly dystopic in central London buzz-spots such as Oxford Street, Piccadilly, and Trafalgar Square.

Traffic lights are on, but there is hardly any traffic, except for police cars, ambulances and vans of electricians, plumbers and road maintenance staff. The price of petrol has come down to nearly a pound, but cars in residential areas have hardly moved an inch.

The BAPS Swaminarayan Temple in Neasden is closed since March 13, streaming its daily 'arti' online to followers across London and the UK. Other places of worship have made similar arrangements to prevent gathering of large number of people.

Medical experts of Indian origin such as Kamlesh Khunti of the University Leicester worry that the ethnicity-wise figures when released will show a disproportionate high incidence of the virus in the community. Initial data has already suggested this.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- The scaled-up liquor prices in Uttar Pradesh didn't come into effect on Thursday allowing consumers time to stock up at old rates.

The state government on Wednesday announced an increase in prices of all categories of liquor, including country liquor, to mop up additional revenue of Rs 2,350 crore.

"We have been asked not to increase prices today (Thursday). As soon as we get the clearance, we will increase it, though re-labelling the price on old stock would be difficult," a liquor seller said.

At many places, people were seen buying liquor by the bagful at old rates, as sellers conveniently ignored the 'limit for sale' clause that bars buying beyond a certain quantity.

Since May 4, when liquor shops reopened to long queues across the state after a six-week closure, revenue of over Rs 300 crore has flowed in, excise officials admit.

At least two BJP lawmakers publicly disapproved of the decision to allow liquor sale. One of them said he was worried that social distancing norms were flouted in the rush to grab a bottle.

"I fail to understand the need for allowing liquor sale as well as lifting the ban on cigarettes and paan masala," said BJP's Unnao MP Sakshi Maharaj.

The party's Kanpur MP Satyadev Pachauri, too, had written to chief minister Yogi Adityanath, expressing concern over the sale of liquor and the flouting of social distancing norms.

BJP's outspoken MLA from Bairia (Ballia) Surendra Singh also wondered why the government had allowed liquor sales. The opposition parties, including the Samajwadi Party, the Congress and the Suheldev Bharatiya Samaj Party, have already demanded that the liquor shops be closed again.

However, shopkeepers said after the first day, the rush had largely settled down.

"Our liquor licence expired on March 31. But due to the lockdown, we have been given seven days to clear our stock after which all the leftover stock would be destroyed. So, before the price hike is effected, we want to make the most of it. The people benefit too and we don't see anything wrong in it as government is getting much needed revenue," a liquor seller said.

The state government had set an excise revenue target of Rs 31,600 crore for 2019-20, against which it earned Rs 27,323 crore till March before the lockdown saw all bars, clubs, standalone liquor vends and model shops shut down for six weeks.

"The excise policy has to be reworked now, given the massive loss of revenue due to closure of liquor shops," an official said.

The HT Guide to Coronavirus COVID-19

WHAT IS 'LIMIT OF SALE?'

The 'limit of sale' clause restricts a person from buying beyond a certain limit.

For country liquor, both spiced and plain, the limit of sale by retail is 1.5 litres for each variety.

In foreign liquor category, six litres of liquor bottled in India or the Indian Made Foreign Liquor can be purchased. This includes whisky, brandy, rum (including white rum), gin and vodka. Similar is the sale limit for imported foreign liquor, bottled in the country of its origin.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 27 -- The United States stands with India in its efforts to defend its sovereignty and liberty, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Tuesday after the third edition of the 2+2 strategic dialogue that majorly focused on dealing with China's aggressive military behaviour in eastern Ladakh, Indo- Pacific and other parts of the world.

Here is the full text of the joint statement issued by India and US:

India's Minister of Defence Rajnath Singh and Minister of External Affairs Dr. S. Jaishankar welcomed US Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo and Secretary of Defense Dr. Mark T. Esper to New Delhi for the third annual India-US. 2+2 Ministerial Dialogue. The Ministers welcomed the elevation of the India-U.S. relationship to a Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership during the visit of President Donald J. Trump to India in February 2020. They reiterated their commitment to further strengthening the India-US. partnership, anchored in mutual trust and friendship, shared commitment to democracy, converging strategic interests, and robust engagement of their citizens.

While celebrating more than seven decades of diplomatic engagement between India and the United States, the Ministers intend to expand cooperation under the 2+2 framework to realize the full potential of the India-US. Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership.

Co-operation during the Covid-19 Pandemic

The Ministers applauded the exemplary cooperation between India and the United States in confronting challenges emerging from the Covid-19 pandemic. They reiterated their resolve to strengthen cooperation in the development of vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics, ventilators and other essential medical equipment. Recognizing that bilateral engagement in the research & development and the mass production of vaccines and therapeutics plays to our respective strengths, the Ministers sought to jointly promote access to high quality, safe, effective and affordable Covid-19 vaccines and treatments on a global scale. India expressed appreciation for the 200 ventilators provided by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) to the Indian Red Cross Society, while the US expressed appreciation for India's export of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), essential medicines, and therapeutics to the United States during these challenging times. The Ministers looked forward to the conclusion of an overarching MoU between India's Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), including their component agencies and departments, to enhance health cooperation, including on health emergencies and pandemics, prevention, diagnosis and treatment of communicable and non-communicable diseases, and biomedical research and innovation. The Ministers also looked forward to the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAD/NIH) to collaborate through an International Center of Excellence in Research focused on infectious diseases including Covid-19 and other emerging threats. They welcomed the upcoming call for applications for clinical research fellowships for early and mid-career Indian and American scientists to help expand the cohort of physician scientists focused on research that will advance clinical practice and benefit public health in both countries. Noting the importance of health sector cooperation, they also looked forward to convening the India-US Health Dialogue at an early date.

The Ministers reaffirmed efforts to enhance supply chain resilience and to seek alternatives to the current paradigm, which had come under severe strain during the pandemic and exposed critical vulnerabilities. The Ministers sought to support the global economic recovery, including in India and the United States, to emerge from the pandemic more resilient than ever.

The Ministers expressed appreciation for the repatriation of stranded Indian and US nationals from both countries during the pandemic.

Shared Vision for the Indo-Pacific and Global Leadership

The Ministers reiterated their commitment to maintaining a free, open, inclusive, peaceful, and prosperous Indo-Pacific built on a rules-based international order, underpinned by ASEAN centrality, rule of law, sustainable and transparent infrastructure investment, freedom of navigation and overflight, mutual respect for sovereignty, and peaceful resolution of disputes. Highlighting the importance of securing the economic and security interests of all stakeholders having a legitimate interest in the region, the Ministers welcomed the growing understanding on the Indo-Pacific among like-minded countries. They reaffirmed that closer India-US cooperation will support shared interests in promoting security and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region and beyond. They also emphasized that the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea should not prejudice the legitimate rights and interests of any nation in accordance with international law.

The Ministers welcomed the recent convening of the Second Australia-India-Japan-United States Quadrilateral Ministerial Meeting in Tokyo on October 6, 2020.They appreciated the exchange of views on regional issues of mutual interest, as well as ongoing cooperation related to maritime security, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, regional connectivity, health security and counter terrorism. The Ministers also welcomed the fact that these Consultations would now be held annually. They expressed their support for further strengthening Quad cooperation through expanded activities, including initiating a dialogue among the development organizations of partner countries.

The Ministers expressed their support for sustainable, transparent, quality infrastructure development in the Indo-Pacific region. They looked forward to furthering collaboration between USAID and India's Development Partnership Administration (DPA) with a view to undertaking joint projects in the region. The Ministers welcomed the establishment of a permanent presence of the US International Development Finance Cooperation (DFC) in India this year. The United States expressed strong support for the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) as a leading mechanism for promoting regional economic development. Recognizing the need to contain the build-up of sovereign debt in developing and low-income countries by ensuring responsible, transparent, and sustainable financing practices for both borrowers and creditors, the Ministers looked forward to exploring ways to cooperate under the Blue Dot Network. They also looked forward to the Second Indo-Pacific Business Forum (IPBF) to be held on October 28-29, 2020.

Building on a strong record of peacekeeping cooperation, the Ministers decided to expand joint capacity building efforts with partner countries in the Indo-Pacific and to participate in multilateral peacekeeping training exercises.

The Ministers discussed their shared interest in promoting a sovereign, peaceful, united, democratic, inclusive, stable and secure Afghanistan, including support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. They applauded India's development assistance, and efforts to build trade linkages and multi-modal connectivity infrastructure for Afghanistan to enhance its regional connectivity to sustain growth and development over the long term.

The United States congratulated India for its non-permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) for the term 2021-2022. The Ministers reiterated their commitment to work together in close coordination at the UNSC and in International Organizations. The US also reaffirmed its continued strong support for India's permanent membership in a reformed UNSC as well as for India's early entry into the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).

Advancing the Defence and Security Partnership

Noting the 15th anniversary of the inaugural US-India Defense Framework Agreement, the Ministers commended what has become a comprehensive, resilient, and multi-faceted Major Defense Partnership (MDP) between India and the United States. They applauded the significant step of the signing of the Basic Exchange and Cooperation Agreement (BECA). They also welcomed enhanced maritime information sharing and maritime domain awareness between their Navies and affirmed their commitment to build upon existing defense information-sharing at the joint-service and service-to-service levels and explore potential new areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.

The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to deepening bilateral defense consultation and collaboration and to exploring opportunities to expand cooperative capacity-building efforts with partners across the region. They also affirmed their commitment to pursue increased cooperation between the Indian military and US Central Command and Africa Command, including broader participation in exercises and conferences, so as to promote shared security interests. The US appreciated India's leadership in establishing an Information Fusion Centre for the Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR). The Ministers welcomed the positioning of a Liaison Officer from the US Navy at the IFC-IOR and the positioning of an Indian Liaison Officer at NAVCENT, Bahrain and reiterated their intent to assign additional Liaison Officers.

The Ministers expressed satisfaction at the ongoing progress in the implementation of Logistics Exchange Memorandum of Agreement (LEMOA) and Communications, Compatibility and Security Agreement (COMCASA), including the expansion of secure communications capabilities to include secure video teleconference capabilities between their respective Navies, Armies and Air Forces as well as between respective Foreign and Defense Ministries. The Ministers welcomed the convening of the Military Cooperation Group (MCG) later this year to review bilateral military-to-military engagement including joint exercises, training and expert exchanges. They looked forward to interaction between the Special Forces of India and the United States.

The Ministers welcomed the inclusion of the Royal Australian Navy in the US-India-Japan MALABAR Naval Exercise scheduled to be held in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea in November 2020. Highlighting the importance of deepening maritime cooperation and the growing sophistication of US-India naval cooperation, the Ministers welcomed the PASSEX carried out by the Navies of both countries. They also looked forward to the convening of the next edition of the Tri-Services Amphibious TIGER TRIUMPH HADR Exercise and Army Exercises YUDH ABHYAS and VAJRA PRAHAR in 2021. The US welcomed India's co-hosting of the Indo-Pacific Armies Chiefs Conference (IPACC), Indo-Pacific Armies Management Seminar (IPAMS) and Senior Enlisted Leader Forum (SELF) in 2023.

The Ministers decided to work together to realize the development of their respective defense industries. Acknowledging India's contributions to the global supply chain of major defence platforms and commitment to defense innovation, the Ministers reiterated the importance of Defence Technology and Trade Initiative (DTTI), and stated their intention to fast track projects under DTTI. They noted with satisfaction the signing of a Statement of Intent (SoI) at the 10th DTTI meeting to strengthen dialogue on defence technology cooperation on several specific DTTI projects as well as a DTTI Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for identification and development of joint projects. India looked forward to the participation by the US Government and defence industry at the upcoming Aero-India in February 2021.

Recognizing the importance of cooperation in defence innovation, the Ministers welcomed the inaugural meeting between the Indian Defence Innovation Organization (DIO-iDEX) and US Defense Innovation United (DIU) in July 2020. They also looked forward to the inaugural Industrial Security Annex (ISA) Summit later this year which would further strengthen defence industrial cooperation between both countries.

Strengthening Bilateral India-US Cooperation

The Ministers welcomed efforts to rejuvenate and expand bilateral India-US trade in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this regard, they noted ongoing discussions by the Unites States Trade Representative and India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry to reach an understanding on improving market access, removing barriers to trade, and improving the business environment.

The Ministers noted with satisfaction the significant strides made under the four Pillars of the Strategic Energy Partnership (SEP) covering Oil & Gas, Power and Energy Efficiency, Renewables and Sustainable Growth. They also appreciated the progress made under the India-US Gas Task Force and the launch of industry-led projects. They welcomed the announcement of new priorities and roadmap for each of the Pillars during the Ministerial meeting of the SEP held on July 17, 2020. With the objective of intensifying cooperation in the area of Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPRs), the Ministers welcomed the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding in this regard.

Recalling the historic India-US Civil Nuclear Agreement, the Ministers welcomed the project Division of Responsibility principles between Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) and Westinghouse Electric Company (WEC) for the construction of six nuclear reactors at Kovvada, and looked forward to the detailed Division of Responsibility that would pave the way for a techno-commercial offer. The Ministers also welcomed the extension of the MoU between the Government of India and the Government of the United States of America concerning cooperation with India's Global Centre for Nuclear Energy Partnership (GCNEP).

The Ministers welcomed the virtual convening of the 17th meeting of the India-US Counter Terrorism Joint Working Group and the 3rd Session of the India-US Designations Dialogue on September 9-10, 2020. They denounced the use of terrorist proxies and strongly condemned cross border terrorism in all its forms. They emphasised the need for concerted action against all terrorist networks, including al-Qaeda, ISIS/Daesh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Hizb-ul-Mujahideen. The Ministers called on Pakistan to take immediate, sustained and irreversible action to ensure that no territory under its control is used for terrorist attacks, and to expeditiously bring to justice the perpetrators and planners of all such attacks, including 26/11 Mumbai, Uri, and Pathankot. The Ministers also committed to continued exchange of information about sanctions and designations against terror groups and individuals, particularly in light of recent legislative changes in India, as well as countering the financing and operations of terrorist organizations, countering radicalism and terrorist use of the internet, cross-border movement of terrorists, and prosecuting, rehabilitating, and reintegrating returning terrorist fighters and family members.

The Ministers intend to enhance their ongoing cooperation in multilateral fora, including the UN. They also reaffirmed their support for the early adoption of a UN Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) that will advance and strengthen the framework for global cooperation and reinforce the message that no cause or grievance justifies terrorism.

In view of the announcement made during President Trump's visit to India to establish a new India-US Counter-Narcotics Working Group, the Ministers welcomed the proposal to convene the first such virtual meeting later this year, with an in-person meeting in 2021, to enhance cooperation between Indian and US drug and law enforcement agencies. The Ministers welcomed efforts by the US Department of Homeland Security and India's Ministry of Home Affairs to reinvigorate the Homeland Security Dialogue.

The Ministers welcomed the virtual convening of the India-US Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Working Group on October 1, 2020. They reaffirmed their commitment towards an open, reliable and secure internet as well as the multi-stakeholder model of internet governance. They emphasized fostering cooperation between their industry and academia for an open, secure and resilient supply of strategic material and critical infrastructure and to independently evaluate the risk associated with deployment of emerging ICT technologies, including 5G networks.

The Ministers also welcomed the recent convening of the annual India-US Cyber Dialogue on September 15, 2020 and the first India-US Defence Cyber Dialogue on September 17, 2020.

Recalling their countries' proud record of achievement in space science and satellite application, the Ministers applauded the ongoing collaboration between the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), including on the NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) satellite scheduled to be launched by 2022. The Ministers also looked forward to sharing Space Situational Awareness information, which will catalyze efforts to create the conditions for a safe, stable, and sustainable space environment. They also expressed the intent to continue the India-US Space Dialogue as well as discussions on areas of potential space defense cooperation.

The Ministers welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Technical Cooperation in Earth Observation and Earth Sciences between the Indian Ministry of Earth Sciences and the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for developing a better understanding of the regional and global weather origins in the Indian Ocean and advancing common research goals in meteorology, oceanography, and management of living marine resources. The Ministers welcomed the signing of an Agreement between India's Department of Post and the United States Postal Service, which will facilitate the electronic exchange of customs data related to postal shipments. They also applauded the signing of the Letter of Intent (LoI) between the Indian Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH and the Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine, US Department of Health and Human Services.

Nurturing the People-to-People Bonds

Underscoring the importance of ties between our respective legislatures, the Ministers welcomed the launch of an India-US Parliamentary Exchange.

Applauding the entrepreneurial spirit of Indians and Indian-Americans that has mutually benefitted both nations, the Ministers recognised the important role of people-to-people linkages in strengthening the overall bilateral relationship and economic ties. Both sides look forward to the next iteration of the India-US Consular Dialogue to further increase cooperation and discuss issues of mutual concern, including visas, and familial issues related to marriage, adoption and child custody.

The Ministers welcomed the increasing number of Indian students in the United States and acknowledged the role of expanding educational ties and fostering entrepreneurship and scientific innovation. In this context, the Ministers welcomed India's National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 which would pave the way for enhanced collaboration between academic institutions of both countries. The Ministers looked forward to discussions to further advance India-US educational partnerships.

Appreciating the valuable contribution of the Fulbright-Nehru Program over the years in furthering exchange of outstanding academics and professionals between both countries, the Ministers celebrated the 70th anniversary of the Program this year.

The Ministers welcomed the commencement of issuance of 12-month reciprocal temporary duty visas to officials from both Governments as a step to facilitate the growing partnership.

The United States looks forward to hosting the next 2+2 Ministerial in 2021.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- Days after Colombo sought a $1.1 billion currency swap facility from New Delhi to boost foreign currency reserves amid the Covid-19 pandemic, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told his Sri Lankan counterpart Mahinda Rajapaksa that India "stands ready to extend all possible support".

Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa sought the currency swap facility, in addition to $400 million the country has sought from India under the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (Saarc) framework, during a telephone conversation with Modi on May 23.

Modi spoke on Wednesday with Mahinda Rajapaksa to congratulate him on completing 50 years since first entering Sri Lanka's Parliament. He recalled Mahinda Rajapaska's contributions to Sri Lanka's development and wished him the best for his future.

"The leaders discussed the health and economic impact of the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic and the measures being taken in the two countries to counter them. Prime Minister assured H.E. Rajapaksa that India stands ready to extend all possible support to Sri Lanka during this challenging time," the external affairs ministry said in a readout.

Modi also conveyed his condolences at the sudden demise of Arumugan Thondaman, a prominent leader of Indian-origin Tamils in Sri Lanka, on Tuesday. He recalled Thondaman's role in taking forward the development partnership between the two countries.

Sri Lanka has been battered by the pandemic, which has led to the complete drying up of revenues from tourism, one of the mainstays of the economy. China's development bank provided a $500 million loan to Sri Lanka in March to bolster the country's official reserves.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 13 -- Three more special trains ferrying around 3,500 stranded migrant workers left the Capital on Wednesday for Bihar's Bhagalpur, Darbhanga and Barauni districts from the Old Delhi Railway Station.

Five trains have left Delhi so far-one for Madhya Pradesh and four for Bihar-with around 6,000 stranded migrant workers as part of a special arrangement between the states under guidelines issued by the union home ministry on April 29.

All 6,000 migrants who have so far left Delhi had taken shelter in government-run camps set up after the implementation of the nationwide lockdown on March 25, a senior government official said. There are at least 10,000 more stranded migrants from Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Odisha, West Bengal and Jharkhand in Delhi.

Government officials said a large number of migrants, however, had chosen to stay back after witnessing the scaling down of lockdown norms and the partial revival of business and commercial activities in several sectors, including industries and construction, since last week.

Over 300 state-run buses ferrying stranded migrants queued up outside the Old Delhi Railway Station on Wednesday afternoon. Ready with luggage, home-cooked food packed in layers of cloth, bottles of water and packets of dry snacks, scores of migrant workers waited inside designated circles marked for each of them to maintain distance at the entry to the station.

Despite economic activities gradually opening up in different sectors, several of them said that they may return to Delhi after their workplaces reopen, but they needed to go home for now. Most said they wanted a break from the uncertain circumstances in the city.

Rajendra Kumar, 36, said he had come to Delhi in early March to work at a cloth factory in Okhla, but could not wait to return home, where his old parents were waiting for them. While his wife wiped their two children's faces with a wet cloth to try and save them from the heat, Kumar said he did not know when his factory would reopen. "The last two months have been really difficult to survive. My parents too don't have much to survive on. We have a patch of land at home. I will farm it until things return to normal," Kumar, who is from Munger, said.

Vinod Kumar (49) and his son, labourers at a bag-making factory in Paharganj, said returning to their village would be a relief. "At least back in the village, there is no fear of people getting infected. We need a break from the prison-like life here. There is no option but to come back. But for some days, we will breathe without fear," Kumar said.

A group of labourers from Sadar Bazar, one of the biggest wholesale markets in Delhi, said their employer told them that he cannot pay their salaries and will call them back once the market reopens.

"The owner told us he won't be able to pay us our salaries for April. I don't know how soon we will be able to go back. I will do some work at home to survive for a while," said Sanjay Kumar Singh, 39, who worked at a toy factory here.

Besides migrant workers, the trains also ferried a few students and out-of-work employees of private firms, who were stuck in rented accommodations.

Delhi labour minister Gopal Rai said all migrants who left in the trains were screened. "They were provided with adequate food and water. The Delhi government paid for their tickets," Rai said. Under the scheme meant for movement of stranded migrants, the central government bears 85% of the ticket cost and the remaining 15% is to be borne by either the state of origin or destination state.

FIRST ARRIVALS IN SEVEN WEEKS

On Wednesday, Delhi recorded arrivals after nearly seven weeks of train operations being suspended by the Indian Railways in the light of the spread of Covid-19. On Wednesday morning, Delhi recorded arrivals from Patna, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Howrah, a senior government official said. For the convenience of passengers, the city government and the police arranged buses connecting the New Delhi Railway Station with district headquarters in all 11 revenue districts in the city, the official said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 3 -- Nearly 300 members of the Tibetan diaspora in Canada, supported by Hong Kongers and Uighurs, protested outside the Chinese consulate in Toronto on Wednesday and also observed a minute's silence in the memory of a Tibetan-origin soldier reportedly killed in the latest clashes between the Indian and the Chinese armies along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in eastern Ladakh.

Headlining the event was a former member of the dead soldier's unit-- the Special Frontier Force or SFF-- who ran from Ottawa to Toronto for the Tibetan cause.

The protest outside the consulate, followed by a gathering at the Parkdale Collegiate Institute in the city, was held to mark Tibetan Democracy Day, the 60th anniversary of the election of the first representative body in Tibet's history.

One of the principal organisers of the event, Youdon Tsamotshang, board chair of Students for a Free Tibet Canada, said Pema Kunga, the former Indian SFF solider joined them after running a marathon from the Canadian capital of Ottawa to Toronto, a feat that took eight days. Protestors expressed their solidarity with the Indian soldiers martyred in the fighting in recent times in the Galwan Valley, while Kunga highlighted his support for India and against China's disinformation campaign.

Also Read: China taking advantage of Covid-19 outbreak, India one such example: US diplomat

Tsamotshang said the members of the diaspora, who gathered outside the consulate, donned ceremonial white scarves and they staged a rally outside the venue and chanted slogans for Tibet. Part of the objective, she said, was "putting pressure on the Canadian government" to give more attention to the status of Tibet under occupation of the Communist regime in Beijing.

Also Read: Foreign and defence ministers of India, Australia, Indonesia to meet amid concerns over China

Joining the protestors was Bhutila Karpoche, a member of Ontario's provincial parliament and the only person of Tibetan heritage to be elected to a legislature in North America. The protest on Wednesday afternoon was part of a growing series of similar events directed against China that have been held in Canada by various groups including Tibetan, Uighurs facing repression in east Turkestan and Hong Kongers agitated over the leaching off of democratic rights in the territory, among others.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 9 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

UP residents head to Uttarakhand to look for missing kin

Unable to contact their family members, who are missing after the devastating flash flood in Uttarakhand's Chamoli district, several people from various districts of Uttar Pradesh have started leaving for the neighbouring state to search for them. Read more

iPhones, cash for best video suggestions for Congress' Assam manifesto

The Congress in Assam is seeking ideas and suggestions in the form of short videos to help prepare its manifesto for the upcoming state polls. It is offering iphones and cash as rewards for the best suggestions. Read more

WHO identifies two 'most likely' scenarios of Covid-19 transmission to humans

A team of experts investigating the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan has identified two most likely scenarios that caused the transmission of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to the human population. Read more

'He will hit one or two 100s': Laxman lauds Kohli's batting in 2nd innings

India captain Virat Kohli displayed a solid batting performance on the final day of the first Test against England in Chennai. Despite being under pressure while chasing a target of 420, and seeing wickets continue to tumble on the other end, Kohli showcased immense maturity to bat on and keep one end safe. Read more

Kangana Ranaut claims she's better at stunts than Tom Cruise, hours after calling herself a better actor than Streep

Hours after calling herself a better actor than three-time Oscar winner Meryl Streep, Kangana Ranaut has claimed that she is a better stunt performer than Tom Cruise. Kangana often gets triggered when a behind-the-scenes video of her, riding a wooden horse on the sets of Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi, is brought up. Read more

Kiren Rijiju shares video of his performance for Army jawans. Netizens love it

Sports minister Kiren Rijiju has shared a video on Twitter recently that has garnered much appreciation from netizens. The video featuring Rijiju himself shows his performance dedicated to the jawans of the 62 Engineer Regiment of Indian Army. Read more

Sasikala's grand return to Tamil Nadu, garlands MGR statue ahead of polls

Sasikala returned to Tamil Nadu after spending 4 years in prison in a disproportionate assets case. She was released from prison on January 27, but spent some days in a Bengaluru hospital for Covid-19 treatment. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 12 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US. The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two smaller state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey, both focused on domestic audiences.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

The reference to 2016 was alleged Russian operations that is believed to have boosted the political campaign of US president Donald Trump, a matter that is presently under investigation. Similar campaigns have been seen in Ukraine where Moscow has been locked in a territorial fight since 2014.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 23 -- The Boris Johnson government on Thursday announced what it called a 'major long-term study' for antibody testing involving nearly 3 lakh people, as senior medical advisors dampened down normalcy expectations, insisting curbs are needed "for a very long time".

New figures of hospital deaths show UK-wide 18,738 deaths and 138,078 cases. In England, the dead include 492 people of Indian origin, constituting 3% of the 16% non-white people who passed away due to the virus. London boroughs with large numbers of people of Indian origin such as Brent, Barnet, Harrow and Ealing are among the most affected.

The study, intended to track the spread of Covid-19 in the general population, will continue for a year, with the aim that it will help improve understanding around the current rate of infection and how many people are likely to have developed antibodies to the virus.

Chris Whitty, chief medical officer of England, said the UK will have to live with some disruptive social measures for at least the rest of the year, adding that it is "wholly unrealistic" to expect life would suddenly return to normal soon.

As the University of Oxford human trial for a vaccine was set to begin on Thursday, Whitty said the ideal way out of the pandemic would be via a highly effective vaccine or drugs, but he warned that the chance of having those within the next calendar year was "incredibly small".

He said: "This disease is not going to be eradicated, it is not going to disappear.So we have to accept that we are working with a disease that we are going to be with globally... for the foreseeable future".

On the study, officials said participants will provide samples taken from self-administered nose and throat swabs and answer a few short questions during a home visit by a trained health worker. The swab tests will show whether or not participants currently have the virus.

They will be asked to take further tests every week for the first 5 weeks, then every month for 12 months. In total, 25,000 people will take part in the pilot phase of the survey, with plans to extend it to up to around 300,000 over the next 12 months.

Health secretary Matt Hancock said: "This survey will help to track the current extent of transmission and infection in the UK, while also answering crucial questions about immunity as we continue to build up our understanding of this new virus".

"Together, these results will help us better understand the spread of the virus to date, predict the future trajectory and inform future action we take, including crucially the development of ground-breaking new tests and treatments".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- The entire Delhi has a high load of coronavirus cases, and all of its 11 districts are under the red zone classification, according to a revised list released by the Centre on Thursday.

The Centre said that recovery rates have gone up, so the districts have now been reclassified under different categories.

According to Centre's guidelines, districts with high load of coronavirus cases or which have a high growth rate of the disease are classified under red zones, while those with considerably fewer cases of the respiratory infection fall in orange zones.

Districts with no coronavirus cases are categorised as green zones.

An order released by the Union health ministry along with the list said that it's a dynamic list and will be updated on weekly basis or earlier. "The states will be communicated for further follow-up action in consonance with the directions issued by the Union Home Ministry. under the Disaster Management Act, 2005," the order further said.

The states have been empowered to add areas/districts to red and orange zones based on field feedback and additional analysis, but they cannot relax the zonal classification as communicated by the Union health ministry.

The National Capital Region (NCR) has a large number of hostpots or 'red zones'. These include Faridabad, Sonipat, and Noida (Gautam Buddh Nagar).

The government in Haryana, which surrounds Delhi from three sides, has said that many of the Covid-19 cases in its NCR districts have their origins in infections emanating from the national capital and the authorities had ordered sealing the districts with Delhi to check spread of the infection.

The worst-affected districts of the state with maximum number of positive cases are Nuh (58), Gurgaon (54), Faridabad (53), Palwal (34), Sonipat (25), Jhajjar (24) and Panchkula (18).

Meanwhile, the district administration in Gautam Buddh Nagar said that the number of coronavirus hotspots has risen to 54. Out of these, 21 are in the green zone, nine are in the orange zone and 24 are in the red zone.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 3 -- After the Covid-19 outbreak at Gyuto Tantric Monastery in Sidhbari near Dharamshala, the Kangra district administration on Wednesday asked the Tibetan government-in-exile to ensure its institutions follow the protocol.

"We have asked the government-in-exile to advise its institutions and Tibetan population to follow the Covid-19 protocol so that any such outbreak can be averted," said Kangra deputy commissioner Rakesh Kumar Prajapati.

Outbreak after Tibetan New Year festivities

Since last week, 160 monks at Gyuto monastery have tested positive for Covid-19.

Prajapati said investigation into the Gyuto monastery cluster suggests that the outbreak started after Losar, the Tibetan New Year, festivities on February 14.

Fifteen monks, comprising 13 from Karnataka and two from Delhi, were at the monastery from February 16 to 19.

The index case in the monastery was reported on February 23 during random sampling. Since then, 330 samples have been tested of which 160 have tested positive.

Two patients have been shifted to Fortis Hospital in Kangra and one to Dr Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College, Tanda, while the others, who are mostly asymptomatic, have been isolated at the monastery.

Monks from other states test negative

What has left the health authorities perplexed is the fact that the monks who came from outside Himachal Pradesh have tested negative for coronavirus. "We aren't sure about the origin of the outbreak as those who came from Karnataka and Delhi have tested negative," said Prajapati.

He said the test report of 26 monks advised repeat sample were awaited.

The sample report of monastery head Kelsang Gyatso was also awaited.

Palden Dhondup, the secretary of health, Central Tibetan Administration, said the department with Delek Hospitals was taking all measures to deal with the situation.

He said the situation was a concern but hoped the situation would become normal in a fortnight.

Inaugurated in 1996 by the Dalai Lama, Gyuto Tantric Monastery is an important institution of the Geluk School of Tibetan Buddhism, where monks study Tantric Buddhism.

The monastery was home to the 17th Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje, since 2000, after he fled Tibet, to May 2017 when he moved to US and finally acquired citizenship of Dominica, a Caribbean island country, in 2018.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 74 as on Thursday. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- India has expressed its "deep displeasure" at the World Health Organisation's maps that inaccurately depict the boundaries of the country in the map used by the organisation's web portals and asked director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus to immediately replace them with fresh maps, people familiar with the matter said.

New Delhi's strongly-worded letter to the WHO is the third in a month. The other two, on 3 and 30 December, were addressed to the WHO director general's office. These communications pointed out that videos and maps including the coronavirus dashboard did not accurately reflect India's boundaries.

Last week, India's Permanent Representative to the UN Indra Mani Pandey escalated the request to Tedros Adhanom.

"I write to express my deep displeasure at the inaccurate depiction of the boundaries of India in the maps of various web portals of WHO. In this regard, I draw your attention to our previous messages sent to WHO pointing out similar inaccuracies. I again request your immediate intervention for removal of maps inaccurately depicting the boundaries of India from various web portals of WHO and their replacement with accurate maps," Indra Mani Pandey said in his 8 January letter to Tedros accessed by Hindustan Times.

WHO maps show the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh in a different shade than the rest of India. The Shaksgam Valley spread across 5,168 sq km, which was illegally ceded by Pakistan to China in 1963, is shown as part of China. The Aksai Chin region occupied by China in 1954 is shown in light blue strips, a shade similar to the colour used to depict Chinese territory.

Publishing inaccurate maps of India is a criminal offence under Indian law, punishable with a six-month jail term and fine. In 2016, the government had proposed to raise the jail term to 7 years and give judges the power to impose a Rs.100 crore fine. But the proposal, part of a geospatial information law proposed by the government in 2016, wasn't pursued by the government.

A senior government official said WHO's use of distorted maps for its widely-publicised and closely-watched Covid-19 tracker is very unfortunate. "The government will follow up with WHO and all relevant authorities to get the correct maps to be used," he said.

The official added that he was confident the WHO chief, who was accused by the US of siding with China to play down the coronavirus disease that was first reported in China's Wuhan city, would not let politics stand in the way of fixing inaccuracies in the map.

The World Health Assembly had, primarily under pressure from the United States, decided in May last year to send a team of experts to China to probe the origins of the disease. The 10-member team of experts was able to land in China on Thursday, seven months after the WHO director-general had committed to the probe. The experts will, however, have to spend two weeks in quarantine before President Xi Jinping's government will allow them to step out of their hotels to start their mission.

Beijing allowed the visit days after Tedros publicly said he was disappointed with the delay, an unusual public complaint by the head of the WHO.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The number of Covid-19 cases in India rose above the 20,000-mark on Tuesday, but the rate at which this threshold was crossed - it took more than 8 days for the tally to double - raises hopes that the country may be able to avert the sort of devastation seen in some other parts of the world. But in a move that compromises efforts by many states to test aggressively in so-called containment zones, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) put on hold for two days antibody testing for Covid-19 using rapid testing kits, or RTKs, citing huge variations in the results.

Covid-19 cases in India double to 20,000 in 8 days

The coronavirus outbreak in India began in early March after people who flew in from abroad introduced the infection to others, and has grown largely in small clusters - except for the one linked to the religious group in Delhi that led to thousands of infections - after the government enforced what is the largest global shutdown in population terms.

ICMR puts rapid tests on hold to check faulty kits

ICMR said the reason it has asked states to stop using the rapid testing kits (RTKs) for two days is that samples which are positive in RT -PCR are showing too much variation when tested by RTKs in the range of 6% to 71%.

Companies warn of layoffs if no stimulus

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the lockdown in place to combat it could cause permanent damage to businesses and force many to lay off staff unless the government announces a substantive stimulus package immediately, respondents to a business impact survey conducted jointly by industry body Ficci and consultancy firm Dhruva Advisors, said.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

While our understanding of the virus and its effect on the human body will become better in time, it is safe to surmise that not everyone reacts to a Sars-CoV-2 infection the same way.

Mumbai bus conductor runs 21 km to report to work

Devidas Jaisingh Rathod is a conductor on a Maharashtra state bus that runs every day from Palghar, 21 km from his home. These days he is in charge of a bus that has an important job these days -- ferrying 25 doctors and nurses to KEM Hospital. He usually hitches a ride on trucks ferrying essentials that pass by Manor. They drop him off at Palghar. On Sunday, though, there were no trucks. So, he ran 21 km to report to work.

Patients admitted to hospitals in clusters to be tested for virus

All patients visiting hospitals in and around containment zones identified by the local authorities will be considered "suspected cases of Covid-19" and those getting admitted will undergo mandatory diagnostic tests for the coronavirus disease irrespective of symptoms, according to a central advisory on Tuesday.

Trump vows to 'temporarily suspend immigration' into US

President Donald Trump on Monday said he is temporarily suspending immigration to protect American jobs threatened by the dire economic consequences of the coronavirus outbreak. India has been the top country of origin for legal immigrants to the US in recent years, with over 126,000 in 2017.

WHO stands by China in coronavirus origin row

The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday that all available evidence suggests the coronavirus originated in animals in China late last year and was not manipulated or produced in a laboratory.

LS staffer, kin of Rashtrapati Bhavan worker test positive

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19) reached the apex of the Indian State - Rashtrapati Bhavan and Indian Parliament - on Tuesday as a special housekeeper of Lok Sabha - whose son works in Parliament too - and a daughter-in-law of a Rashtrapati Bhavan sanitation worker were tested positive.

Parliament to review protocol over video call meetings

The Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha will review rules and procedures to consider whether standing committee meetings can be held over video conference, a practice that has not taken place till now in order to maintain the secrecy of the proceedings. The rethink has been necessitated by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, which has led to the grounding of inter-city transport and the need for people to avoid gatherings as far as they can.

Goa has no local cases, outsiders are a concern: CM Pramod Sawant

While neighbouring Maharashtra struggles with the burden of a growing number of coronavirus disease cases, Goa is celebrating its status as a state with zero Covid-19 patients. In an interview with HT, chief minister Pramod Sawant talked about the Goa model of combating the virus.

Review teams visit Bengal as state, Centre lock horns

The West Bengal government removed restrictions on the movement of inter-ministerial central teams (IMCTs), sent to monitor the implementation of the lockdown, after the Union home ministry sent a strongly worded letter on Tuesday amid an intensifying political tussle between the Centre and the state over Covid-19.

Lockdowns may have only arrested first wave

The sweeping shutdowns across the world appear to have absorbed what may only be the first wave of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections, according to officials from the World Health Organization (WHO) and findings by researchers in France - one of the countries hardest hit by the pandemic.

ICMR says 69% patients didn't show Covid signs

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said on Tuesday that 69% of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) patients in India who were tested did not show symptoms of the infection, even as the Union health ministry said that the trend of cases worldwide showed about 80% of the patients had mild or very mild symptoms.

Covid-19: CISF to go for contactless frisking of passengers at airports, Delhi metro

The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) is preparing new standard operating procedures (SOPs) for operations at airports and the Delhi Metro after the lockdown that are expected to include contactless frisking and fewer passengers in each coach.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 30 -- Ventilation systems in modern office buildings may increase the risk of exposure to the coronavirus, according to research published in the Journal of Fluid Mechanics.

The University of Cambridge said on Wednesday that a research team, including Indian-origin expert Rajesh Bhagat, found that widely used 'mixing ventilation' systems, which are designed to keep conditions uniform in all parts of the room, disperse airborne contaminants evenly throughout the space. These contaminants may include droplets and aerosols, potentially containing viruses.

The evidence, the study says, increasingly indicates that the virus is spread primarily through larger droplets and smaller aerosols, which are expelled when people cough, sneeze, laugh, talk or breathe.

In addition, the data available so far indicates that indoor transmission is far more common than outdoor transmission, which is likely due to increased exposure times and decreased dispersion rates for droplets and aerosols, the study led by Paul Linden of the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP) says.

The researchers explored a range of different modes of exhalation: nasal breathing, speaking and laughing, both with and without face masks. By imaging the heat associated with the exhaled breath, they could see how it moves through the space in each case.

If the person was moving around the room, the distribution of exhaled breath was markedly different as it became captured in their wake.

Bhagat, also from DAMTP, said: "You can see the change in temperature and density when someone breathes out warm air - it refracts the light and you can measure it. When sitting still, humans give off heat, and since hot air rises, when you exhale, the breath rises and accumulates near the ceiling."

The results show that room flows are turbulent and can change dramatically depending on the movement of the occupants, the type of ventilation, the opening and closing of doors and, for naturally ventilated spaces, changes in outdoor conditions., and found that masks are effective at reducing the spread of exhaled breath, and therefore droplets.

The researchers found that laughing, in particular, creates a large disturbance, suggesting that if an infected person without a mask was laughing indoors, it would greatly increase the risk of transmission.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 7 -- There is no significant community transmission of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in India, experts in the Union ministry of health have confirmed, even as India reported its 31 positive case on Friday.

That means each of the 31 cases can be traced back to its possible point of origin.

Experts say widespread community transmission is usually a cause for concern.

A senior scientist with the health ministry said on condition of anonymity that the transmission of infection is still restricted to clusters.

"Community transmission that we are seeing in India has not reached the alarming stage where we cannot trace the source of infection. We are keeping a close watch on the situation which is developing every hour, and what is currently seen in India is called cluster transmission," he said.

Some of the transmissions are happening locally, but are still not of a scale to cause concern.

"...in addition to Covid-19 cases related to travel, some cases of community transmission have also been observed, it has been decided to involve district collectors and States have been asked to form rapid response teams at the district, block and village levels. Private sector shall also be engaged for Covid-19 management," a health ministry statement said. The reference here is about transmission of infection from one person to another locally, but can't strictly be termed community transmission in the scientific sense of the term - the emergence of patients with no travel history or clear link to another infected person or carrier.

In a paper on community transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2, Shenzhen, China, 2020, in 'Emerging Infectious Disease' journal, the US Centre for Disease Control in Atlanta analyzed data for the first 365 laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Shenzhen, to summarize the epidemiologic characteristics and provide updated information to aid in the development of control measures."Overall, most (91%) cases that we report had definite exposure," the report added.

On January 14, the first patient without definite exposure was reported in Shenzhen. Since January 20, growing numbers of cases without definite exposure were observed.

"Compared with before January 24, the proportion of case-patients without definite exposure was much higher from January 25 through February 5 (11% vs. 6%; p&lt;0.001) and increased to 36% (12/33) on both January 31 and February 5. These data suggest an increasing risk for community transmission," the paper explained.

That's what India is watching closely.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has also raised its assessment of the risk of spread and the risk of impact of Covid-19 to very high at the global level.

"...at present, we see linked epidemics in several countries, where most cases can still be traced to known contacts or clusters of cases, although we see signs of community transmission in some countries," Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general, WHO, had said in a briefing on Covid-19 a couple of days ago.

"Our view continues to be that containment of Covid-19 must be the top priority for all countries, but at the same time, countries should be preparing for (dealing with) sustained community transmission."

As on March 6, 2020, India had tested a total of 4058 samples from 3404 people, of which 31 have tested positive.

The experts do not deny there is human-to-human transmission of infection in India but say that it cannot be termed community transmission yet.

"The government has managed to track down the index case in all the reported cluster infections locally, so that way we have not yet reached the stage where we must worry. It can be contained and the government is making adequate efforts," the scientist cited in the first instance added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 16 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Delhi NCR air in severe category, temperatures to dip in northwest India

Air quality remains in 'severe' category in many parts of Delhi NCR on Saturday. Delhi's air quality index this morning is 441, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Greater Noida and Noida also recorded 'severe' air quality which negatively impacts even the healthy.

Number Theory: How much does an average Indian earn?

India's per capita annual income in 2019-20 was Rs.1,26,968, according to provisional estimates published on January 7. This average, given India's large income inequality, is not representative of the earnings of average Indians. Read more

'We are not in the game of greed for power': Kumari Selja

HaryanaCongress president, Kumari Selja said on Friday that she sincerely hopes that Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) MLAs and Independents supporting the Manohar Lal Khattar regime in Haryana would vote against the government in the state assembly. Read more

Sanitation workers, Padma awardee doctor, MP: List of 1st vaccine beneficiaries

With months of preparation leading to Vaccine Day on January 16, when Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurating the world's largest vaccination drive through his virtual address, all eyes are on those who will receive the first jabs of the vaccines in different states. Read more

'Want justice': Indian-origin fan reports racial profiling by security guard at SCG

Racial profiling is not just limited to team India players but seems to have spread to Indian-origin fans at the Sydney Cricket Ground as well. The stadium officials are investigating one such matter after a fan had alleged having faced racism at the venue during the third India vs Australia Test. Read more

Here's how Sidharth Malhotra struggled at TV auditions before film debut

Actor Sidharth Malhotra may have made a mark in Bollywood with a decade-long film career, but the actor didn't have it easy. Sidharth, who turns 36 on Saturday, had his own share of struggles ahead of his acting debut in the 2012 film, Student of the Year. Read more

Inside Kareena-Saif's new home: Swimming pool, Taimur's space, room for new baby; designer gives all the deets

Actors Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor Khan are all set to move into their new house, across the street from their current residence. The couple, mostly Saif, have been seen making regular trips to the new house to oversee construction work on the property. Read more

'Beginning of the end of Covid-19': Harsh Vardhan on India's vaccination drive

Union health minister Dr Harsh Vardhan said that the vaccination drive is 'beginning of the end of covid-19'. He reviewed the preparedness ahead of the Covid-19 vaccination drive in India. Watch

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 23 -- Congress leaders Kapil Sibal and Jaiveer Shergill took a dig at the Narendra Modi-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government on Friday for US President Donald Trump's remark that "India's air is filthy" and linked the outburst to the "Howdy Modi" event that was held in Houston, Texas, on September 22, 2019.

The "Howdy Modi" event was attended by about 50,000 people of Indian origin from across the US. Besides Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Trump had also addressed the gathering.

"Fruits of Friendship. 1) Questions India's coronavirus disease (Covid-19) death toll. 2) Says India sends dirt up into the air. India's 'air is filthy'. 3) Called India 'tariff king'. The result of 'Howdy Modi' !" Sibal tweeted.

Earlier during the final presidential debate with his Democratic challenger Joe Biden in Nashville, Tennessee, on Thursday night, Trump accused China, India and Russia of not taking care of their "filthy air", while justifying America's withdrawal from the "unfair" Paris climate agreement, which was signed in 2016.

"Look at China, how filthy it is. Look at Russia. Look at India, it's filthy. The air is filthy," Trump said during the presidential debate.

Shergill, too, hit out at the government for not responding to Trump's accusation.

"BJP's (Bharatiya Janata Party) foreign policy trump card is boasting about Modi-Trump friendship and President Trump's election card seems to be berating India. Not naming China when they trespass and not responding to Trump when he labels India's air 'filthy' is the BJP's version of nationalism!! Howdy punctures 56 inches (of Modi's chest)," the Congress spokesperson tweeted.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh,, Nov. 9 -- Even though Diwali is just a few days away, sellers of string lights and diyas are facing dark days because of the Covid-19 pandemic, complaining that demand has dropped by 50% when compared to the previous years. A firecracker ban by the administration is also not helping, they say.

Interestingly, buyers have been asking about the origin of the fancy lights and not picking up products made in China.

Electrical shops selling string lights are empty, except for the Sector 18 Electronics Market, with RP Gupta, chairman of the sector's Market Dealer Association saying, "This year we have barely managed to sell 50% of our stock compared to sales in previous years. Fancy lights are not selling and even though there are a few days left for Diwali, the footfall in the markets and the response of the shopkeepers have been discouraging."

Many shopkeepers in other sectors have skipped the annual ritual of stringing up lights outside. Gurpreet Singh, proprietor of an electronics shop in Sector 35, said, "We have not received a single enquiry about Diwali lights, which is why the entire stock hasn't been unpacked. Due to the pandemic, people's spending power has been impacted. Many families are making do with what they bought last year."

The China effect

Although it is not very pronounced, shopkeepers have also reported that people are refusing to buy Chinese products.

Confirming this, RP Gupta says unlike previous years, shopkeepers have been stocking the comparatively more expensive India made lights, which are selling faster than the Chinese ones.

Rajwinder Singh, who also runs a shop in Sector 18, adds that there has been a shift away from the China made lights, but not necessarily for patriotic reasons. "Today brands of repute such as Philips have started making fancy decoration lights for Diwali which are more durable and people are willing to shell a few extra bucks to get them instead of the Chinese products that develop faults quickly."

Simple designs, fewer buyers

Diyas too have no takers. "A year ago we were making pillars of diyas and other works of art, but now we are stocking diyas with simple designs," says Vinod Kumar, the president of the potters group which sells its wares in Sector 24.

All hope was not lost, however, as he added that an order had come in for a three-foot diya pillar from Sector 15 that would cost Rs900.

Laxmi of Jagatpura, who has been selling diyas in Sector 46 for the past 15 years, says this year will be tough for her. "These are difficult times. Everyone knows someone close to them who has been affected because of Covid. The festive spirit is lacking in the markets, due to which our diyas are also not selling."

Laxmi failed to sell a single diya on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 19 -- India is right in supporting an investigation. WHO reform should be next

The Australian draft resolution at the World Health Assembly calling for an investigation into the sources of the virus is necessary, and India has rightly supported it. China's decision to treat this as an unfriendly act has given the resolution a political hue. It has also drawn attention to China's absurd refusal to not allow the World Health Organization (WHO) or any international scientific team to study ground zero of the outbreak. Given the destruction the virus has wrought, Beijing could only have improved its battered image by allowing an investigation. The United States, which sees Covid-19 through the prism of great power rivalry, did not join in because China was not directly mentioned.

Having a global scientific investigation into the origins of a pandemic should have been a routine affair. That it has now become a geopolitical battleground is a sign that the international health system, particularly WHO, needs reform. Though a United Nations agency, it was unusual in being funded and directed by non-governmental organisations. This is why it proved so inept at navigating global politics or rejecting the unreasonable demands of Beijing. Member-states should lay the ground for a larger debate on how WHO should be overhauled. The world can't afford another pandemic, and this should be the overriding thought of all countries, including China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 17 -- Vipin Narang, associate professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology:

With the Indian Army now sustaining fatalities in the tense border confrontation with China, the key question is what China's objective is. Regardless of the tactical details and the legal and linguistic gymnastics over whether China has entered Indian "territory", there is no question that the scope, scale and swath of Chinese pressure is unprecedented and strategic. There are many hypotheses but few definitive answers: Is this about Indian infrastructure development along the DSDBO [Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie] road? Article 370? To settle the border unilaterally on their terms through fait accompli? General assertiveness East and West? Something else? Without any definitive statements from the Chinese, we are left with much speculation. And it is when the Chinese say nothing that one should worry. The objective may become clear in due time, but one thing is clear now: The PLA came to play and they came to stay, and they are intent on making India pay.

Rajiv Bhatia, former ambassador , distinguished fellow for foreign policy studies at Gateway House:

China's recent intrusions aim to serve three purposes: First, to stop or slow down India's border infrastructure development, second, to restrict New Delhi to South Asia, thus reducing its ambitions for a global role, and three, to weaken the traction the Quad partnership has been gaining of late. Kathmandu and Islamabad are happy to lend a helping hand to Beijing on the second objective mentioned above. Our response has to be firm and resolute.

Nitin Pai, director of The Takshashila Institution, an independent think tank:

For Beijing, border transgressions are a cheap instrument to apply pressure on India's political leadership. The Chinese side doesn't tell you "why", "why now", and indeed what their claim actually is. By keeping New Delhi guessing as to its intentions, Beijing puts the Indian government on the back foot on lots of issues. For instance, we are now asking whether it is to pressure India to stay neutral in the WHO investigation on the origins of Covid-19, whether it is to retaliate against FDI restrictions, to coerce India on the 5G issue, to counter the Modi government's move to change the status of Jammu and Kashmir, or indeed in response to purely military developments.

Christopher Clary, assistant professor of political science at the University at Albany, State University of New York:

China has a set of fuzzy claims all along its boundary with India, and the American scholar M Taylor Fravel has found that China historically has escalated militarily when it perceives steps taken by others erode the likelihood of China ever securing its territorial claims. In this case, Indian road- and bridge-building in the area, especially combined with Ladakh's change to union territory status, may have led China to conclude a sharp signal might be necessary to arrest developments weakening its hold on disputed areas in eastern Ladakh.

Harsh V Pant, head of the strategic studies programme at Observer Research Foundation:

China's actions along the LAC, which have gradually escalated in tone and tempo over the last few weeks, are a reflection of its growing military capabilities and its attempts to dictate the terms of engagement to India. First, this puts into perspective New Delhi's inability to put its own house in order by highlighting the power differential between the two Asian powers. Simply put, China is doing this because it can today and might not tomorrow. Second, this is an attempt by China to show India its place at a time when India's cachet has been rising globally and China's declining on account of the backlash because of its mishandling of Covid-19. Finally, this is a pre-emptive move by China to make it difficult for India to consolidate New Delhi's hold over strategically important Ladakh

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

After no Covid-19 deaths in a week, Telangana records 3 in one day

After a brief lull, Telangana witnessed a sudden spike in the Covid-19 cases, including three deaths, on Thursday night. The state was expecting that it would become coronavirus-free by the first week of May. Read more

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury's requests for a phone call with Piyush Goyal pending for 4 days is about migrants

Senior Congress leader from West Bengal Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury has written to the railways minister Piyush Goyal on May 1, 2020, with a request to make time for a telephonic conversation regarding the return of migrant labourers from West Bengal who are stranded in different states due to the ongoing nationwide lockdown. Read more

As Pune slums emerge as Covid-19 hotspots, political activists urge for tweak in strategy

Pune Municipal Corporation authorities have said that notwithstanding the poor response from slum dwellers to shifting to the nearly 70 temporary shelters created in civic schools, numerous steps have been taken to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the city's slums. Read more

WHO wants invite to China's probe into virus origins

The World Health Organization said Friday it hoped China would invite it to take part in its investigations into the animal origins of the novel coronavirus. Read more

India lose top spot in ICC Test rankings for first time since October 2016

The Virat Kohli-led Indian cricket team was dethroned from the top spot in the ICC Test rankings for the first time in close to four years after cricket parent's body announced the latest rankings on Friday. India had yielded the top spot for since October 2016. Read more

Telangana TSCHE extends deadline to apply for EAMCET 2020, other CETs

Telangana State Council of Higher Education (TSCHE) has further pushed the deadline to apply for all the Common Entrance Tests (CET) that were scheduled to be conducted this year. Read more

Love in the time of coronavirus: Crumbling modern relationships and how familiarity breeds contempt

To be "Quarantined in love", would surmise almost every true-blue romantic's fantasy, a long honeymoon masquerading as a harsh decree. Read more

Xiaomi phones record your web and phone use, claim researchers

Gabi Cirlig called his new Xiaomi phone "a backdoor with phone functionality". And he wasn't really joking. Cirlig was speaking to Forbes after discovering that "his Redmi Note 8 smartphone was watching much of what he was doing on the phone". Read more

Mrs Serial Killer movie review: Jacqueline Fernandez's Netflix film is a torturous experience; one of the worst films of 2020

Much before Mrs Serial Killer even begins killing, you'd wish she just abandon going after her target and focus on you instead. You'd be willing to come quietly, without putting up any struggle at all. Read more

Cops attacked in Gujarat's Godhra, health worker attacked in MP's Tikamgarh

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- With the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) affecting more and more people in West Bengal's hill district of Darjeeling, traders in Siliguri, the district's biggest town located in the plains, on Monday decided to shut down three major markets for at least a week.

This will affect people not only in the town but also neighbouring districts and even states such as Sikkim since Siliguri is the main trade hub and shipping point in the north Bengal region. Goods from Siliguri are shipped to Bihar and the North-East as well.

So far, five people have died in Darjeeling district where the number of Covid-19 cases stood at 296 till Sunday. Siliguri has so far recorded more than 170 cases. Sunday witnessed the highest single-day spike in the town with 25 new cases. Fourteen cases were recorded on Monday.

Incidentally, Siliguri Regulated Market, the largest fish, vegetable and fruit market in north Bengal was closed down by the administration more than a week ago after some people who regularly visited the market were infected. Ward number 46 in Siliguri Municipal Corporation area, where the market is located, has the highest number of Covid-19 cases.

Most of the fish, vegetable and fruit sold in the market are shipped to Darjeeling hills, Sikkim and other parts of north Bengal.

On Monday, traders at Bidhan Market, the biggest general goods market in Siliguri with around 4,000 shops, decided to suspend business till June 28. Their counterparts at the jewellery market in Deshbandu Para will keep shops closed till June 30. Hong Kong Market, the hub of foreign goods principally of Chinese origin and having around 500 shops, will remain closed till June 30, the traders said.

Bhabotosh Saha, secretary of the Hong Kong Market traders' body said, "The rise in Covid-19 cases has forced us to close the market for eight days. The spike is alarming people."

A few days ago, two local journalists, veteran Communist Party of India (Marxist) leader and former minister Asok Bhattacharya, who is chairman of board of administrators of the municipal corporation, and Raju Shah, general secretary of Bharatiya Janata Party's Siliguri organisational district committee, tested positive for the coronavirus disease.

Bapi Saha, secretary of the traders' body at Bidhan Market said, "With 20 cases being reported a day on an average it is better to have fewer people on the streets."

Traders at Seth Srilal Market, however, are opposed to the suspending business. Khokan Saha, secretary of the traders' union, said, "Another shutdown would mean another blow to business." The market has around 1,000 shops.

Surajit Paul, secretary, North Bengal Industries Association said, "Closing down markets is not the solution when we need economic activities to increase."

Last week, 16 trade and transport organisations in Darjeeling town had decided to suspend business for a week but called it off after meeting district administration officials.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- Senior Congress leader from West Bengal Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury has written to the railways minister Piyush Goyal on May 1, 2020, with a request to make time for a telephonic conversation regarding the return of migrant labourers from West Bengal who are stranded in different states due to the ongoing nationwide lockdown.

Chowdhury's letter states that his request for a conversation with the minister over the phone has been pending for the last four days and he finds it "regretful". The letter further says that the leader of the Congress party in Lok Sabha is in an urgent need to speak with Goyal over the issue of migrant workers from Bengal.

"It is regrettable to note that for the last four consecutive days, I have been seeking a little time from Railway Minister over phone, but to no avail. Hon'ble Railway Minister again I, am imploring to you to grace me by calling me back over phone as I, am in urgent need to have a few words with you regarding the return of stranded persons of West Bengal from different state," the letter says.

Chowdhury's letter to Goyal comes amidst demands for resumption of limited train services to carry the hundreds of thousands of migrant workers, stranded in different parts of the country, home. The home ministry has cleared their travel by buses and the states have argued that it was not feasible to transport such a huge mass by buses over long distances.

According to rough estimates, around 10 million migrant labourers could be in need of interstate transport after their employment was suspended due to the coronavirus outbreak. The migrant workers have been put up in relief camps in various states and are said to be restless to get back home.

Chowdhury's letter says that he has spoken to Prime Minister Narendra Modi over the "distressing" condition of the migrant workers and other stranded people after the imposition of nationwide lockdown on March 25.

The railways, in a one-off service, transported around 1,200 migrants from Hyderabad's Lingampalli to Jharkhand's Hatia (near state capital Ranchi). The arrangement was made on a request by Telangana chief minister K Chandrashekhar Rao.

The HT Guide to Coronavirus COVID-19

The guidelines issued last week by the Centre allows interstate movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, students and other stranded people through road transport only and it must be done following strict protocol for screening at both ends-the place of origin of travel and the destination. The order also specifies that the movement of migrants, tourists and students has to be restricted to non-containment zones.

For Coronavirus Live Updates

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- Chinese President Xi Jinping has called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

The early Friday phone conversation between Xi and Trump was held in the backdrop of Covid-19 cases in the US surging past China's and Beijing's late night decision on Thursday to close down its borders to foreigners amid fears of a second wave of infection coming in from abroad.

China's decision to ban foreigners from entering the country was preceded by the call to limit incoming international flights to one every week from every country.

Data from the Johns Hopkins University said Friday the US had 82,404 confirmed Covid-19 cases by Thursday evening.

China's national health commission (NHC) reported 81,340 confirmed cases, and 3298 deaths.

The pandemic has spread to at least 175 countries and territories, more than 532,700 cases have been reported worldwide since last December and the death toll is now above 24,000 with over 122,600 recoveries.

During the phone call, Xi told Trump that bilateral relations were at a critical juncture and both nations stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation and that cooperation is the only correct choice for both sides.

According to Chinese state media, Xi "called for joint efforts from both sides to bolster cooperation in areas such as epidemic containment and develop a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation".

"Working together brings both sides benefits, fighting hurts both. Cooperation is the only choice," he said.

The Chinese president urged Ttump take "substantive actions" in improving bilateral relations.

"China has always shared information on the Covid-19, including the genetic sequence of the virus, at the earliest time possible, with the World Health Organisation and countries including the US in an open, transparent and responsible manner since the start of the pandemic," Xi said.

"The country has also shared its experience on epidemic containment and medical treatment and done its best to support and help countries in need of assistance," Xi was quoted as saying.

Soon after the conversation, Trump tweeted that he had a "very good conversation" with Xi and called the pathogen "coronavirus" instead of the "China virus", which had infuriated China.

"Just finished a very good conversation with President Xi of China. Discussed in great detail the CoronaVirus that is ravaging large parts of our Planet. China has been through much & has developed a strong understanding of the Virus. We are working closely together. Much respect!"

Trump and other US politicians have repeatedly to call the disease "the Chinese virus," in the face of strong protestations from Beijing, which called it attacks which are racist and stigmatises China.

A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in turn tweeted that the virus, which emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, originated in the US and was planted in the city by the US military.

In context of reports on racist attacks that Chinese have faced, Xi told Trump China hopes for the U.S. side to take practical and effective measures to safeguard the safety and health of Chinese citizens includes students in the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 24 -- Shimla's handmade Chinese shoes are perhaps as big a tourist draw as the verdant hills themselves.

The shoes and lip-smacking Chinese delicacies, particularly the momos, have become a part of the state's culture. While people across the nation have called for a boycott of Chinese products after the Galwan Valley standoff, Chinese-origin traders here have no reason to complain.

John Chung, the owner of Shimla's iconic Hopson's shoe shop on Mall Road, says, "There has been no change of behaviour towards us. Shimla is a small town everybody knows us. My family came here in the '50s and the art of shoe-making has been passed down from generation to generation. The third generation of our family has been born and bred in India. We are well integrated and proficient in Hindi."

On what he felt about the rift in relations between the two countries, he says, "It is a sad development, indeed. Hopefully, things will improve."

'FIND DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION'

Brenda Chiu, the proprietor of the popular eatery Dim Sum on Mall Road and the Minsen Beauty Parlour, says, "My grandparents, too, were born in India so China is no longer a country of origin for me. We are all Indians so we don't feel conflicted about the Indo-Chinese faceoff."

"A war, be it with any country, needs to be avoided and a diplomatic solution must be sought," she said.

Ask her if business has been affected and she says, "Business is down everywhere because of Covid-19. Everybody knows us in Shimla and there has been no change in behaviour or any anti-Chinese sentiment towards us. A war will not change locals' perception towards us."

Though Chung's business has been affected because of Covid-19, loyal customers from Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and Chandigarh are still placing online orders.

GENERATION GAP, DIFFERENT VOICES

Nirmal Thakur, a retired public sector employee with a penchant for Chinese handmade shoes, says, "The Chinese community in Shimla is as Indian as anybody else. They have been living here for generations. It will be foolhardy of anybody to punish Chinese-origin entrepreneurs over the Indo-Chinese conflict. Yes, the government should reduce import and give impetus to make in India."

However, Manoj Kumar, 28, a bank officer at a private bank in Shimla, says, "There has definitely been an attitude change towards the Chinese. They are staying here and profiting, while their country of origin is on warpath with us. The government should try to sort out the matter at the diplomatic level and reduce Chinese imports."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- President Xi Jinping has warned against complacency in the ongoing fight to curb the coronavirus outbreak in the country even as China on Thursday classified all its counties as "low-risk" for the Covid-19 disease.

The decision to lower the risk level was taken as no domestic cases were reported in the Chinese mainland for four consecutive days as of Wednesday, and no new deaths for 22 consecutive days, national health commission (NHC) spokesperson, Mi Feng said on Thursday.

The Chinese mainland reported two new imported Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of imported cases to 1,680, Mi added.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

China now has a total of 82885 confirmed cases of the disease and 4633 deaths from it.

Xi, however, warned officials from "relaxing" in their fight against it despite the dramatic fall in numbers at a meeting of the Communist Party of China's Standing Committee, the top decision-making body in the country, on Wednesday.

"Xi stressed that authorities can afford zero complacency in their work on all fronts to consolidate the outcomes of epidemic containment, and must not undo all the efforts that have been made," state media quoted him as saying at the meeting.

Xi said the spread of the ".virus overseas has not been effectively curbed yet and cluster cases were reported in a few areas in China, posing considerable uncertainty to the epidemic control".

The epidemic prevention and control measures in Hubei, the Chinese province worst-hit by the coronavirus, should not be relaxed, Xi said.

Meanwhile, China's diplomatic spat with the US continued on Thursday with the Chinese foreign ministry accusing US secretary of state Mike Pompeo of telling one lie to cover up another in his continued attacks against Beijing over the pandemic.

Speaking at the regular ministry briefing on Thursday, spokesperson Hua Chunying said Beijing has been transparent about the Covid-19 outbreak that emerged in Hubei province's capital Wuhan late last year and that the US politicians were making baseless accusations against China

Washington has accused Beijing of covering up the outbreak and mishandling it.

Hua added that China supported the efforts of the WHO to investigate the origin of the pandemic.

"We are always open to cooperate with the WHO on matters, including on the question of origin," she said.

"While scientists have not come to a conclusion, why is Secretary Pompeo drawing the hasty conclusion that the virus came from a Wuhan lab? Where is his proof? Show us the proof. If he cannot show any evidence, then he may still be in the process of making up this evidence," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 2 -- There is an increase in the number of Canadians viewing India's growing economic power as an opportunity, while more and more of them now see China's rise in the domain as a threat. These are among the findings of a national opinion poll conducted by the Vancouver-headquartered non-profit Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada (APF Canada).

The organisation that strives to be a bridge between Canada and the Asia-Pacific region has been tracking Canadian attitudes towards the economic rise of India and China since 2004.

"Between 2018 and 2020, the change in perceptions for China and India has followed opposing paths, something we have not observed before. While 72% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of India is more of an opportunity than a threat, a modest increase since 2018 (71%), only 35% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of China is more as an opportunity than a threat, down from 60% in 2018," the results of the annual survey revealed.

This is the also the first time that the survey has shown the majority of respondents seeing China's economic power as a threat, at 57%.

Again, the perception towards India is headed towards a positive direction with just 18% seeing its economic growth as a threat, which the APF Canada described as "an all-time low".

Canadians' general feeling towards India has also remained stable. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means "very warm, favourable", India scores 5.7.

"Over the past decade, the governments of India and Canada have been making efforts to build a mutually beneficial relationship, which can only prosper further if the Canadian public also holds a positive view," the report noted. "On the flip side, Canadians' feelings towards China, which had been remarkably stable for the past decade until 2018, dropped from 4.9 to 3.6 in 2020."

The survey said there was support for Canada entering into a free trade agreement (FTA) with India, though that was not the case with regard to China. Just about one-third voiced support for an FTA with China, which 59%.

"It marks the lowest support for an FTA with China since we started polling Canadians on the subject in 2012," the report stated.

One of reasons behind the growing animosity of Canadians' towards China is the Covid-19 pandemic. Two-third of Canadians disagreed with the statement that the Chinese government "acted responsibly" at the beginning of the outbreak in Wuhan.

The vast majority, at 68%, "feel that Canada should support an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 virus".

Human rights abuses and the arrest and detention of two Canadians by the Chinese government are also feeding into the escalating negativity.

"The majority of Canadians (83%) feel that Canada should stand up to China as Canadian national values such as the rule of law, human rights, and democracy are on the line," the report pointed out, while "67% think Canada should work alongside the US and other allies to pressure China, and about 67% also believe Canada should take a more aggressive approach towards China" to liberate the two imprisoned there.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 2 -- The first comprehensive study of how coronavirus affects non-white people released on Tuesday has confirmed initial data that people from Indian, Afro-Caribbean and other ethnicities are more at risk from dying than the white population in England.

The report by Public Health England came in the context of allegations that the Boris Johnson government is delaying its release to prevent any public protests against official steps to deal with the pandemic that has caused over 39,000 deaths as of Monday evening.

Several doctors and nurses of Indian origin have passed away during the pandemic in recent weeks.

The report says: "People from Black ethnic groups were most likely to be diagnosed. Death rates from Covid-19 were highest among people of Black and Asian ethnic groups. This is the opposite of what is seen in previous years, when the mortality rates were lower in Asian and Black ethnic groups than White ethnic groups".

"An analysis of survival among confirmed Covid-19 cases and using more detailed ethnic groups, shows that after accounting for the effect of sex, age, deprivation and region, people of Bangladeshi ethnicity had around twice the risk of death than people of White British ethnicity".

"People of Chinese, Indian, Pakistani, Other Asian, Caribbean and Other Black ethnicity had between 10 and 50% higher risk of death when compared to White British", it adds.

The report found a "particularly high increase" in deaths among those born outside the UK and Ireland; those in a range of caring occupations including social care and nursing auxiliaries and assistants; those who drive passengers in road vehicles for a living including taxi and minicab drivers and chauffeurs; those working as security guards and related occupations; and those in care homes.

Men working as security guards, taxi drivers and chauffeurs, bus and coach drivers, chefs, sales and retail assistants, lower skilled workers in construction and processing plants, and men and women working in social care had significantly high rates of death from Covid-19, it adds.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 28 -- An Indian-origin London-based man has been jailed for eight months after he spat at a police officer after lying about having Covid-19 because he was 'angry,' Scotland Yard said on Tuesday.

Karan Singh, 23, pleaded guilty at the Croydon Crown Court to three counts of assault on an emergency worker, using threatening words to cause harassment and in possession of a class B drug (cannabis).

He was sentenced immediately to four months' imprisonment. He was also sentenced to an additional four months' imprisonment, to run consecutively, for being in breach of a suspended sentence - making his total sentence eight months.

The police said that on March 14, officers were on patrol when they spotted Singh sitting in a car in a driveway in Croydon. Officers recognised Singh as being disqualified from driving and so they approached the car and spoke to him.

Singh denied he was disqualified from driving and stated that he had been given his licence back. As officers were speaking to Singh, they noticed a strong smell of cannabis coming from him and the vehicle. Officers asked him about the smell and he admitted smoking cannabis.

As one of the officers began explaining the grounds for a search under the Misuse of Drugs Act, Singh attempted to run away. The vehicle stalled and officers were able to detain him.

A snap bag of cannabis was found and Singh admitted to having cannabis for personal use.

Singh was arrested and when he was taken to a south London police station he was said to have been verbally abusive to the interviewing officers.

Following the interview, Singh became aggressive and stated that he would not go back to his cell. He had to be physically taken back by a custody sergeant and PC, with a DC and Designated Detention Officer (DDO) also stepping in to support their colleagues.

Once at the cell door, Singh continued to struggle with the officers. The officers managed to get him into the cell and when the door was partially closed, Singh spat directly into the custody sergeant's face. Some of the spit also hit the DDO's lip and the DC's cheek.

Singh then tried to prevent officers from closing the cell door, during which he told the custody sergeant that he had coronavirus. He was further arrested on suspicion of assaulting an emergency worker.

Following the incident, Singh was interviewed behind his cell door for safety reasons. He admitted to spitting at the officers stating he did it because he had been waiting for hours and he 'got stressed out'.

When asked if he had coronavirus, he admitted that he did not and stated he said it because he was angry. At the conclusion of the interview, Singh was asked if he had anything he wanted to say and he said: "Sorry to the officers."

Superintendent Dan Knowles said: "It is never acceptable to spit at an emergency worker, whether it is during these unprecedented times or not. Singh carrying out this vile act and then lying about having coronavirus was a deplorable thing to do and it caused a great deal of distress for the officers and staff who were just trying to do their job and keep London safe".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 2 -- It is a concept that has been around since the 1950s when it originated in Germany (although some put its year or origin even earlier); in the decades since, there has been enough research to show that its cons far exceed its pros; yet it has lingered on.

It, of course, is the open office, and the coronavirus disease, Covid-19, may have finally killed it.

As the coronavirus pandemic spread across the globe in February, most workplaces around the country (and the world) began to implement rules among its employees: avoid clusters, maintain physical distance, wear masks, avoid using biometric entry, sanitise hands. Many put in place strict deep cleaning protocols. And finally, all suddenly discovered the merits of WFH (work from home).

Once the lockdown is lifted and at least some employees look to rejoin work -- many will work from home; for instance, India's largest software services firm Tata Consultancy Services has said that up to 75% of its global workforce will work from home by 2025 -- one of the most important questions facing organisations is simply this: Can the open office plan, marked by a lack of cubicles such that all employees are required to sit or work in clusters, still make sense in a world ravaged by an ongoing pandemic?

The straightforward answer? No.

The open office aimed to improve collaboration and proficiency among employees. Different types of furniture demarcated different spaces of work: hubs for private meetings, longer tables for meetings among larger groups, single or two-seater sofas for more private conversations, and workstations for clusters of employees where they often share resources like lamps, telephones, and that great luxury of the modern workplace -- coffee machines.

In a post-Covid-19 world, this translates into zero social distancing, not to mention multiple shared surfaces. In other words, heightened risk of transmission of Sars-Cov-2.

"We are looking at a complete 180-degree shift [in offices]. The whole premise of how offices have been designed has been about collaboration. Now the premise about people coming to office is about social distancing. So the whole focus will be on how to get people to interact in such a way. The communal spaces that the open office plan allowed for will not be possible anymore. It won't be possible for three people to sit on a sofa and have a discussion," said Aparna Piramal, author and columnist on business and design.

Neetish Sarda, founder of Smartworks, a firm that offers co-working spaces across nine cities in India, said that his company instituted workplace measures on March 20 itself, five days before the nationwide lockdown was announced. The measures, which included disinfecting all surfaces (metal, knobs, workstations) and floors, placement of sanitizer bottles at "high touchpoints" and physical distancing among clients, will also be enforced once the lockdown is lifted, he said.

Would firms redesign the office space all together? US-based furniture makers, Steelcase, recently released a report-cum-catalogue titled Navigating 'What's next: the post Covid workspace' offers a range of solutions, including reconfiguring desks, or pulling them apart to reduce face-to-face orientation, which can be achieved for instance, by turning workstations to 90-degree angles to prevent workers from working directly across or behind one another. It also suggests leveraging flexible furniture with movable whiteboards and screens to create boundaries.

Bimal Patel, director of Ahmedabad-based HCP Design, Planning and Management Private Limited - the architecture firm mandated to develop the Central Vista - said that it was too early to think of lasting design changes.

"The most interesting thing that has emerged out of the present crisis is not so much this idea that we may need to make lasting [design] changes in the long run but that a lot of people, particularly in the service industries like our own, have discovered the potential of working online."

In the short run, he said, the important thing for firms to figure out is how many people can actually stay away from the office so as to reduce the number of people coming in to work.

Though Patel may not agree with this, his remark highlights a larger question -- forget open offices, do we even need offices?

A Price Waterhouse Coopers pulse survey among 305 US companies published on April 27, found that more than half the companies (52%) were planning on changing shifts and alternating crews to reduce exposure, while 49% of the companies said they were planning to make remote work a permanent option for roles that allow.

Indian furniture maker Godrej Interio has a four-person team, called the Ergonomics and Workspace Research Cell, whose mandate is to study issues commonly faced in offices - like noisy colleagues - and publish findings that eventually guide their product design team. When the global pandemic hit and offices around the globe and India began to close down, it began to study the challenges of working from home.

"Our aim is to reach 10,000 [respondents] so the research is still ongoing. We asked questions like, what are the issues people face; how can we help them stay productive? Our focus is on the health and well-being of people," said Sameer Joshi, an associate vice president in the marketing division of Godrej Interio who leads the team. Based on the findings, a 'work from home' range of 40 furniture items will be rolled out once factories open, Joshi said.

At a time when the world stares at yet another economic recession, it is crucial to ask whether firms will make such additional investments in office spaces or infrastructure to enable people to work from home. Piramal said it would be in their own interest to do so.

"For the first time, many organisations will have to think of their employees being in a kind of life and death situation [inside the office]. In most industries, you don't think about this, unless you're in the manufacturing space or in the armed forces. So, if you view it from that perspective, then certain investments have to be made. [Of course] somebody has to bear that cost. Maybe that cost may come out of employee salaries," she said.

Or they may simply come out of the savings companies hope to make from rent payments.

(With inputs from Abhishek Behl)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 30 -- India's position on the border standoff with China was backed on Thursday by Australia, which said it opposed attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) as that could increase the risk of instability.

Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell conveyed his country's position to external affairs minister S Jaishankar during a meeting, at which the two sides discussed developments across the Indo-Pacific region amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Australian side urges restraint along the LAC and supports continued moves towards de-escalation, said a statement from the Australian high commission.

"As I told the external affairs minister of India today, Australia opposes any attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo, which only serve to increase tension and the risk of instability," O'Farrell was quoted as saying in the statement.

"It is important that the bilaterally-agreed principles and norms that have helped prevent escalation or miscalculation in the border areas over many decades continue to be observed," the statement added.

India has repeatedly said in recent weeks that it is opposed to any unilateral efforts to change the status quo along the LAC, along which tens of thousands of Indian and Chinese troops continue to be deployed.

There has been growing convergence between India and Australia on security issues and the role of China in the Indo-Pacific in recent months. The two sides elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit last month.

Australia, which is set to be invited to join the Malabar naval exercise conducted by India, Japan and the US, has also backed India's calls for reform of international bodies such as the World Health Organisation (WHO) and sought a probe into the origins of the pandemic.

During a meeting of the US and Australian defence and foreign ministers in Washington on Tuesday, the two countries envisaged a key role for India in defence cooperation and post-Covid-19 recovery efforts in the Indo-Pacific.

The Australian mission's statement further said that "Australia remains vigilant about strategic trends inimical to our vision of the region" even as it focuses on the health and economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis.

Australia envisages an Indo-Pacific that is an open, free, rules-based region that is "resilient to coercion" and supported by inclusive institutions, the statement said. "Territorial disputes and competing claims should be resolved peacefully by the claimant countries, and in ways consistent with international law," it added.

Australia also continues to be deeply concerned by China's actions in the South China Sea that are "destabilising and could provoke escalation", the statement said. On July 23, Australia lodged a note with the UN Secretary General refuting China's "unlawful maritime claims in the South China Sea".

It added: "It rejects China's claim to historic rights and internal waters, its assertion of certain maritime zones, and its contention there is wide international recognition of its South China Sea sovereignty claims."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 8 -- Indian-origin Miss England 2019, Bhasha Mukherjee has resumed work as a doctor to fight the coronavirus pandemic in the UK. One of the worst hit countries in the world, UK is seeing multiple deaths every day from the virus.

Bhasha told CNN that she was in India for charity work as the pageant winner when she realised she needed to be back home, serving her people. "I wanted to come back home. I wanted to come and go straight to work," she said. She received messages from her former colleagues at her old hospital, the Pilgrim Hospital in Boston, eastern England, who told her of the dire situation at hospitals overflowing with patients. She then contacted the hospital's management, telling them that she wanted to return to work.

"I felt a sense of this is what I'd got this degree for and what better time to be part of this particular sector than now. It was incredible the way the whole world was celebrating all key workers, and I wanted to be one of those, and I knew I could help," she said. "There's no better time for me to be Miss England and helping England at a time of need," she added.

Also read: When Robert Downey Jr's Iron Man co-star Terrence Howard blamed him for Marvel ouster: 'He took money that was supposed to go to me'

Bhasha, 23, from Derby, holds two different medical degrees, has an IQ of 146, making her officially a 'genius' and is fluent in five languages. She was due to start her new job as a junior doctor in a hospital, just hours after the Miss England final ended last year.

She was born in India. Her family relocated to the UK when she was nine. She went onto complete two bachelor degrees: one in medical sciences and one in medicine and surgery from the University of Nottingham.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- The much-awaited Rapid Testing Kits, which use antibody-based blood tests for Covid-19, arrived in New Delhi on Thursday morning after missing their third deadline by a day, and will likely be used to test for the coronavirus disease in areas with no or few cases, according to the Indian Council of Medical Research. Meanwhile, expectations for a relief and stimulus package for individuals and businesses rose after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in a meeting with finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman, reviewed the Covid-19 impact on the Indian economy and the ongoing national lockdown aimed at limiting its spread.

Rapid kits finally arrive to test Covid-19 immunity

The much-awaited Rapid Testing Kits, or RTKs, which use antibody-based blood tests for Covid-19, arrived in New Delhi on Thursday after missing their third deadline by a day, and will likely be used to test for coronavirus disease in areas with no or few cases -- the health ministry's green zones -- according to an official at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).

PM Modi, FM Nirmala Sitharaman meet with stimulus in pipeline

Expectations for a relief and stimulus package for individuals and businesses rose after Prime Minister Narendra Modi reviewed on Thursday, in a meeting with finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman, the impact on the Indian economy of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the ongoing national lockdown aimed at limiting its spread. HT learns that chief economic adviser Krishnamurthy Subramanian is putting together the package.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

The trajectory of Covid-19 infections in India is very different from that in any other country. It's slower; there haven't been too many deaths; and, at least anecdotally, the proportion of patients requiring ventilator support is lower than that in many other countries. It isn't clear why. Nor is it clear that this trend will continue.

Firms rush to meet new PPE norms

The Bureau of Indian Standards' newly-released list of national specifications for coveralls or body-suits worn by Covid-19 healthcare workers has left some government approved manufacturers scrambling for material that would pass the new tests, even as government-approved laboratories rejected thousands of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits that were donated by China.

One-third of India lives in red zones, Tamil Nadu leads the list

The 170 districts identified as coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots across the country are home to about 37% of India's population, with Tamil Nadu accounting for the most "red zones" - 22 of its 37 districts - among the states, according to the government's data.

India begins controlled trials of plasma therapy

Trials using the antibody-rich blood of patients cured of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) have begun, with doctors turning to a pool of 1,600 people in India who have recovered from the infection to test their antibodies as a potential cure for those fighting the disease.

Airlines told to give full refund for tickets

The Centre on Thursday ordered domestic and foreign airlines to refund passengers in full for bookings on flights that have been suspended during the extended coronavirus disease (Covid-19) lockdown until May 3 .

Typing error makes man Covid-19 positive in UP's Amroha

Authorities on Tuesday rushed six ambulances to Nauganva in Uttar Pradesh's Amroha to quarantine eight members of a 68-year-old man's family and to track down those, who may have in contact with him, after he was wrongly declared Covid-19 positive because of a typographical error, officials said.

Virus spread will decelerate due to lockdown: Niti Aayog member

The rate of spread of Sars-Cov-2, the virus responsible for the coronavirus disease, has slowed sharply in the past month and will decelerate further as a result of the nationwide lockdown, according to Dr Vinod Paul, a member of the government policy think tank NITI Aayog, who heads the empowered group overseeing the Covid-19 medical emergency management plan.

Hydroxychloroquine to be supplied to 55 nations

The Indian government has so far approved the supply of the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine, either as commercial sales or as grants, to 55 countries as part of the efforts to fight the Covid-19 pandemic, people familiar with the development said on Thursday.

Covid crisis temporary brake, it will improve: Prakash Javadekar

The coronavirus crisis will be just a temporary "brake", information and broadcasting minister Prakash Javadekar, said, explaining that the government is trying to save lives even as it keeps an eye on the economy. From April 20, many sectors will open up, providing livelihoods to many, he added in an interview to Hindustan Times.

After WHO row, US is probing China lab link

US President Donald Trump's administration is urging an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic, saying that the US doesn't rule out that it came from a laboratory researching bats in Wuhan. China's foreign ministry hit back saying the World Health Organization (WHO) has said there is no evidence that the coronavirus was made in a lab.

Your voice may be able to tell if you have Covid

The rush to understand, predict and head off the Covid-19 outbreak has prompted technology researchers to deploy artificial intelligence to create tools that can determine whether people are infected by analysing the sound of their cough, the way they speak or even breathe.

Patients start infection spread before symptoms set in: Study

People with the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) start infecting others two to three days before they develop symptoms of fever and cough, according to a study from China which suggests effective outbreak containment must include contact tracing of people who have been exposed to positive cases two to three days before their symptoms first appeared.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 3 -- The Uttarakhand government has further relaxed norms under Unlock 2.0 for people entering from other states, especially for very important persons (VIPs) from the central and state government, judiciary and legislative members who have been exempted from quarantine.

The state government released the guidelines for Unlock 2.0 for inter-state movement for official and other purposes on Thursday.

"Ministers of Government of India, ministers of state government, chief justice and other judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, other judicial officers of district and subordinate judiciary of the state, advocate general, chief standing counsel and other government advocates in the High Court of Uttarakhand, member of parliament and member of the legislative assembly of the Uttarakhand, all officer of the government of India, state government, PSUs, Central or state government organisations, along with their support staff shall be exempted from being quarantined," the guidelines said.

It said these individuals will ensure compliance of all norms of safety and social distancing as per guidelines of the central government.

Inbound passengers from other states will not need permission for such movement though but will have to register themselves on http://smartcitydehradun.uk.gov.in.

The registration documents shall be verified at border check posts. Passengers entering the state from non-high load Covid-19 infected cities shall be home quarantined for 14 days.

Passengers from high load Covid-19 infected cities, irrespective of the mode of travel, will have to undergo a period of seven-days of institutional quarantine and home quarantine each. They will have the option of choosing a government (non-payment basis) quarantine centre or paid quarantine facility.

Pregnant ladies, seriously-ill people, senior citizens above the age of 65 years or those accompanied by children below 10 years of age shall be exempted from institutional quarantine and permitted to stay in home quarantine for 14 days.

Giving further relaxations to people the government said all inbound asymptomatic persons travelling for a short visit of up to seven days in the state for "exceptional and compelling reasons such as a death in the family, serious illness, visiting parents, or any other reason of personal distress, as assessed by the district nodal officer in coordination with health authorities shall be exempted from being quarantined, but will be allowed to move outside their homes."

Such passengers will have to mention the address during the registration process and district administration will verify the movement of such persons.

The guidelines further mention that the Indian Army, Indian Navy, Indian Air Force and para-military forces "shall make their own arrangement" for institutional quarantine for officers, personnel and family members visiting for high load Covid-19 infected cities.

All asymptomatic passengers travelling by flight and transiting through high-load Covid-19 cities where the origin is not from such a city will have to undergo 14-days of home quarantine.

Asymptomatic persons travelling to the state for maximum three-days will be exempted from being quarantined. No permission is required for inter-district movement, but registration on the web portal is mandatory, according to the fresh guidelines.

For tourism purposes, all asymptomatic persons travelling from other countries will have to undergo a period of seven-days of institutional quarantine along with seven-days of home quarantine. In the case of "exceptional and compelling circumstances", home quarantine may be permitted for 14-days to asymptomatic persons.

All hotels, bed and breakfast, homestay and hospitality services shall be allowed to open in the state except for those in containment zones. Hotel management should ensure that bookings for people from other states are made for a minimum of seven days.

However, there would be no restrictions regarding the minimum period of stay for persons who undergo RT-PCR test from a lab authorised by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) with a negative report, 72-hours before arriving at the concerned hotel or hospitality service.

Action will be taken against violators under relevant sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC), Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act. Those who do not undergo the test will have to give a self-declaration that they will not visit any public places.

Hotels outside containment zones will also be allowed to serve liquor only as room service and not in the bars.

Suryakant Dhasmana, vice-president of Congress' Uttarakhand unit, said Covid-19 disease does not differentiate based on status, caste, creed, religion of people.

"Prime ministers and health ministers of major countries also got infected by Covid-19, and here there are exemptions for VIPs. On one hand, our Prime Minister says that the VIP culture has been done within the country, and on the other, we have such rules." he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 3 -- As interstate bus services resumed in Delhi after more than seven months, the scene at the city's two major bus terminals (ISBTs), at Kashmere Gate and Anand Vihar, were in stark contrast. While Kashmere Gate had mostly all Covid-19 safety mechanisms in place, the latter was in disarray.

On Day 1, 542 interstate buses carrying over 20,000 passengers arrived in the Capital through the three ISBTs (the third of which is at Sarai Kale Khan) till 5.30 pm. Passengers arrived from Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand, with some returning to the city for work, and many others travelling to celebrate Diwali with their friends and family.

The Kashmere Gate ISBT saw a fair rush in the morning, with long queues at the entry gate as passengers were thermally screened and frisked using contactless devices, while staff members sanitised luggage inside the premises.

Yet, social distancing norms were often thrown to the wind as people would rush in a horde, jostling to either get entry to the terminal, collect their luggage or to buy a ticket. Despite a properly designed waiting area, people crowded the narrow bus bays, even while drivers waited patiently till all the seats were occupied.

Kavalpreet Kaur, who arrived at Kashmere Gate ISBT from Punjab on Tuesday morning pointed out that the terminal did not have any Covid-19 testing centre or camp for those who voluntarily wanted to get themselves checked.

"I travelled all night in a bus that was full of passengers. A Covid testing centre here would not just help me, but also the city administration to identify and quarantine those who have the infection," she said.

Apart from a few security guards at the entry gate, Kashmere Gate ISBT had absolutely no police officer, district official or civil defence volunteer to warn or prosecute violators of Covid-19 norms.

The situation was much worse at the other two ISBTs, especially at Anand Vihar, which shares its border with Uttar Pradesh.

On Tuesday, the Anand Vihar ISBT received 257 interstate buses, followed by 242 buses in Kashmere Gate and 43 buses at Sarai Kale Khan.

Despite being host to the most passengers, the Anand Vihar ISBT was short of proper arrangements. Four people were deployed for screening and sanitisation, two of who were deployed to check the temperatures of only the driver and conductor, and two others who sanitised buses - mostly from the outside.

The Anand Vihar terminal had no facilities to thermally screening passengers, or to sanitise their luggage. It also did not have any sanitiser spray available for public-use. Female passengers, said they were especially hassled, saying the washroom was too dirty to use.

Several also complained about passengers' displaying a lack of hygiene.

Yadunath Singh, and his family were boarding a bus from Anand Vihar ISBT, headed for his hometown in Ram Nagar, Uttarakhand, to celebrate Diwali.

"I am fed up of people spitting here. This problem is peculiar to Anand Vihar ISBT. Don't people know that Covid-19 spreads from droplets? There is not a single official to prosecute violators. While walking around the ISBT, most passengers had their masks either on their chin or hanging from their ears," said an angry Singh.

The testing centre, located between the bus terminal and Metro station, was not conducting any Covid-19 tests when HT visited the facility at 4pm.

A district official deployed to oversee testing there said they wrapped up by 3.30pm. "We do 1,000-2,000 tests daily, most of which are performed using the rapid antigen method. The most RT-PCR tests we have conducted at this facility are around 300 on a single day. Very few have tested positive so far, but we immediately send those who do to the Covid Care Centre at Akshardham on an ambulance," said an official deployed there.

KK Dahiya, managing director of the Delhi Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation (DTIDC) Limited that manages and operates all the ISBTs, said people are being de-boarded at the entry gate of the ISBTs, from where they are being allowed to leave for their respective destinations in the city.

"There was no crowding observed on day one, as the number of buses allowed to enter the terminal has been slashed to 50% until November 15. Moreover, it was the first day, so fewer buses arrived. The number will gradually go up," Dahiya said.

Before the onset of the pandemic, the three ISBTs would witness a combined footfall of over 250,000 every day. On a daily basis, there were 3,500 trips of interstate buses and 2,000 trips of local buses.

According to the SOP prepared by the Delhi government, interstate buses have to be sanitised by the respective depots of bus operators at the point of origin and before departure from the respective ISBT. The conductors or the drivers of interstate buses were also to submit a certificate issued by the respective depot of the bus being thoroughly sanitised, but only five such certificates of the 257 buses that arrived at Anand Vihar were submitted at the terminal. The story was same for the other two terminals as well.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, by real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 3 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

In Rajasthan, Congress' 'enduring plan' to address discontent among MLAs

After overcoming the recent political crisis in Rajasthan, the state Congress has started working on an "enduring plan" to address dissatisfaction among MLAs and other party leaders. The party is planning to ensure maximum participation of MLAs, senior leaders and workers in the government and organisation. Read more

Number of recovered Covid-19 patients is 3.5 times more than active cases: Health Ministry

Health Ministry on Thursday addressed a press briefing on the Covid-19 situation in the country and said the number of recovered cases is more than 29.70 lakh, which is 3.5 times more than active cases. Read more

Staff shortage, poor coordination: Pune's jumbo Covid facility invites patients' wrath

If 42-year-old journalist Pandurang Raykar's death highlighted lack of coordination on part of administration, it also underlined inconvenience being faced by patients in delayed treatment, no response from centre and poor food. Read more

Kenosha unrest: Joe Biden to test his promise to unify the nation

Campaigning for more than a year as a calming, unifying figure, Joe Biden and his core pitch for the presidency face the most intense test yet when he travels to Kenosha, Wisconsin, a city wrenched by police and protest violence that makes it a microcosm of the nation's election-year reckoning with systemic racism. Read more

Hilary Swank interview: Oscar-winner on being inspired by Kalpana Chawla to play astronaut in Netflix's Away

Oscar-winning actor Hilary Swank said that Kalpana Chawla was among the many real-life icons who inspired her to play astronaut Emma Green in the Netflix space drama Away. Chawla was the first woman of Indian origin to go to space. She died in 2003, in the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. Read more

Tata Motors, Hyundai to supply Nexon and Kona EVs for government use

Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) on Thursday announced it had placed orders for 150 Nexon electric vehicles (EVs) from Tata Motors and another 100 Kona EVs from Hyundai for government use. EESL is a joint venture of PSUs under the Ministry of Power, Government of India. Read more

CEO Madhav Sheth on why Realme 7 smartphones launched six months after Realme 6 series in India

Realme has just introduced its Realme 7 and 7 Pro in India at Rs.14,999 and Rs.19,999 base price. And while these two are powerful enough to give a tough time to rivals in the same price segment, they also add to the vast lineup that Realme has been aggressively growing this year. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 24 -- Defence minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday said he was assured by the Russian leadership that all ongoing contracts for military supplies will proceed as scheduled and be completed speedily despite the impact of the Covid-19 crisis.

Singh's remarks, made during a media interaction in Moscow, came against the backdrop of reports that India is pushing Russia to advance the delivery of S-400 missile defence systems following a tense stand-off with Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).

Russia, which accounts for more than 60% of the military hardware used by the Indian armed forces, has called for the easing of tensions between China and India. The tensions spiked after 20 Indian soldiers were killed in a violent face-off in Ladakh's Galwan Valley on June 15. "I have been assured that ongoing contracts will be maintained, and not only will they be maintained, but they will also be completed quickly and in less time," Singh said, describing his talks with Russian deputy prime minister Yury Borisov as "very positive and productive".

"All our proposals have received a positive response from the Russian side. I am fully satisfied with my discussions," he said, without giving details of the proposals.

Singh arrived in Russia on Monday - the first trip abroad by an Indian leader since foreign travel was restricted four months ago due to the pandemic - with a high-level delegation to participate in the Victory Day parade on June 24. He is scheduled to hold several meetings with Russian leaders, though no talks are planned with his Chinese counterpart Wei Fenghe, who is also in Moscow for the parade.

India plans to seek the advanced delivery of the S-400 missile defence systems, currently due by mid-2021. India and Russia signed a $5.4-billion deal in 2018 for five systems. New Delhi is also expected to ask Moscow to cut delays in supplying spares for key Russian-origin platforms such as tanks, combat jets and helicopters.

New Delhi's request could potentially place Moscow in a difficult position due to its relations with Beijing. It is becoming increasingly tricky for Russia to maintain good ties with India and China, Alexander Gabuev, a China expert at the Carnegie Moscow Centre, told Bloomberg.

"It's a very important test overall of Russia's ability to balance its relationships amid growing dependency on China, which is becoming increasingly assertive and pushing its partners to choose sides," Gabuev said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Ludhiana,, Aug. 20 -- The World Animal Health Organisation (OIE), Indian Meat Science Association, and department of animal husbandry and dairying, government of India issued a notification stating that poultry has no role in the transmission of Covid-19 to humans.

This information was shared by Dr Inderjeet Singh, vice-chancellor of Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Ludhiana.

He revealed that scientific findings clearly indicate that coronavirus is known to spread through human to human interactions.

However, the person suffering from Covid-19 infection should be screened and not be allowed to handle either domestic animals or any food products whether of plant/animal origin or even cooked. They may cause secondary surface contamination of the products.

Dr Singh emphasised that farmworkers, milkers, milk/meat handlers, butchers, dairy and meat industry personnel should be screened regularly and anyone showing symptoms of fever, cough, nausea, diarrhea and difficulty in breathing should not be allowed to enter the farm and meat/dairy industry premises. The infected persons should immediately consult the doctor and quarantine themselves.

All the workers should be instructed to follow the general hygiene of frequent sanitisation and washing hands, wearing masks, and avoid spitting, sneezing, and coughing in public places to prevent the spread of disease. Everybody should take a protein-rich immunity booster diet to increase their strength to fight against the disease.

The V-C urged the public to stop forwarding fake videos without ascertaining the facts. Undue fear among people adversely affects the demand for eggs and poultry meat or other products, and consumers will be deprived of good affordable sources of protein.

Further, food products including milk, meat and poultry products should be consumed after proper cooking only, so that all the infectious agents including viruses may be killed. The general principles of food hygiene and proper cooking must be followed as per the suggestions of WHO/OIE.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- India has 559 deaths so far due to Covid-19 and has recorded 17,656 coronavirus cases. India has also eased lockdown in certain areas of the nation to restart economic activity. Nationwide containment zones still continue to be under the ambit of lockdown rule. Global death toll has surpassed 1,60,000 and 2.4 million continue to be affected. The United States, continues to be the nation most affected by coronavirus, recording more than 746,000 coronavirus cases and 40,000 deaths so far. US with 40,000 deaths and 700,000 cases has now become the epicentre of the coronavirus in the West.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 8 -- Pakistan on Wednesday skipped a video conference of senior trade officials of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (Saarc), which discussed ways to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 crisis on regional trade.

The virtual meeting of the trade officials was a follow-up to a video conference of leaders of the eight Saarc states that was convened by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on March 15. At that time, Pakistan was the only country not to be represented by its head of government.

The external affairs ministry said in a statement that all Saarc countries, except Pakistan, participated in Wednesday's video conference discussed the impact of travel restrictions and the larger Covid-19 situation on intra-regional trade.

All the countries present during the video conference contributed to discussions on a wide-ranging trade-related agenda in the spirit of "shared interest and a problem-solving approach". They recognised that the pandemic is "likely to have a considerable adverse impact on trade in the Saarc region".

The trade officials stressed that new ways should be identified to sustain and expand intra-regional trade until normal trade channels are restored. "The imperative need to maintain essential trade within the Saarc region was viewed as an important thrust area for favourable consideration," the statement said.

Specific issues addressed during the conference included facilitation of trade through pragmatic solutions such as provisional clearance of imports at preferential duty with suitable conditions, provisional acceptance of digitally signed certificates of origin, acceptance of scanned copies of documents for clearing imports by customs and release of payments by banks, and resolving issues related to exports and imports at land customs stations.

The impact of health issues such as Covid-19 on regional trade and measures to mitigate it emerged as a new focus area for discussion within the larger framework of trade facilitation under Saarc, and the need to enhance the quantum of intra-Saarc trade was highlighted, the statement said.

The seven states that joined the conference proposed to remain in touch through a designated focal point in each country, and the Indian side offered to coordinate this exercise, the statement said.

This will also enable further interaction on ideas and proposed actions for the early restoration of normal trade in the region after movement restrictions related to Covid-19 are lifted.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 2 -- New Delhi

The Indian government has decided to accept contributions from abroad for the Prime Minister's Citizen Relief and Emergency Situations (PM-CARES) fund ,created to carry out relief efforts in the aftermath of the Covid-19 outbreak, and similar emergencies in the future. The decision marks a shift from India;s earlier position of refusing foreign donations during crises.

People familiar with the development said on condition of anonymity the decision was in line with the unprecedented situation created by the Coronavirus outbreak that has resulted in more than 850,000 infections and around 42,000 deaths worldwide.

"The pandemic is unprecedented and when the prime minister spoke to envoys [via video conference on Monday], he asked them to make efforts for contributions towards this fund. A decision has been taken to accept contributions from abroad in the PM-CARES Fund," said one of the people.

The PM-CARES Fund was set up in view of several spontaneous requests from India and abroad for making contributions to support the government's relief efforts in the wake of Covid-19, the people said.

Contributions to the fund can be made by individuals and organisations, both in India and abroad, in view of the expressed interest to contribute to the government's efforts and keeping in mind the "unprecedented nature" of the pandemic, the people said.

In 2018, the government refused all foreign aid, including a reported offer of $100 million from the United Arab Emirates, for disaster relief following floods in Kerala that displaced millions of people. Offers of help from Thailand, Qatar and the Maldives too were declined.

This was in line with a long-standing policy put in place after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, and at the time, the external affairs ministry had said in a statement that the "government is committed to meeting the requirements for relief and rehabilitation through domestic efforts".

The people cited above pointed out that no overseas government had so far come forward to donate to the PM-CARES Fund, which has largely attracted pledges from non-resident Indians (NRIs) and people of Indian origin based in several countries.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has directed the heads of Indian missions around the world to explore the possibility of sourcing medical equipment needed to fight Covid-19 - especially personal protective equipment (PPE) kits, ventilators, and three-ply, surgical and N95 masks - as there is a huge shortage of such products in the country, the people said.

In the case of China, some relief materials were coming to India from independent sources as donations while the mission in Beijing is looking at procuring available equipment on a commercial basis, the people said.

"The embassy in Beijing is working on this and we are looking at various options and sources," said a second person. "There is a huge shortage and we will source materials from wherever they are available."

At the same time, domestic companies are being encouraged by the health and textile ministries to ramp up production of PPE and medical equipment, the people said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 2 -- The United States marked Groundhog Day on Tuesday but the ongoing coronavirus pandemic has forced thousands of people to celebrate the pop culture virtually. Pennsylvania's most famous groundhog, Punxsutawney Phil, saw its own shadow which, according to the legend, meant there will be six more weeks of winter.

What is Groundhog Day?

The annual tradition, which has its origin in a German legend about a furry rodent, is celebrated every year on February 2 in the United States and has been part of its pop culture for many years. The legend of Groundhog Day dictates that if a groundhog emerges on this day from its burrow and sees its own shadow, it will return to its den and the winter will extend for six more weeks. On this day, people hold events around the country and weather reporters Live broadcast the so-called weather prediction.

However, this year has been different due to the ongoing pandemic and social media users have compared the day with the hit 1993 comedy Groundhog Day. In the movie, actor Bill Murray played the character of weatherman Phil who was sent to cover the event for a news channel. After arriving in Punxsutawney town of Pennsylvania, he wakes up the next day and relives it over and over again.

What's the pandemic connection?

At the beginning of the last spring, governments around the world started imposing movement restrictions to curb the spread of coronavirus disease. While vaccines have rolled out in several countries to provide immunity against the disease, social distancing measures are still in place with different variants of virus creating concern for authorities. Social media users said that the pandemic has made every day a Groundhog Day as they are forced to stay at home. They expressed their lockdown fatigue, saying they are experiencing their own private Groundhog Day.

Here are some of the reactions on social media:

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 20 -- The Sars-CoV-2 viruses causing coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has three major strains, but no key mutation specific to India has been found that affects infectiveness or disease severity, said Minister of Health and Science & Technology Harsh Vardhan in his first interview after Covid-19 cases crossed 100,000 in India on Monday. He told Sanchita Sharma that calibrated lockdowns and public health measures have delayed the peaking of the curve in India and prevented the dramatically high numbers predicted by several modelling studies, but warned that how the pandemic progresses now will depend on how closely people follow mobility restrictions, social isolation and personal hygiene norms. Edited excerpts:

When is the pandemic expected to peak in India?

We have successfully managed to delay the peaking of the curve by imposing lockdown and other public health measures in a timely manner. There are several mathematical models which are predicting the course of the pandemic in India, but till now, we have managed to avoid the dramatically high numbers that they predicted. Right now, with the calibrated lockdowns being implemented, we have tried to contain the spread of infection. It is difficult to predict numbers as they will depend on the adherence of restrictions on mobility and intermingling, observance of personal hygiene, and prevention of exposure to infection by people in different areas. Additionally, it will also depend on the proportion of those infected among migrants and travellers from outside and within.

Has community transmission begun in India?

The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined four stages of Covid-19 outbreak: Countries with no cases, countries with sporadic cases; countries with clusters; and countries experiencing larger outbreaks of local transmission (community transmission). How large is an outbreak that constitutes a community transmission has not been defined by WHO, so what people refer to as community transmission differs from country to country.

In India, the virus has come from foreign sources through travellers coming from outside. We generally consider a case to be a 'case of community transmission' when there is no clarity on the source of origin of the infection in a new community. Let me explain again. Community spread in India would mean that cases are occurring in people who did not have any known contact with travellers from overseas infected countries. However, this is not happening, implying that there is no community transmission.

Although there are some clusters of local spread, the numbers being reported are not indicative of community transmission, which would have likely resulted in a larger number of cases given the expanded testing. Central teams have been deployed in 10 states witnessing a high burden of cases to investigate the sites with higher transmission. In addition, 69 districts will be brought under surveillance to understand the burden and disease trends in greater detail.

Is India prepared for the projected rise in cases after work and travel restrictions end?

India has massively scaled up all aspects of preparedness. There are around 535 laboratories across the country, more than one lakh samples are tested per day, and 24,04,267 people have been tested. The testing strategies are constantly being examined in light of emerging evidence. India has also developed ELISA-based antibody testing kits, which will provide testing alternatives.

India now has the capacity to produce over 250,000 PPE units every day. This expansion of capacity is a real success story as we were entirely dependent on imported PPEs in the pre-pandemic period. We have also scaled up the availability of hospital beds, and oxygen supply linked beds, to enable supportive treatment of Covid-19 patients. While there are sufficient ventilators, our goal is to prevent patients from going on ventilators because the global experience shows that once patients go on ventilators, the mortality rate is very high.

Overall, we are focusing on preparedness in the community (physical distancing, phased relaxation of lockdown), augmenting healthcare facilities (more beds, oxygen support, ICU) and public health management measures (surveillance, testing) to ensure that a holistic plan is in place to combat the threat of resurgent infections once the lockdown is lifted in a phased manner at varying levels in different districts.

How many genomic sequences of SARS-CoV2 has India submitted to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID)?

India has contributed around 226 genomic sequences of SARS-CoV-2 so far to the around 25,000 sequences of SARS-CoV-2 that have been shared with unprecedented speed via GISAID. A 1,000-genome sequencing initiative has been launched by Department of Biotechnology (DBT), and 500 are being sequenced by the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR).

What are the findings? Are there any key mutations in the SARS-CoV2 virus causing disease in India?

The key mutations in SARS-Cov-2 virus have been found in spike glycoprotein (D614G, G1124V), nucleocapsid (R203K, G204R), RNA dependent RNA Polymerase (P323L) . The circulating viruses in India belong to three major strains. The majority of our samples belong to A2a and about 15% to A3 genotypes. There are a few samples belonging to genotypes B, B1, B4, and A1a. They do not have any mutation that has been reported to be associated with any disease progression or acquisition so far. So, despite the fact that no key mutation specific to India has been found in the virus and it still continues to be an imported virus strain, we cannot afford to be complacent. We have to remain vigilant and continue tracking the virus to identify emerging quasi-species or strains.

How many states have the SARS-CoV2 genetic samples been sequenced from? Is there any difference in the strains causing infections across states?

Sequences are currently mostly from Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh -- most belong to A2a clade, while some belong to A3 and B1 clades. It is too early to detect major differences. We are trying for a systematic study of viral RNA sequence from different zones of India and correlate with disease severity.

What has been the role of government institutions in the Covid-19 response, including diagnostic, drug and vaccine development?

The focus is on self-reliance. We have ramped up our capacity for developing indigenous testing kits. From being completely dependent on imports, we now have over 20 indigenous manufacturers with a diagnostic kit production capacity of nearly 50 lakh kits per month getting ready by the end of May. This includes indigenous components and reagents.

The government's role has been very proactive in supporting innovation for vaccine development, development of cost-effective diagnostic equipment, as well as drug discovery and repurposing. The Covid Consortium, under DBT-BIRAC (Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council), has supported 70 projects. Support has been also given to medical devices such as ventilators and equipment such as PPEs, N-95 masks etc, and for drugs and vaccine development. Funding start-ups that offer immediate solutions has been fast-tracked.

Some US studies have found hydroxychloroquine to be ineffective against Covid-19? What is India's experience?

The recent study from New York which failed to find any mortality benefits associated with the use of hydroxychloroquine is a retrospective cohort study. There are several caveats in the study which need to be accounted for. First, the design of the study precludes attribution of the causal effect of the use of hydroxychloroquine on the disease outcomes. Second, the recipients of the drug were already suffering from severe disease, thus making the comparative sample groups unfair. Third, the best effect of hydroxychloroquine based strategy is seen when initiated in the mild to moderate disease stage. Several clinical trials are underway, and once their results are declared, we shall have definite evidence of the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine.

Several studies are also underway in India, and as the results emerge, we shall be able to provide more insights into the experiences. However, early reports from the pharmacovigilance programme indicate that there are no unexpected spikes of adverse reactions from the use.

What is the progress on the WHO Solidarity Trial in India?

In India, we plan to randomise at least 1,500 Covid-19 patients over five to six months. The trial has been initiated with 46 randomised Covid-19 patients, symptomatic adults who have been recently hospitalized and have not yet received hydroxychloroquine. The nature of care proposed as part of the randomized trial include providing only local standard of care, administering Remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, Lopinavir / Ritonavir or Lopinavir / Ritonavir with Interferon Beta-1a. So far, around 2,500 people have been randomized globally. Being a five-arm study, large numbers (&gt; 10,000) are required, although there is no cap on sample size. It's not possible to give timeframe for outcomes as the analysis resulting from these trials is global.

Is the effect of BCG vaccination being studied in India?

BCG vaccination has been found to be an immunomodulator in malignancies and also protects against certain infectious diseases. Several high-income countries, which do not have routine BCG vaccination in childhood, have initiated clinical trials of BCG in high-risk groups, especially in health care workers. Currently, there are two ongoing clinical trials in India. Serum Institute of India (in Pune) is conducting a trial of VPM1002 and Cadila is conducting a trial using mycobacterium indicus pranii. However, we have to keep in mind the fact that India has very high rates of BCG vaccination at birth, and this could be an effect modifier or confounder in the results.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 18 -- The government's decision to open the gates for private facilities to test for the coronavirus infection has the potential to urgently scale up the country's testing capacity that experts say is necessary to effectively fight the deadly disease that has claimed 7,500 lives worldwide.

But experts warn that if diagnosis criteria is not relaxed and more people tested, the benefits of allowing private labs might be nullified and India will be left fighting an uphill battle against the highly contagious infection.

Currently, the Indian authorities limit testing only to government facilities, for people with a history of travel abroad, those who have come in close contact with someone testing positive for the virus, as well as health workers. Only those showing symptoms are tested.

But the strict eligibility criteria and limited number of testing centres - 72 in a country with a population of 1.3 billion people - has ensured that many people are finding it difficult to get tested.

Moreover, the need to rope in more labs and private players is made clear by the problems plaguing government testing and sample collection centres, where experts admit there exists a clear infection risk because of long hours of wait and overcrowding.

India currently tests the lowest number of people per capita among major countries grappling with the coronavirus outbreak: a mere 8.6 tests per million, compared with 4,831 per million in south Korea, 2,820 in China and 533 in the United Kingdom, which has been criticised for not testing enough and reversed its "herd immunity" policy after grim projections.

"We do need to do more testing. I have made that clear. You don't know what you are dealing with until you test. What is the harm in testing?" asked Dr Gagandeep Kang, director of Translational Health Science and Technology Institute.

Even in the national capital, patients have complained of many problems. Overcrowded hospitals have turned away travellers from affected countries on the basis that they didn't show symptoms, even though research has shown that symptoms may take up to 14 days to appear.

"I was impressed by the response of the Indian government, till I reached the sample collection centre. I have been standing here for over two hours and now I just feel like running away," said a 27-year-old Australian national, who was standing outside the sample collection centre at Dr Ram Manohar Lohia hospital. She had travelled to Delhi for work.

On Tuesday morning, the Australian woman called the government helpline number and informed them she was fatigued and had a sore throat. "They came to my hotel and picked me up in an ambulance. All the health care workers were in complete protective gear. It was scary but it was also good. Then, they just dropped me here with my bags and asked me to wait," she said.

For almost an hour, she couldn't figure out what to do because none of the hospital staff posted outside the sample collection centre spoke English. "They took me inside the hospital to find someone who could explain what I needed to do," she said.

If she had the infection, she may have infected people inside the hospital.

And it is not just her. In the corridor outside the two rooms collecting the samples at the collection centre, close to 70 people sat next to each other waiting for up to two hours. Open on all sides, several people passed by this "restricted area" all day round. There was no check on who entered the corridor.

RML hospital collects nearly 70 samples for Covid-19 every day. But the corridor outside has hundreds of people waiting. Many were likely to be turned away after hours of waiting, and potentially exposing themselves to the coronavirus infection.

"The person I brought to the hospital today has been given the token number of 318, I think," said the ambulance driver stationed outside the centre. It will be hours before she gets her turn.

Safdarjung hospital collects samples only for suspected patients admitted to its isolation ward. Sample collection facilities will soon start at 14 Delhi government and corporation hospitals.

"Who has the time to wait for three hours? We have a flight tonight and we just wanted to get tested to get a certificate declaring that we are virus-free. And, we were told to come to this centre but if we sit around here we are more likely to get the virus," said Ravi Shingari, an Australian citizen of Indian origin. He and his wife travelled to London before coming to India.

Some wait it out, only to be refused at the door. "In the last two hours, I have seen around 10 people being refused the test after they reach to the front of the line. They must have been waiting for a couple of hours. And, what if one of these people actually has the disease? That's why I am waiting my turn here a little farther away," said one of the persons waiting near the sample collection centre.

Getting information on testing is difficult on the helplines: only one of the 30 calls made by the HT reporter to the toll-free number connected.The government helpline advises people with cough and fever but no travel history to maintain personal hygiene and get in touch with district surveillance officers or a local physician.

Experts say cramped government facilities pose a clear danger.

"This is an infection risk. We are advocating social distancing and here are people who need to get tested for the disease sitting close to each other. The government has to make arrangements for a large waiting area.. or start more sample collection centres because clearly there is a need," said Dr MC Mishra, former director of the All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.

People who didn't need the tests should not show up, he added. "Someone needs to be stationed outside the centres to ask people who do not need testing to leave rather than them waiting for hours before leaving," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 29 -- China has said it abides by the Line of Actual Control (LAC) as proposed by Premier Zhou Enlai to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in a letter dated November 7, 1959 - the first time in decades that it has clearly spelled out its stand on the notional Sino-India boundary by reiterating a position that New Delhi has consistently rejected since it was first made 61 years ago.

Beijing's position, in an exclusive statement to HT amid the ongoing border friction in eastern Ladakh, is a reiteration of the long-existing differences on the boundary question and a sign that the ongoing military standoff is unlikely to be resolved soon.

Also read: Eye on China, India goes for Heron tech upgrade, missile-firing Guardian drones

In the statement in Mandarin, the Chinese foreign ministry, while blaming the Indian Army for the ongoing tension since May and for the June 15 clash in eastern Ladakh's Galwan valley, said the clash was an "unfortunate" event.

"Firstly, China-India border LAC is very clear, that is the LAC on November 7, 1959. China announced it in the 1950s, and the international community including India are also clear about it," the ministry said on Friday.

"However, ever since this year, the Indian Army has continued to arrive and illegally cross the border, unilaterally expanding the scope of actual control. This is the source of tension on the border issues. The key to disengagement between the two armies is India's withdrawal of all illegal cross-border personnel and equipment," it added.

It's the first time in recent years that Beijing has said in unequivocal terms that it still goes by the 1959 LAC. It did, however, make a passing reference during the 2017 Doklam crisis, when the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying spoke of the "1959 LAC" while blaming Indian troops for a scuffle with Chinese soldiers near Pangong lake in Ladakh in August that year.

Also read| Brahmos, Akash and Nirbhay: India rolls out its missiles to counter Chinese threat

India has repeatedly and consistently rejected China's allegations that Indian troops crossed over to the Chinese side of the LAC in eastern Ladakh, asserting that New Delhi has always taken a responsible approach towards border management and maintaining peace and tranquillity in the border areas.

The Indian ministry of external affairs did not respond to requests for a comment on the fresh Chinese statement.

The November 7, 1959 date mentioned in the Beijing statement was in reference to a letter written by Zhou to Nehru - the two leaders under whom the two countries experienced the best and the worst of bilateral diplomatic ties. "In order to maintain effectively the status quo of the border between the two countries, to ensure the tranquillity of the border regions and to create a favourable atmosphere for a friendly settlement of the boundary question, the Chinese government proposes that the armed forces of China and India each withdraw 20km at once from the so-called McMahon Line in the east, and from the line up to which each side exercises actual control in the west," Zhou wrote.

Also read: How Chinese propaganda is using the 1962 war to shape public opinion

A year later, during his high-profile visit to New Delhi in 1960, Zhou had used the phrase "LAC" during a press conference. "There exists between the two counties a line of actual control up to which each side exercises administrative jurisdiction," he said as part of a six-point proposal to maintain peace at the border.

Zhou went on to say that both sides should keep to the ".line of actual control and should not put forward territorial claims as pre-conditions, but individual adjustments may be made".

In 1962, when India and China fought a war between October and November, Nehru rejected the definition. "There is no sense or meaning in the Chinese offer to withdraw twenty kilometers from what they call 'line of actual control," he said. The Chinese Premier responded to Nehru, defining the LAC - again as per November 7, 1959.

The LAC was "basically still the line of actual control as existed between the Chinese and Indian sides on 7 November 1959: To put it concretely, in the eastern sector it coincides in the main with the so- called McMahon Line, and in the western and middle sectors it coincides in the main with the traditional customary line which has consistently been pointed out by China", Zhou said in reply to Nehru.

The phrase LAC was used in the 1993 Sino-India "Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and tranquillity along the LAC in the India-China Border Areas." At New Delhi's insistence the expression wasn't qualified in terms of whether it was the 1959 one.

Former Indian ambassador to China, Gautam Bambawale said the ".significance (of the statement) is that they are telling India that the LAC is the line of November 7, 1959, as explained by Zhou Enlai to Nehru in his letter. That's it. They are going by that." Bambawale added: "We have never accepted it. There were several pockets of disagreements and the largest number of pockets (of disagreements) were in Ladakh. Obviously, we did not accept the offer." He added that New Delhi has conveyed this to Beijing in "no uncertain terms".

A leading China-hand, Bambawale had also served as ambassador in Bhutan, the only other country, other than India, with which Beijing has a land-territorial dispute.

Bambawale said following the Chinese understanding of the LAC, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is attempting to hold on to the ground positions right up to it as per the 1959 LAC.

It is clear that the current aggression at the border shown by the Chinese since May is to attempt to control territories up to where Beijing defines its LAC.

Officials in diplomatic circles, who asked not to be named, told HT that India had pointed out its disagreements with the 1959 LAC even during meetings of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) on India-China Border Affairs established in 2012 as a mechanism to consult and coordinate the management of India-China border areas.

Little is known about the differences in perceptions on the LAC in the western sector, the most troublesome. Maps have only been exchanged for the middle sector until now.

One of the officials above told HT that the LAC clarification process for the western sector broke down "an hour into the meeting" in 2002. Since then, the entire process - which was then an Expert Group headed by a director general in MEA and deputy director general in the Chinese foreign ministry -- has been stalled. "The western section was drawn by Indian surveyor (WH) Johnson, who privately assigned more than 30,000 square kilometres of land in the Aksai Chin region of China to British India. This is the historical origin of the territorial dispute between China and India in the western section," Wang Dehua, a South Asia expert at Shanghai Municipal Centre for International Studies, said.

"China hopes India will give more concessions in the western sector while Beijing could give more concessions (to India) in the eastern sector," Wang added.

The Chinese foreign ministry statement blamed New Delhi for the tension, saying: ".the right and wrong of the Galwan Valley conflict is very clear. We didn't want to see what had happened. We hope the media doesn't hype this unfortunate event". The ministry did not respond to the question on the number casualties that PLA suffered during the brutal hand-to-hand clash with Indian army soldiers on June 15.

The ministry's statement referred to the recent foreign ministers' and military talks held between India and China.

"Since the bilateral meeting between the foreign ministers of China and India in Moscow on September 10, the two sides have actively engaged in dialogue and consultation based on the five-point declaration," it said.

Referring to commander-level talks, it said "constructive measures to stabilise the border situation were taken. We hope the two sides walk in the same direction and push the frontline troops to disengage as soon as possible". Asked to comment on reports arguing Beijing is escalating tension with neighbours to divert attention from a badly hit economy, the ministry said though hit by the pandemic, the economy is reviving.

"Due to Covid-19, China's economy has been affected but it has regained growth and has contributed to the recovery of the global economy, the statement added.

On relations with neighbours, the ministry said: "The relationship between China and its neighbouring countries is generally good. China has always insisted on resolving differences between neighbouring countries through friendly consultations."

Sameer Patil, a fellow for international security studies at Gateway House, said the statement indicated that China was clearly adopting a maximalist position that disregarded all the developments that have taken place since 1959, including the bilateral boundary talks, mechanisms and agreements on peace and tranquillity on the LAC.

"When the Special Representatives mechanism was set up, this wasn't their position. Even though this matter [China's stance on the LAC of 1959] may have been known, it was not reiterated when important bilateral mechanisms and arrangements for handling the border dispute were set up," he said.

"This reflects China's obdurate attitude towards the border dispute. Reiterating this maximalist position amid the five-month-long standoff shows China has no intention of going in for an early solution to the problem," Patil added.

(With inputs from Rezaul H Laskar)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 5 -- Coronavirus originated from China's Wuhan last year. As it began to step away from mainland China, the deadly contagion left behind over 80,000 patients and killed more than 3,000 people in the country.

As of today, nearly 1.2 million people are affected by the virus and a whopping 60,000 have been killed. The virus is estimated to account for a record number of patients and deaths in the United States. European nations like Italy, Spain, France and Germany are already reeling.

Global bodies like the World Health Organization hailed South Korea for its strategy to contain the virus spread. Another administration which has done laudable work in mitigating the crisis within its territory is Taiwan.

Taiwan, although so close to mainland China (just 81 miles off coast), has managed to keep the ugly head of Covid-19 from rising within its territory.

According to a report, as the news of coronavirus' emergence surfaced in Wuhan last year, officials at Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) acted quickly.

Stanford expert Jason Wang, who is an associate professor of pediatrics at Stanford Medicine, says the outcome is a result of Taiwan using "new technology and a robust pandemic prevention plan put into place at the 2003 SARS outbreak".

Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) was set up after the SARS pandemic and became part of its mechanism to tackle large outbreaks.

While world economies were mulling over what actions to take and when, Taiwan was already responding with a Covid-19 strategy in place. Owing to its proximity to mainland China, it was supposed to be one of the worst-hit regions by coronavirus.

Taiwan quickly moved to put travel curbs in place, checking its ports and introducing stringent punishments for violators of quarantine orders. Aggressive testing also helped Taiwan deal with the pandemic efficiently.

Taiwanese authorities came into action as soon as the WHO was notified of a pneumonia of unknown cause in the Chinese city of Wuhan in December.

In the first week of January itself, Taiwanese authorities issued a notification for individuals who had travelled to or from Wuhan in the past 14 days and reported fever or symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection.

Those displaying symptoms were quarantined, tested for over 20 viruses.

"Taiwan leveraged its national health insurance database and integrated it with its immigration and customs database to begin the creation of big data for analytics; it generated real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and clinical symptoms to aid case identification. It also used new technology, including QR code scanning and online reporting of travel history and health symptoms to classify travelers' infectious risks based on flight origin and travel history in the past 14 days," Wang says in a paper published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The administration prepared a list of 124 action items to devise a strategy against coronavirus.

After nearly three months into the Covid-19 crisis, Taiwan has reported less than 400 coronavirus cases and witnessed 5 deaths as per the data by Johns Hopkins University.

The lessons that world economies can learn from Taiwan's Covid-19 plan are enormous. Taiwan's strategy finds its foundation in early recognition of the crisis.

With "daily briefings to the public, and simple health messaging, the government was able to reassure the public by delivering timely, accurate, and transparent information regarding the evolving epidemic," Wang writes in her paper.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 1 -- Railway minister Piyush Goyal on Sunday rejected allegations that special trains meant to ferry migrant workers back home were mismanaged and some of them took wrong routes and said every single train reached its desired destination, with only a fraction diverted, and in a five-day period that saw a rush of trains headed for East Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, to avert congestion.

Several Opposition leaders, including Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, have alleged that the trains, labelled "Shramik Specials", were running late by days. Others have alleged that a large number of trains was diverted. According to data collected by the Railway Protection Force and reported by HT, around 80 travellers on these have died, although, to be sure, some of them, according to the force's own report, had pre-existing health conditions.

The railway minister said the allegations on widespread delays and diversions were "completely baseless and wrong". "Almost all trains up to May 19 were before time... (So far) only 71 out of 4,040, which is 1.75% trains, were diverted. Charges like 'kahin se nikle, kahin chale gaye' (they left from somewhere and went off somewhere else), all that is nonsense. Every train reached the destination, only took a slightly longer route to ease the congestion and keep the flow of trains running. Otherwise, I would have to stop the operation," Goyal told Hindustan Times in an interview. It was only between May 20 and May 25 that a rush caused a congestion and resulted in diversions and delays, he added. And no train has taken seven or nine days to reach its destination as is being claimed, the minister said.

So far, 4,040 Shramik Specials - necessitated by a national lockdown brought on by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) - have carried more than 5.4 million passengers. The minister said almost 80% of the trains were travelling to Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, leading to congestion on the limited routes. And stations which received around three trains a day were being asked to deal with many more.

On being asked why the special trains for migrant workers began operating only by May 1, Goyal said: "The purpose of the lockdown was containment and the idea was that we have to break the coronavirus chain and, therefore, starting the trains any earlier would have been counterproductive. The idea was that all migrants should stay where they are... We also requested states to ensure that they were well-looked after."

"It needed that five weeks at least to break that coronavirus chain but then, we found that people are getting very anxious... We decided on May 1 to start this and we continued to ramp it up," the Union minister said.

The Indian Railways said on Sunday it will begin operation of 200 special trains from June 1 and more than 145,000 passengers will travel on the first day as the lockdown measures are relaxed over the coming weeks.

Goyal said that the reasons for delays of most of the special migrant trains were not the journeys, but "at the end". "There were only seven places where maximum trains were headed... Trains were just bunched up. Local administrations were taking precautions, taking three hours for each train or two hours for each train to disembark. Fewer platforms were there. So the bunching and delay happened because of the congestion at the end..."

He said beyond a point, states demanded more stoppages for the trains that were initially origin-to-destination. They couldn't bring people to the stations in time, the minister said, adding that this caused bunching up. "To ease that congestion, we took a considered view and diverted 71 trains."

These trains, he said, took a little longer to reach their destinations but that they took "seven to nine days" was a gross exaggeration. "No train took seven or nine days," he said.

The minister added that despite the diversions, and eateries being closed due to the lockdown, the railways provided food and water, five-six times in some journeys, in the diverted trains. He said 11.9 million meals were provided by the railways in addition to 5.4 million of them provided by the states at the point of embarkation. The railways also provided 15 million water bottles other than those provided by the states. And the states also provided food when the migrants disembarked, Goyal pointed out.

On the issue of deaths - there have been about 80 deaths on board the Shramik Special trains between May 9 and May 27, according to data from the Railway Protection Force - Goyal said they found that in all cases, there were existing ailments. "Some of the stories are sought to be portrayed as if people died of hunger or starvation. I can say with confidence that no one died of hunger," he said, adding that in long-distance travel, some deaths occur even in normal operations.

He added that Railways has been transparent about the deaths, and insisted on compiling a list of them, and finding out causes even as news reports suggested that "eight or nine migrants" died on trains. The real number has emerged only because of this, he suggested.

"We are very concerned... My heart goes out to the families (of those who have died)," the minister said.

Goyal said some of the deaths could have been prevented with better medical screening but the doctors who were dealing with a heavy flow of people could not be blamed. He added that 36 pregnant women who were expecting to deliver were allowed to travel in the trains and they went into labour in the course of the journey. "They should have never have been on the train."

Praising the efforts of railway employees across the country, the minister said: "In such adverse circumstances, moving 54 lakh people, with all the associated health protocols, is certainly not an ordinary operation. And in the extraordinary circumstances, I will say that the railway employees put in their heart and soul... They are as much front-line corona warriors..."

The minister said the special trains will run for as long as there is a demand from states. "We have been asking states... The current demand today is 250-300 trains. Maximum demand is now to West Bengal and to Odisha." But the flow is also starting in the reverse direction, he suggested.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 8 -- In a historic moment on Saturday night, Democrat Joe Biden defeated Donald Trump to be projected as the 46th president of the United States of America while Kamala Harris became the first American of Indian descent to be named for the vice-presidential post in the US. As soon as congratulatory wishes started streaming in after their US election victory, the winner duo lost no time in changing their Twitter bios.

While their cover pictures reflected the same blue background and assurance of "Keep the faith!", Biden's updated Twitter bio read, "President-Elect, husband to @DrBiden, proud father & grandfather. Ready to build back better for all Americans (sic)." With promises to reverse some of the decisions of the outgoing Trump rule, Biden is set to be the oldest president in US history at 77 years of age.

On the other hand, Harris' new bio on the micro-blogging site read, "Vice President-Elect of the United States. Senator, Wife, Momala, Auntie. Fighting for the people. She/her (sic)."This win marks the historic event of an Indian-origin woman stepping inside the White House as the Vice President for the first time ever.

As per the latest reports, the Biden administration is gearing up to reform temporary visas and create a new visa category that allows cities and counties to petition for higher levels of immigrants to support their growth. In June, Trump had temporarily suspended the H-1B visas along with other types of foreign work visas until the end of 2020 to protect American workers from unemployment aggravated by Covid-19 pandemic.

If Biden administration's new rule is successful in increasing the number of high-skilled visas, tens of thousands of Indian professionals will be benefitted.

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 24 -- The Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB) in Delhi has been working with four states to set up "megalabs" that can sequence up to 3,000 viral genomes of the Sars-CoV-2 that causes the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). The states, which are expected to make separate announcements to the effect, weren't named.

Not only will genome sequencing be more accurate than the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test at detecting infection in clinical samples, but the data will also be used for routine surveillance of the virus and where it originates to help the government in devising more effective strategies to control its spread. RT-PCR is now considered the gold standard for diagnosis of the coronavirus disease.

"The megalabs will automate genome sequencing, allowing us to process a large number of samples - a couple of thousand - a day. This is being permanently used for routine surveillance in Kerala and has been able to give us very useful information. As we will be sequencing the complete genome, the results of the test will be more accurate than the RT-PCR test, which looks for certain identifying parts of the genome to say whether a person has the virus or not. It will also be immune to any mutation by the virus," said Dr Anurag Agarwal, director of the IGIB.

The entire sequencing process will not cost more than Rs 2,000 per sample and can be easily implemented by state governments, Dr. Agarwal said. In comparison, a patient pays Rs 2,400 for an RT-PCR test at a private laboratory in Delhi.

Kerala, where the machine used in the megalabs was first field-tested in August, is one of the four states that would be using genetic sequencing data for routine surveillance of Covid-19 cases. The state has already benefitted from genetic sequencing data from IGIB for one of is projects. An analysis of 200 samples from the state revealed that most of the infections in the state were brought in by domestic inter-state travellers rather than international ones, according to the researchers.

"Analysis of the genetic sequencing data collected by our clinical partner from three districts in northern Kerala shows that most of the infections in the state were brought in by domestic travellers, with three distinct clusters from infections imported from Odisha, Maharashtra, and Karnataka. This also validates the quarantine norms that the state followed with foreign travellers, preventing the importation of the disease from other countries," said Dr Sridhar Sivasubbu, head of business development at IGIB and a member of the Indian CoV2 Genomic and Genetic Epidemiology consortium.

He added, "The Kerala government has now committed to continuing the study in all 14 districts as part of regular surveillance using the megalab. We are working with three other states to set up similar labs. The constant surveillance will tell the government of the origin of clusters of infections, helping them in developing strategies to prevent it at the source."

The researchers found that 94.6% of the genomes sequenced in Kerala spread locally after three distinct introductions - the K1 group where a traveller from Maharashtra introduced it in mid-July; K2 from Odisha, introduced in the first week of March; and K3 from Karnataka, introduced in the beginning of April.

The researchers also found a variation in the S-gene - which encodes the defining spike protein the virus uses to enter human cells - associated with the higher infectivity of the virus. There were also five variants in areas of the genetic sequence that are used as probes for the RT-PCR test, which might result in reduced efficacy of the tests, according to the research paper that is currently on the pre-print server BioRxiv.

The routine surveillance using genetic sequencing of the virus will also help in detecting cases of re-infection. IGIB is the first institute in the country to have confirmed eight cases of re-infection - two in Noida, two in Delhi, and four in Mumbai.

"The cases of re-infection were detected in health-care workers through routine surveillance that allowed us to sequence genomes of the viruses during both the infections," said Dr Sivasubbu.

Dr Agarwal said: "We used to think re-infections were very rare, but we are seeing a few cases now. We were able to establish re-infection in at least eight cases where samples from both the infections were available, we could ensure that there was sufficient genetic differences in both the viruses, and where we were clearly able to show that neither of the samples were positive due to possible contamination. This makes us think that re-infection is not very rare {as thought earlier} but very uncommon."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- With fashion industry hit harshly by the pandemic, everyone's speculating the Covid-19 aftermath. Will fashion embrace austere minimalism or succumb to emotional exuberance? The aftermath of the Spanish flu (1918-1919) ushered in the roaring '20s which became the metaphor for a decadent and free-spirited attitude. After World War II, Christian Dior shook couture out of its slumber by introducing the full-skirted New Look in 1947. Will history repeat itself or will we see the emergence of a new aesthetic? Designers across the board seem to be divided about the emerging style vocabulary post pandemic.

Designer Anamika Khanna opines that she would perhaps not put excess and exuberance in the same sentence. "Exuberance will be a huge part of fashion in any form, sometimes in minimalism and sometimes the opposite. The common denominator would be a consciousness, even in extravagance. A consciousness of investing into rather than whimsical buying and a consciousness on the origin and quality," says Anamika. She observes that there will be a need to feel beautiful, the '20s are seeping in and in the Indian context, perhaps in bits. "But for sure, the spirit of the '20s will be back," she adds.

Designer Anamika Khanna opines that she would perhaps not put excess and exuberance in the same sentence ()

On the other hand, designer Tarun Tahiliani is of the opinion that the excess associated with the flapper era won't make a comeback and that is the whole point of this period. "This is a moment given to us to introspect those exact consumption habits. The world is in a different place and man has understood he is not invincible!. The world will no longer be the same, at least for the coming future and people, too, have realised the value of consuming quality over quantity. We are realising the strength in what is homegrown, locally accessible and the difference between what is sustainable. I hope people truly utilise this time to go inward and make a change on a fundamental level,* says Tarun.

Designer Tarun Tahiliani is of the opinion that the excess associated with the flapper era won't make a comeback and that is the whole point of this period (File Photo: Sarang Gupta)

Designer Nikhil Thampi seconds that. "The '20s was all about celebration, one to have survived the pandemic and secondly the world came out much evolved and the economy then supported the exuberant lifestyle. When it comes to India, I seriously doubt the exuberance coming back. People are going to be more alert and less emotional when it comes to buying luxury products.

There will be a major shift in paradigm and in attitude. The economy is going to take a long time to stabilise affecting the lifestyle of many. I do see the return of sensible shopping, people now on will gravitate towards more classic and investment clothing pieces as compared to trend based fashion, which will last time a long time and is versatile in its approach," says Nikhil.

Follow HT Life&Style fore more updates.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- The Union government on Wednesday informed Parliament that 255 Indian citizens were infected by the novel coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in Iran, one of the countries worst hit by the infection. Even as the government has evacuated hundreds of Indians from China, where the infection originated, and other countries including Iran, official data shows that a large number of Indians abroad may be vulnerable to the virus.

According to data compiled by the United Nations in 2019, India was the leading country of origin of international migrants in the world. It estimated that a total of 17.5 million Indian migrants lived across the world, forming more than 6% of the world's total migrant population.

Data on overseas Indians compiled by the Union ministry of external affairs (MEA) in December 2018 showed that there were more than 13 million non-resident Indians (NRIs, those holding an Indian passport but ordinarily residing outside India) and nearly 18 million persons of Indian origin (PIOs, those who or whose ancestors were Indian nationals but have a passport of any foreign country) across the world.

Even as some of the Indians living outside the country would have voluntarily travelled back home or been evacuated by the government in view of the virus outbreak, coming to India has become difficult with multiple airlines cancelling international flights and the government imposing travel restrictions.

This leaves many Indians living in the worst-hit countries more vulnerable to the virus. According to MEA data, more than 15% NRIs (nearly 2 million people) were in 10 countries that have by far recorded the highest number of positive coronavirus cases, including China. Of these, the highest number of NRIs were living in the United States at nearly 1.3 million.

There were more than 300,000 NRIs in Italy, Iran, Spain and Germany -- the four worst-hit countries outside China. Also, more than 86% NRIs Indians lived in countries where at least 100 positive cases of coronavirus have been confirmed.

In some countries, mainly in the Arabian region, Indians comprise a significantly large share of international migrant population, according to the UN data. For instance, 43% of all international migrants in Bahrain, where 256 people have been found Covid-19 positive, were Indians.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 20 -- A Covid-19 super spreader could have aided the rapid spread of more than 200 infections linked to the Xinfadi fresh food market in the southwestern district of Fengtai in Beijing, experts have said.

New infections linked to a single market indicates the sign of a super spreader,Yang Zhanqiu, deputy director of the pathogen biology department at Wuhan University, told the state media.

The speculation on the presence of a super spreader - or an infected human passing on the infection to others - comes in the backdrop of another 22 new cases of Covid-19 in Beijing for June 19, taking the caseload to 205 since June 11.

Follow latest updates on coronavirus here

A new case related to the outbreak in neighbouring province Hebei was also reported.

More tests were needed to track a super spreader, the experts said.

Michale Ryan, WHO's emergencies chief, said a super spreading event could have amplified the spread of the new outbreak in Beijing.

"You get a few cases occurring and it then is a super spreading event or something happening where there's a large amplification of the disease. And when that happens, you want to avoid that first amplification turning back into community transmission," he said at a press conference in London.

Ryan said China had shared coronavirus sequences from its latest outbreak with the global community and says it appears the virus was imported to Beijing from strains circulating in Europe.

Ryan noted that "strains and viruses have moved around the world" throughout the pandemic.

Analysis of the genetic sequences so far suggests that the virus spread to people in China from other humans instead of jumping from animals directly into humans.

Click here for complete coronavirus cases

Ryan said a detailed investigation into the recent Beijing outbreak was needed to find out how the imported cases sparked such a large cluster.

"This coronavirus (in China's latest outbreak) looks very much like it's of human origin," Ryan said.

Ryan said it was essential to understand how the virus spread so quickly and what conditions in the market-included crowded workers, air conditioning and the presence of water-may have helped.

"The environment itself may have facilitated the spread of disease, at least initially," he said.

"That's we've seen that in meatpacking plants," he said, adding: "We've seen that all over the world. So what is it about this environment that allows the disease to amplify that setting?"

The WHO official said that Beijing has done well to control the new outbreak from spreading.

Illustrating the good examples of Germany, Japan and South Korea, Ryan said: "I think our colleagues in Beijing as well are mounting a very large-scale response ... in an attempt to prevent that from getting out of hand," emphasising the importance of rapid detection, investigation and suppression of clusters of cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 21 -- The global disruption unleashed by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has led to an uptick in the use of social media platforms such as WhatsApp, Facebook, TikTok and Twitter. Facebook's usage, for example, has increased by as much as 50% in countries hardest hit by Covid-19, whereas the Twitter usage in India has gone up by 30% between early-February and end-March. With the lockdown likely to continue in some form or other, the reliance on social media is likely to rise further.

This has, however, exacerbated pre-existing challenges around curbing misinformation. Some forms of misinformation, such as a motivational quote misattributed to industrialist Ratan Tata, may be benign, but they can often have severe consequences. In April, 10 people in Andhra Pradesh were found in a semi-conscious state after they followed a "home remedy tip" for the coronavirus they found on TikTok. Similarly, misinformation about the role of specific communities in spreading the virus can further deepen the social divide.

Tackling misinformation is a very delicate dance that requires us to traverse a narrow corridor between accurate information and free speech. As many as seven countries including Egypt, Malaysia and China have brought in legislation to control fake news, and almost all of them have been accused of committing excesses. Sensing the danger such steps can invite, an independent European Union committee has advised against bringing laws to curb misinformation.

There are no easy responses, however. Society needs to build resilience and infrastructure to be able to tackle this scourge. It calls for a holistic national strategy, with clear roles for social media platforms, governments and individuals.

Under intense pressure from governments, leading social media platforms have announced some measures to curb misinformation. For example, Facebook has partnered with the International Fact-Checking Network to provide flash grants for fact-checkers fighting coronavirus-linked misinformation. WhatsApp has introduced features that slow down misinformation by restricting the "frequently forwarded" messages to one chat at a time. Twitter has put in place a system that attempts to identify and remove instances of Covid-19-related misinformation.

These measures are welcome, but not enough. In addition to expanding and intensifying the measures already in place, social media platforms must introduce more sophisticated tools, which, for example, sorts and ranks verified news or has a better pattern recognition capacity to remove highly deceiving-in-nature "deep fake" images and audios. This should be prioritised especially in India, where a lot of social media content is audio-visual and in regional languages.

In such a crisis, the government, with its unmatched reach, perceived reliability and trust, has an indispensable role to play. As of now, it has reached out to platforms to remove users spreading misinformation, and, on the other side, has issued public advisories.

Learning from the best practices employed in other countries to curb fake news, the government should consider implementing these three ideas.

First, it should make fighting misinformation a jan andolan (mass movement) by involving people, much as it did with the Swachh Bharat Mission for sanitation. The Australian government's "stop and consider" campaign to tackle political misinformation employs the same idea.

Second, it should create a non-partisan national task force that serves as a "rapid response mechanism" to coordinate among public and private agencies. This was pioneered in Canada in the run-up to its 2019 election.

Third, the government can explore creating forums for citizens to receive accurate information. It has already launched a WhatsApp chatbot to provide accurate information on Covid-19. It can create a fact-checking unit that provides accurate information to the public through a website. Mexico created a government-run platform, "verificado notimex", which employs a network of fact-checkers.

But, above all this, citizens have the most important role in curbing misinformation. Social media gives each of us immense power. It can be used as a platform for citizen-led mass movements as seen during the agitation against corruption during the last decade.

Since out-of-context images are a major source of misinformation, citizens can be trained to use reverse search image tools such as RevEye and TinEye to locate their origin. Videos present an even higher level of complexity, but tools like InVID have begun to make a difference. In general, we should verify the accuracy of information by looking up a reliable source before forwarding it.

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have shown that posts that trigger an emotional response are shared more - that vulnerability is exactly what fake news targets. In short, if a story is too good, too funny, too infuriating, too sweet, or too outrageous, it is probably likely to be untrue.

Subhashish Bhadra and Varad Pande work at Omidyar Network India, an investment firm that invests in bold entrepreneurs who help create a meaningful life for every Indian

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 4 -- Minister of state for external affairs (MEA) and parliamentary affairs, V Muraleedharan, spoke to Hindustan Times about brings Indians back from abroad, foreigners stranded in India, and relief being sent by India to other countries, among other issues.

MEA had a daunting task of evacuating Indian citizens from overseas. How did you go about it?A lot of Indians who were abroad have been brought home; the last such flight came from Iran. We have been carrying out evacuations, but since international travel has stalled, and there is a lockdown in India, we have through our high commissions and embassies ensured that food and other necessities of people of Indian origin are taken care of. In fact there are between 700-800 Indians abroad who are infected by the virus, even their needs are being taken care of.

We get a lot of emails and requests from people who want to come home, some are unwell, some have bereavements in their families, but since international travel is affected so we cannot do selective evacuation. Embassies and high commissions have been asked to step up; they have also been helping people whose visas have expired. It is not their job, but they are helping people renew their visas as well.

How is India helping in the relocation of foreign nationals stranded across the country?For foreign nationals who are in India, we have already started a portal where they can register and we can plan for their evacuation. A lot of people from countries such as Germany, the UK and the US have already been evacuated. Governments of some countries sought our help in getting their nationals who were stuck in distant places to reach the airports in Mumbai, Delhi or Kochi; that assistance we could provide after coordinating with the home ministry and the local police - we helped them reach the airport from where they could then be evacuated to their respective countries.

How exactly is India helping other countries? We've sent help to Maldives.Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been in discussion with heads of states; he had a meeting with the members of the Saarc nations and G20; he also spoke to French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday (expert teams of the two countries will actively share information on measures to prevent the spread of coronavirus as well as about ongoing research on treatment and vaccines.) Union Minister for external affairs S Jaishankar has also spoken to his US counterpart Mike Pompeo (on how to combat the international crisis, including strengthening global pharmaceutical and healthcare manufacturing and supply chains). The PM also addressed the heads of 130 missions. Wherever we can offer help and provide assistance, we're going to do that.

What is the status of relief efforts by India to the neighbouring countries?

Being a member of Saarc, PM Modi has already announced the setting up of a Covid-19 emergency fund with India making an initial contribution of $10 million. Countries such as Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives have already made the contributions. These countries are again collaborating in whatever ways to fight the pandemic.

What is the initial assessment of the lockdown?The overall impact has been good because people have appreciated the decisive action of the PM. Because of his address on TV, a lot of people understood the seriousness of the situation. His word carries weight and people have faith in him.

The economic impact is an important issue, and the second is the migration of workers. The government will have to work on these. Some groups [of exporters] have had a discussion with the commerce minister pointing out how India could lose markets if restricted resumption of services export services is not started. But we will all have to bear the impact of the pandemic. However, some international financial agencies have said that except China, India and Indonesia, which will have growth in the whole financial year, other countries will be in recession.

The challenges now are to ensure that the delivery of essential goods is carried without any hiccups. The railways,for instance, is transporting all essential goods, but the workers to carry the load may not be permitted by the police to leave their homes. We will have to find a way out; those in the government and in the police, particularly at the lower levels, will have to be a bit more discerning and understand the nuances of the lockdown.

There was criticism from the Opposition that Parliament should have been adjourned earlier?Parliament was on because at that moment there was a sense that adjourning the House will create a situation of panic. The Prime Minister had said 'no' to panic and 'yes' to precautions. We had already taken steps such as banning visitors from Parliament. The message was that life has to go on but with precautions. After the "Janta curfew" on Marcch 22, and when an escalation of cases began, it was decided that there will be a locked down. After the Lok Sabha passed the finance Bill on March 23, a lockdown was announced on the 24th, in that way the timing was perfect; it was neither too late nor too early.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
LONDON, April 29 -- An Indian-origin London-based man has been jailed for eight months after he spat at police custody staff after lying about having Covid-19 because he was "angry", Scotland Yard said on Tuesday.

Karan Singh, 23, pleaded guilty at the Croydon Crown court to three counts of assault on an emergency worker, use of threatening, abusive, insulting words, behaviour to cause harassment, alarm, distress and possession of a class B drug (cannabis).

He was sentenced immediately to four months' imprisonment. He was also sentenced to an additional four months' jail, to run consecutively, for being in breach of a suspended sentence - making his total sentence eight months.

The police said on March 14, officers were on patrol when they spotted Singh sitting in a car in a driveway in Croydon. Officers recognised Singh as being disqualified from driving and so they approached the car and spoke to him.

Singh denied he was disqualified from driving and said he had been given his licence back. As officers were speaking to Singh, they noticed a strong smell of cannabis coming from him and the vehicle. Officers asked him about the smell and he admitted to smoking cannabis.

As one of the officers began explaining the grounds for a search under the Misuse of Drugs Act, Singh attempted to start the engine of the vehicle and make off from police. The vehicle stalled and officers were able to detain him.

A snap bag of cannabis was found and Singh admitted to having cannabis for personal use. Singh was arrested and when he was taken to a south London police station, he was said to have been verbally abusive to the interviewing officers. Following the interview, Singh became aggressive and said he would not go back to his cell. He had to be physically taken back by a custody sergeant and PC, with a DC and designated detention officer (DDO) also stepping in to support their colleagues.

Once at the cell door, Singh continued to struggle with the officers. The officers managed to get him into the cell and when the door was partially closed, Singh spat directly into the custody sergeant's face. Some of the spit also hit the DDO's lip and the DC's cheek.

Singh then tried to prevent officers from closing the cell door, during which he told the custody sergeant that he had coronavirus. He was further arrested on suspicion of assaulting an emergency worker.

Following the incident, he was interviewed behind his cell door for safety reasons. He admitted to spitting at the officers stating he did it because he had been waiting for hours and he "got stressed out".

Superintendent Dan Knowles said: "It is never acceptable to spit at an emergency worker, whether it is during these unprecedented times or not. Singh carrying out this vile act and then lying about having coronavirus was a deplorable thing to do and it caused a great deal of distress for the officers and staff who were just trying to do their job and keep London safe."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 5 -- There are many ways in which one can write about an evolving event such as the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic, which is unique in some non-virological and non-epidemiological ways as well.

It is the first pandemic of the Internet Age (SARS broke when the Internet was still in its infancy, and vaccine technology, patently previous generation). As such it is also the first pandemic of the Information Age, which comes with its own Mr Hyde, misinformation.

One is the classic news-you-can-use approach. After all, the coronavirus disease affects pretty much everyone; avoiding it requires the use of masks, social distancing, staying away from crowded indoor facilities (including air-conditioned malls and offices), and repeated washing of hands. At least in the initial months, it also included the wearing of gloves and the furious cleaning of surfaces although it is now clear that catching an infection from a surface is rare; the virus, after all, is airborne, although most of the infection appears to be aerosol based, from close contact with an infected person whose respiratory droplets carry the virus.

That - the potential airborne nature of the SARS-CoV-2 virus as prudent scientists term it - offers a natural segue into the second approach, the real-time scientific commentary. It took a long time for public health agencies to admit the (potential) airborne nature of the virus that causes Covid-19; there was significant debate before the universal relevance and benefits of masks were acknowledged; and many false dawns with therapies (remember HCQ, and Remdesivir, and plasma therapy). Because Covid-19 affects us all, and because there is a sudden surge of interest in viruses, infection curves, therapies, and vaccines (accompanied by a huge increase in the volume of non-peer-reviewed research being published), a new category of experts has emerged. Some trained, some untrained, they have sought to make sense of it all - in real-time. I'd like to think of the column I wrote for this newspaper for 10 months (238 instalments in all) as an effort in this direction.

The third, because Covid-19 is a public health crisis that has resulted in an economic crisis, is an approach that critiques the governmental response to both.

All are interesting ways to write about something that has changed everything. It has, at last count, infected 115,049,044 and killed 2,551,767 (Figures for March 2 on worldometers.info/coronavirus/). Many more are likely to have been infected without ever knowing about it. In addition to lives, it has taken a toll on livelihoods. It has affected social interactions, work, play, education, even the simple act of popping down to the corner store to pick up milk and eggs.

But there is a fourth way to write about it as well. This is to contextualise and place our emerging and growing knowledge of the virus, the toll it takes on human bodies, and therapies that treat the disease and vaccines that prevent it within the larger knowledge framework of viruses, viral diseases, and treatments and vaccines. The best books of this kind actually do one better: they use what we have recently learnt about this virus and this disease to improve the framework itself. After all, it is only natural that our knowledge of zoonotic diseases in general, and beta coronaviruses in particular, even the human immune system increases as we learn more about the SARS-COV-2 virus; how it attacks the human body; and the immune system's response to it.

Anirban Mahapatra's Covid-19: Separating Fact from Fiction is one such (and thus far, the only such). Mahapatra, a microbiologist, and I have both been on Twitter for over a decade I think, and following each other for almost as long. I do not remember why I started following him, but it's likely I did so after he posted what is called a threshold concept. These are an established concept in education dating back to the early 21st century (although they have always been there in some form) and refer to insights that once understood, change the way we perceive a subject. The best education, I have come to learn, has to do with teaching threshold concepts (and it is something very few schools or teachers do or even know how to). Threshold concepts are elementary in the true Holmesian sense - obvious once someone has done the hard work of pointing them out. And Mahapatra has that ability.

It's evident across the book, even when it comes to things that are, at least in hindsight, basic.

Such as when Mahapatra is writing about the structure of the virus.

"One of the central themes of biology, at the level of molecules and atoms, is that structure is related to function. How a large molecule or a biological machine is shaped determines what it does and how well it does its job. If its shape is distorted it might not function well at all. And structures that do a job well are maintained across generations and different species," he writes.

And a little further down: "The relationship between structure and function is such an obvious and elegant unifying concept that it should be in school biology books. Except it isn't. I wish someone had told me when I was up at night memorizing minutiae for exams in school. In biology size does matter. And so does shape."

It is these bits that elevate Covid-19: Separating Fact from Fiction from a book about the coronavirus pandemic to one about understanding the current pandemic in the context of the science of viruses and viral pandemics. Mahapatra's writing complements this clear-minded approach. It is crisp to the fault of being brief, and he is punctilious about distinguishing between facts and theories. This is a book where the author tells the reader what he knows, and, importantly, what he doesn't. The names of the chapters themselves reflect Mahapatra's economy with words: each is a single word (Origins, says one; Immunity, says another; Aftermath, says a third).

I am not convinced this is a book meant for lay audiences, though; but it is perfect for scientifically-inclined amateurs who want to know more about the virus, the disease, and vaccines. There are enough of them around.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 18 -- The health ministry on Wednesday issued new guidelines for international arrival amid the spread of mutant variants of Covid-19, saying the latest rules will come into effect from 23:59 hours on February 22 and will be in force till further orders.

On Tuesday, the ministry had informed that the South African variant was detected in four travelers returning from Africa and the Brazilian strain was found in a returnee from Brazil.

"In the context of Covid-19, Government of India is following point of entry procedures for identifying international travellers, particularly at-risk travellers to India through multi-pronged strategy of thermal screening and testing," the health ministry said in its updated guidelines.

"There is increasing evidence that the mutant variant of SARS-CoV-2 are in circulation in many countries and these mutant variants are driving the pandemic in their country of origin.

So far, the three SARS-CoV-2 variants in circulation viz-a-viz (i) UK variant (ii) South Africa variant and (iii) Brazil variant, have been detected in 86, 44 and 15 countries, respectively," it added.

According to the guidelines, all international travellers, except those coming on flights originating from the United Kingdom, Europe and Middle East, will require to submit a self-declaration form on the online Air Suvidha portal along with a negative Covid-19 RT-PCR report prior to travel.

"This test should have been conducted within 72 hours prior to undertaking the journey. Each passenger shall also submit a declaration with respect to authenticity of the report and will be liable for criminal prosecution, if found otherwise," the guidelines read.

Besides this, passengers will also require to submit an undertaking on the portal or otherwise to the aviation ministry through concerned airlines before undertaking the journey that they would abide by the decision of the appropriate government authority to undergo home quarantine/ self-monitoring of their health for 14 days, or as warranted.

Arrival in India without a Covid negative report will only be allowed to those travelling in the exigency of death in the family, the guidelines read.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 21 -- President Donald Trump on Monday said he is temporarily suspending immigration to protect American jobs threatened by the dire economic consequences of the coronavirus outbreak. India has been the top country of origin for legal immigrants to the US in recent years, with over 126,000 in 2017.

"In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States!" the American president said in a post on twitter Monday evening. He has frequently used the phrase "Invisible Enemy" for the coronavirus.

More than 22 million people have filed for unemployment benefits in last four weeks of stay-at-home lockdowns in force in most parts of the United States.

It was not immediately clear from President Trump's tweet what kind of immigrants would be impacted - new immigrants are mostly those applying for Green Cards on professional and family visas, refugees and asylum seekers.

But temporary foreign workers hired on H-1B, tourists and business visitors - the most popular visas for Indians - are unlikely to be impacted because they are on non-immigrant visas.

The order is likely to be challenged in court, said industry sources.

A response was awaited from the US Citizenship and Immigration Services for what to expect, and who are likely to be impacted, or not. It was not clear if immigrations applications already in the system will be frozen because of the order, and if that could happen to Green Cards as well.

More than 1 million new immigrants are admitted to the United states every year. India sent the most in 2017 with 126,000 people, according to a Pew study. It was followed by Mexico (124,000), China (121,000) and Cuba (41,000). Overall, people from Mexico comprise the largest group of foreign-born US national in 2018 at 25%, followed by India and China, with 6% each, according to the same report.

There were no indications Tuesday when the US president planned to issue the executive order, which could effectively shut down the legal immigration system for an indefinite period.

While Trump has striven to block all illegal immigration, a key election promise, he has explicitly and repeatedly supported legal, merit-based immigration. The annual diversity visa, granted to residents of underrepresented countries, have been discontinued and intake of refugees has also been curtailed.

The number of immigrant visas have dropped by about 25% from 617,752 in 2016, the year before President Trump took office, to 462,422, according to official US data.

There has been a growing chorus of demand from Republican lawmakers and conservative analysts and commentators in recent days demanding a suspension of immigration in view of the increasing job losses due to the epidemic and the shutdown in place to slow and stop it.

"25 million Americans are unemployed today. All immigration should be halted until every citizen who wants a job has a job," Paul Gosar, a Republican congressman from Arizona and staunch Trump ally, wrote on Twitter last week.

And Jeff Sessions, former US attorney general and an estranged Trump ally who has been an immigration hawk, has called on the federal government to "IMMEDIATELY halt immigration to the United States until Americans are back to work".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 9 -- Immediately after being declared the 46th President-elect of the US, Joe Biden said he will get to work.

Making the Covid-19 pandemic his first priority, Biden on Monday will announce a 12-member task force to deal with the virus.

Reports said Vivek Murthy, the Indian-origin former US Surgeon General in the Barack Obama administration, will co-chair the team. It will provide a blueprint for implementation on January 20, 2021, when Biden will be sworn in.

"That plan will be built on a bedrock of science. It will be constructed out of compassion, empathy, and concern," Biden said in his victory speech on Saturday in Delaware.

Murthy will co-chair the task force with David Kessler, a former Food and Drug Administration commissioner and Dr Marcella Nunez-Smith, a Yale University professor. The team will have 12 members.

The task force announcement will kick off a busy week that will see Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris moving forward with the presidential transition on a number of fronts, with Biden turning to the task of building his administration before the inauguration.

On Sunday, his transition team launched a new website, BuildBackBetter.com, and a new social media handle, @transition46, to provide the public with information on the handover. It lists four priorities for a Biden-Harris administration: Covid-19, economic recovery, racial equity and climate change.

"The team being assembled will meet these challenges on Day One," it said.

Biden spent much of his election campaign criticising President Donald Trump's handling of the pandemic. The US is seeing record daily infections.

Biden is also expected to issue a clutch of executive orders reversing some of Trump's controversial measures, such as returning to the Paris Accord on climate change, resume funding of World Health Organization, rescinding the travel ban on people from certain Muslim-majority countries and reinstating protections for undocumented immigrants brought as children, according to the Washington Post.

With inputs from Agenceis

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 14 -- As the deadly coronavirus has spread worldwide, it has carried with it xenophobia - and Asian communities around the world are finding themselves subject to suspicion and fear.

A man decided to do something about it, and came up with a novel campaign. Massimiliano Martigli Jiang, an Italian-Chinese, stood blindfolded and with a mask in Italy's Florence with a message board which read "I am not a virus, I am a human being, free me from prejudice".

Jiang lives in Florence and was touched by the responses he got. Many people hugged Jian, and some even removed the blindfold. He uploaded a video of the people's reaction on his Facebook page and Instagram.

"This video was one of those things that didn't make me sleep the day before, it put me anxiety while waiting for filming, during and all the moments later. But now. Thanks to your beautiful words, you made me cry so much!" he wrote on Facebook. The video, uploaded more than a week ago, has been widely shared in Italian media.

He also cheered the people of Wuhan, the Chinese city at the epicentre of coronavirus outbreak. "Come on Wuhan - Come on China," Jiang said in his Facebook post.

China has put Wuhan and other cities where the virus has spread, under unprecedented lockdown. The diease is now officially known as Covid-19.

There has been a spike in reports of anti-Chinese rhetoric directed at people of Asian origin, regardless of whether they have ever visited the centre of the epidemic or been in contact with the virus.

Chinese tourists have reportedly been spat at in the Italian city of Venice, a family in Turin was accused of carrying the disease, and mothers in Milan have used social media to call for children to be kept away from Chinese classmates.

In Canada, a man was filmed telling a Chinese-Canadian woman "you dropped your coronavirus" in the parking lot of a local mall.

In Malaysia, a petition to "bar Chinese people from entering our beloved country" received almost 500,000 signatures in one week.

"It's a common phenomenon," said Rob Grenfell, director of health and biosecurity for Australia's science and research agency CSIRO. "Sure it emerged in China," he said of the coronavirus, "but that's no reason to actually vilify Chinese people."

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has warned against "measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", but this has not stopped scores of countries from introducing travel bans.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 4 -- Minister of state for external affairs (MEA) and parliamentary affairs, V Muraleedharan, spoke to Smriti Kak Ramachandran about brings Indians back from abroad, foreigners stranded in India, and relief being sent by India to other countries, among other issues. Edited excerpts:

MEA had a daunting task of evacuating Indian citizens from overseas. How did you go about it?A lot of Indians who were abroad have been brought home; the last such flight came from Iran. We have been carrying out evacuations, but since international travel has stalled, and there is a lockdown in India, we have through our high commissions and embassies ensured that food and other necessities of people of Indian origin are taken care of. In fact there are between 700-800 Indians abroad who are infected by the virus, even their needs are being taken care of.

We get a lot of emails and requests from people who want to come home, some are unwell, some have bereavements in their families, but since international travel is affected so we cannot do selective evacuation. Embassies and high commissions have been asked to step up; they have also been helping people whose visas have expired. It is not their job, but they are helping people renew their visas as well.

How is India helping in the relocation of foreign nationals stranded across the country?For foreign nationals who are in India, we have already started a portal where they can register and we can plan for their evacuation. A lot of people from countries such as Germany, the UK and the US have already been evacuated. Governments of some countries sought our help in getting their nationals who were stuck in distant places to reach the airports in Mumbai, Delhi or Kochi; that assistance we could provide after coordinating with the home ministry and the local police - we helped them reach the airport from where they could then be evacuated to their respective countries.

How exactly is India helping other countries? We've sent help to Maldives.Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been in discussion with heads of states; he had a meeting with the members of the Saarc nations and G20; he also spoke to French President Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday (expert teams of the two countries will actively share information on measures to prevent the spread of coronavirus as well as about ongoing research on treatment and vaccines.) Union Minister for external affairs S Jaishankar has also spoken to his US counterpart Mike Pompeo (on how to combat the international crisis, including strengthening global pharmaceutical and healthcare manufacturing and supply chains). The PM also addressed the heads of 130 missions. Wherever we can offer help and provide assistance, we're going to do that.

What is the status of relief efforts by India to the neighbouring countries?

Being a member of Saarc, PM Modi has already announced the setting up of a Covid-19 emergency fund with India making an initial contribution of $10 million. Countries such as Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives have already made the contributions. These countries are again collaborating in whatever ways to fight the pandemic.

What is the initial assessment of the lockdown?The overall impact has been good because people have appreciated the decisive action of the PM. Because of his address on TV, a lot of people understood the seriousness of the situation. His word carries weight and people have faith in him.

The economic impact is an important issue, and the second is the migration of workers. The government will have to work on these. Some groups [of exporters] have had a discussion with the commerce minister pointing out how India could lose markets if restricted resumption of services export services is not started. But we will all have to bear the impact of the pandemic. However, some international financial agencies have said that except China, India and Indonesia, which will have growth in the whole financial year, other countries will be in recession.

The challenges now are to ensure that the delivery of essential goods is carried without any hiccups. The railways,for instance, is transporting all essential goods, but the workers to carry the load may not be permitted by the police to leave their homes. We will have to find a way out; those in the government and in the police, particularly at the lower levels, will have to be a bit more discerning and understand the nuances of the lockdown.

There was criticism from the Opposition that Parliament should have been adjourned earlier?Parliament was on because at that moment there was a sense that adjourning the House will create a situation of panic. The Prime Minister had said 'no' to panic and 'yes' to precautions. We had already taken steps such as banning visitors from Parliament. The message was that life has to go on but with precautions. After the "Janta curfew" on Marcch 22, and when an escalation of cases began, it was decided that there will be a locked down. After the Lok Sabha passed the finance Bill on March 23, a lockdown was announced on the 24th, in that way the timing was perfect; it was neither too late nor too early.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 27 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of ~75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, ~19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of ~6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving ~1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over ~1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around ~12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate ~1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over ~400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Ram Madhav is national general secretary, Bharatiya Janata Party, and director, India Foundation

With additional data inputs from Rajat Sethi

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 6 -- India and Italy on Friday signed 15 agreements covering trade and investment, shipbuilding and energy, and unveiled a broad-ranging action plan to enhance their partnership by cooperating on connectivity, climate change and counter-terrorism.

The signing of the agreements coincided with an hour-long virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Italian counterpart Giuseppe Conte, during which the leaders pledged to work jointly on common challenges such as the Covid-19 pandemic.

The two sides are keen to take their economic partnership to the next level in new areas such as green technology, renewable energy and advanced manufacturing, officials said. "The focus was on economic ties and Italy is very keen to diversify its supply chains and its outgoing investments, [and] to have a more substantive economic partnership with India," said Sandeep Chakravorty, secretary (Europe West) in the external affairs ministry.

Both countries agreed to work closely on concluding a migration and mobility partnership agreement and a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on defence cooperation at the earliest, Chakravorty said. The mobility pact is crucial for India's plans to enhance access for its skilled professionals in European countries.

The much-delayed India-European Union (EU) free trade agreement figured in the meeting, officials said. A joint statement issued after the meeting said PM Modi and Conte stressed the need for "India and the EU to actively re-engage towards an early resumption of negotiations for mutually beneficial India-EU trade and investment agreements".

Also read: 'Outcome of election won't affect ties' - MEA on US presidential election

Among the 15 agreements signed on Friday was an MoU between Italy's Cassa Depositi e Prestiti SpA and India's National Investment and Infrastructure Fund to promote co-financing, two MoUs between Fincantieri and Cochin Shipyard Limited covering design, shipbuilding and manufacturing, and repairs and refits of ships, two cooperation agreements between Snam and Adani Entreprises to promote energy transition and to set up a CNG compressors factory in India, and an MoU between Snam and Indian Oil Corporation to cooperate on gas infrastructure development.

The 2020-24 action plan for an enhanced bilateral partnership is based on four pillars - political dialogue at the bilateral level and coordination in multilateral forums, economic engagement, partnership in science and technology, and cultural cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. The two sides will create a mechanism chaired by the foreign ministers to follow up the action plan yearly.

PM Modi and Conte, the joint statement said, condemned all forms of terrorism and backed a comprehensive approach to prevent and combat terrorism. They agreed to enhance the exchange of expertise and capacity building to counter-terrorism.

They also emphasised the need to expand defence engagement through greater two-way collaboration and technology cooperation, and co-development and co-production of military hardware. They also agreed to consolidate defence ties to enhance the effectiveness of UN peacekeeping activities.

The joint statement said PM Modi and Conte stressed the importance of the Indo-Pacific as a "fundamental area for connecting Asia and Europe", and said both sides will "support all connectivity initiatives based on internationally recognised norms and standards, good governance, rule of law, inclusiveness, transparency and level playing field".

The meeting, the latest in a string of virtual engagements by PM Modi after his successful summits with Australia and the EU, was part of New Delhi's enhanced focus on Europe against the backdrop of a global rebalancing in the post-Covid-19 scenario. Leading EU players, such as Germany and France, have also signalled a greater interest in the Indo-Pacific region.

Both countries are keen to put behind the 2012 killing of two Indian crew members of a fishing boat off the coast of Kerala by Italian marines guarding an oil tanker Enrica Lexie, an incident that took bilateral ties to an all-time low.

"Barring the brief hiatus caused by Enrica Lexie incident for some time, the two countries have always enjoyed a cordial relationship since they established political ties in 1947," said a person who declined to be named.

India sees Italy, the third-largest EU economy after Brexit with robust manufacturing, technological and design capabilities, as a strong partner for the Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat (self-reliant India) initiatives.

Italy is currently India's fifth largest trading partner in the EU, and bilateral trade was worth 9.52 billion Euros in 2019. India, however, ranks 16th as country of origin for Italian imports, and experts believe there is potential for considerable growth.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of Rs 75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, Rs 19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of Rs 6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving Rs 1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over Rs 1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around Rs 12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate Rs 1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over Rs 400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- Kolkata

At least three persons, who have been detected with corona in the last 48 hours, might not have travelled outside the state in the recent past, raising fears of community transmission, health officials said.

It was not immediately clear if they came in touch with any infected person. Officials say they are trying to trace the source of the infections.

A 57-year-old man from Hooghly district in south Bengal with no 'known' history of travelling outside the state or meeting anyone from outside the state tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday.

In a separate case, a septuagenarian man from Burrabazar in Kolkata has also tested positive. Family members said he didn't go anywhere.

In another incident, a 56-year-old resident of Baranagar in North 24 Parganas district tested positive, raising eyebrows of health officials. Initially, it was thought he got infected from his brother who returned from Madhya Pradesh with fever. But his brother has tested negative. The patient has no history of travelling outside the state.

"We could not trace any travel history of some of the patients who tested positive in the last 48 hours. We are still trying to trace them," said Ajay Chakraborty, director of health services in West Bengal.

The man from Hooghly district works at a private firm in Durgapur in West Burdwan district. Before testing positive for Covid-19, he had travelled in train in the districts of Birbhum, Bankura, Kolkata and South 24-Parganas. He had attended an event at his firm in Durgapur on March 13, went to Bankura to attend another event of the company, and stayed the night at a hotel in Durgapur. He returned home on March 14. On March 26, he had fever and gradually developed breathing difficulties. He was admitted to a hospital on March 28 and tested positive for Covid-19 on March 29. Increasing worry for the administration, the domestic help at their home has also reported of fever and her swab samples have been sent for tests.

"It seems that probably we are entering stage three (community transmission). However officially we are still in stage two," said Dr Sumon Poddar, associate professor, Institute of Child Health

The 77-year-old a cloth merchant having his shop at Burrabazar area in Kolkata, did not travel outside the state or meeting anyone from outside the state, his family members reportedly told the authorities of the private hospital where he is admitted.

Reports of more patients being tested positive with COVID-19 have poured in since Monday night but the state government is yet to release any official figures after Monday afternoon. According to the last bulletin issued by the state on Monday, at least 22 cases have been detected and the total death toll was two.

"A few more cases have been tested positive since Monday evening. The numbers have gone beyond 22. There is also a report of one person dying. This could take the total death toll to three. We are yet to confirm as the man died before his swab samples could be tested," said Chakrabarti.

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission, a phase of the outbreak when the source of a patient's infection cannot be traced and isolated. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), tasked with containing the epidemic, has publicly maintained that India is still in Stage II, despite the number of cases of people with no known contact to an infected person or travel history rising over the past week.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 15 -- The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has said that it is critical to increase testing for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) as the number of cases in India is "rising exponentially", a development that comes even as the government awaits the arrival of rapid testing kits from China.

The rapid testing kits, which search for antibodies in blood samples, were first supposed to arrive on April 5. The expected date of delivery was later revised to April 10, and then to April 15. There was, however, no clarity if all kits ordered by India would arrive by Wednesday.

Rapid testing kits show if a person is or has previously been infected by the virus. Apart from being a fast way to identify the extent of infections in clusters, countries are looking to use these tests to determine who has immunity to the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19. Unlike the RT-PCR tests currently in use, which take at least five hours for a result, RTKs can give diagnoses in 25-30 minutes.

"Number of Covid-19 cases in India is rising exponentially... it is critical to increase the numbers of tests conducted by laboratories," said an ICMR document released on Monday, based on a study the premier medical research institution recently commissioned to check the feasibility of conducting pool testing in the country that can cover large sample sizes with limited resources.

Public health experts have raised concerns over the disease possibly entering the "community transmission" phase, when the infections spread indiscriminately and the origin of an individual's disease can't be traced. The government has, however, said that there is some "limited community transmission" in certain clusters. The ICMR document, however, suggests that the government is aware of the possibility of a surge in Covid-19 cases in India in the coming weeks and that preparations were being made for that likely scenario.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined four transmission scenarios for Covid-19 - no confirmed cases, sporadic cases, clusters of cases, and community transmission.

The number of Covid-19 cases in the country stood at 11,479 on Tuesday night, doubling over six days, with 1,035 fresh infections in the last 24 hours. At least 390 people have died of the disease in the country so far, with the global death toll crossing 120,000.

A government official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: "Exponential growth is worrying when numbers double in three days or less, as is happening in several countries. If we manage to keep the numbers from doubling in five or more days, as the lockdown has and will help us do, we will be on a good wicket."

Lav Agarwal, joint secretary in the Union health ministry, said in his daily health briefing on Wednesday: "There is no community transmission in India yet. There is nothing to hide if there was; in fact, it makes more sense to declare it so that people take extra precautions to prevent getting infected."

Experts in virology, however, differ. "This seems like a schizophrenic approach to the truth where you speak only what is pleasing to the listener, and don't say what you really believe in...," said Dr T Jacob John, former head of virology at the Christian Medical College, Vellore.

India ordered 500,000 kits from Chinese suppliers on March 30 and later raised a tender for 4.5 million more to be acquired in batches. In anticipation of the arrival of the kits first on April 5, India issued an advisory on starting rapid antibody testing on April 4, and revised the testing guidelines on April 9 to include rapid testing of all symptomatic individuals in hot spot areas with symptoms at least a week old.

The King George's Medical University, Lucknow, on Monday began testing of samples in pools from low-risk areas in the state as a surveillance mechanism. "The samples that we are getting to pool are all those lifted for the purpose of surveillance. It is not for diagnosing the disease as pooling samples for diagnoses is not advisable," said Dr Amita Jain, head of ICMR's virus research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) based in KGMU.

Due to shortage of kits, Andaman & Nicobar has already begun performing tests in pools.

ICMR, however, says there is no shortage of kits, and current stock can perform tests for at least six weeks.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- The first Air India aircraft carrying Canadians of Indian origin back to the country landed at Vancouver International Airport on Tuesday afternoon. The flight will return to New Delhi on Wednesday night as the first-ever rescue mission for Indians stranded in Canada due to the Covid-19 pandemic begins.

Describing the flight's arrival as a "historic first", India's Consulate in Vancouver in British Columbia said the repatriation flight will commence on May 20.

India's High Commissioner to Ottawa Ajay Bisaria tweeted that he was "delighted" to welcome the first Vande Bharat Mission flight to Canada. He added that the flight was full as it also brought Indo-Canadians home. "Hope to bring every citizen home in these and future flights," he said.

Family members of some of those who arrived in Vancouver thanked the Indian Government and Air India for the flight. Gobind Shergill tweeted that his wife had arrived, and that she was "very impressed by all the safety measures taken by all authorities."

The Vande Bharat Mission is the Indian government's repatriation programme to bring back Indians stranded abroad due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

There are nearly three lakh Indians in Canada, according to estimates, and the five Air India flights that have been scheduled from Vancouver and Toronto will take more than 1400 of those with "compelling" reasons back to India.

The flight from Vancouver will cover Delhi and Amritsar. It will be followed by flights from Toronto on May 21 and 22 that will take passengers to Delhi and Amritsar, and Bengaluru and Hyderabad, respectively. On May 24, another flight will depart from Vancouver for Bengaluru and Hyderabad, while the last planned trip, from Toronto on May 25, will go to Ahmedabad and Jaipur.

Passengers arriving in Canada are expected to enter mandatory self-isolation for a period of 14 days, and those returning to India will also be placed in quarantine for that period and then tested for Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy. home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled. The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups. Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors." Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe. In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 7 -- There is no significant community transmission of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in India, experts in the Union ministry of health have confirmed, even as India reported its 31 positive case on Friday.

That means each of the 31 cases can be traced back to its possible point of origin.

Experts say widespread community transmission is usually a cause for concern.

A senior scientist with the health ministry said on condition of anonymity that the transmission of infection is still restricted to clusters.

"Community transmission that we are seeing in India has not reached the alarming stage where we cannot trace the source of infection. We are keeping a close watch on the situation which is developing every hour, and what is currently seen in India is called cluster transmission," he said.

Some of the transmissions are happening locally, but are still not of a scale to cause concern.

".in addition to Covid-19 cases related to travel, some cases of community transmission have also been observed, it has been decided to involve district collectors and States have been asked to form rapid response teams at the district, block and village levels. Private sector shall also be engaged for Covid-19 management," a health ministry statement said. The reference here is about transmission of infection from one person to another locally, but can't strictly be termed community transmission in the scientific sense of the term - the emergence of patients with no travel history or clear link to another infected person or carrier.

In a paper on community transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2, Shenzhen, China, 2020, in 'Emerging Infectious Disease' journal, the US Centre for Disease Control in Atlanta analyzed data for the first 365 laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Shenzhen, to summarize the epidemiologic characteristics and provide updated information to aid in the development of control measures."Overall, most (91%) cases that we report had definite exposure," the report added.

On January 14, the first patient without definite exposure was reported in Shenzhen. Since January 20, growing numbers of cases without definite exposure were observed.

"Compared with before January 24, the proportion of case-patients without definite exposure was much higher from January 25 through February 5 (11% vs. 6%; p&lt;0.001) and increased to 36% (12/33) on both January 31 and February 5. These data suggest an increasing risk for community transmission," the paper explained.

That's what India is watching closely.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has also raised its assessment of the risk of spread and the risk of impact of Covid-19 to very high at the global level.

".at present, we see linked epidemics in several countries, where most cases can still be traced to known contacts or clusters of cases, although we see signs of community transmission in some countries," Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general, WHO, had said in a briefing on Covid-19 a couple of days ago.

"Our view continues to be that containment of Covid-19 must be the top priority for all countries, but at the same time, countries should be preparing for (dealing with) sustained community transmission."

As on March 6, 2020, India had tested a total of 4058 samples from 3404 people, of which 31 have tested positive.

The experts do not deny there is human-to-human transmission of infection in India but say that it cannot be termed community transmission yet.

"The government has managed to track down the index case in all the reported cluster infections locally, so that way we have not yet reached the stage where we must worry. It can be contained and the government is making adequate efforts," the scientist cited in the first instance added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech on Wednesday released the results of the Phase 1 trials of its coronavirus (Covid-19) vaccine 'Covaxin' - which produced a robust immune response against the disease and showed that the majority of the adverse events were mild and got resolved. The vaccine is being stored between 2-8 degrees Celcius and further efficacy trials are underway.

The results of the first phase of Covaxin- which Bharat Biotech is developing in collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) comes a day after the Drugs Controller General of India (DGCI) had said that it was examining the application submitted by the company seeking emergency use authorisation of its vaccine.

Also Read: India records 26,382 new Covid-19 cases; death toll crosses 144,000

Emergency approval for any vaccine or drug can only be granted once the regulatory body carries out an assessment of its safety and effectiveness, based on the data obtained from the efficacy trials.

Earlier, Bharat Biotech was told by the Subject Expert Committee (SEC) on emergency use authorization of vaccines that it needs to submit more data on Covaxin before it can be granted approval.

Also Read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

Meanwhile, India along with the United Kingdom launched a virtual vaccines hub which will share best practice for clinical trials and foster innovation besides helping in the shared fight against Covid-19 pandemic. British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab announced that experts from the two countries would join forces through a new virtual hub to deliver vaccines for coronavirus and other deadly viruses.

India on Wednesday had registered 26,382 new Covid-19 cases and 387-related fatalities which pushed the overall tally to over 9.9 million. The active cases stand at 332,002 and are declining steadily while 9.45 million people have recovered from the disease till now.

(With inputs from Rhythma Kaul)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 15 -- The 1.5 million-strong Indian community has been the group most affected by the Covid-19 pandemic among non-whites in the UK, according to new figures released on Tuesday. The data shows that their mental health was particularly affected, and in England alone, 1,105 people of Indian origin have died.

The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the mental well-being of those in the Indian ethnic group may have been particularly affected by the pandemic as they reported both greater difficulty with sleep over worry between 2019 and the initial period of the lockdown, in April 2020, and had higher scores than other groups on a measure of self-reported mental health difficulties.

According to latest figures from the NHS, patients categorised as "Indian" in official records topped the list of non-white people who died from Covid-19 - 1,105, accounting for 3% of deaths by ethnicity. The Indian group was followed the Pakistani community, with 1,000 deaths.

Glenn Everett of the ONS said, "What today's research shows us is how the impact on different ethnic groups varies and how people's circumstances before the pandemic could affect their experience during the first national lockdown.

"Financial resilience was lower among Black African or Other Black households before the pandemic, for example, which would explain why these groups found it harder to manage financially during lockdown. Perhaps unsurprisingly, mental health deteriorated across most ethnic groups during lockdown but was most marked in the Indian group."

Several Indian-origin doctors, nurses and pharmacists have succumbed to the coronavirus during the year, besides others working in public-facing professions. Official studies have also highlighted the disproportionately adverse impact on the Indian and other non-white communities.

The ONS said that at the start of the UK-wide lockdown earlier in the year, across all ethnic groups, people reported an increased or persistent loss of sleep over worry.

After adjusting for age, over one-third (36%) of those from the Indian ethnic group reported this, compared with less than a quarter (23%) of White British respondents and 18% of those in the Other White ethnic groups.

When comparing across the groups, respondents from the Indian ethnic group reported a greater average increase than those from the White British ethnic group (0.8). Taken together with the findings on loss of sleep over worry for the Indian ethnic group, this suggests that their mental well-being may have been particularly challenged by the pandemic, the ONS added.

It added that those of White Irish ethnicity (28%) were more likely to report either continuing to feel lonely often or to experience an increase in feelings of loneliness between 2019 and April 2020 than people from White British (18%) ethnicity. Nearly a quarter of those from the Indian ethnic group (24%) also reported this.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- A study published five years ago had warned of viruses similar to that responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome circulating among the Chinese bat population that may pose a serious future threat. The study was co-authored by Shi Zhengli, a virologist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, and published in the scientific journal Nature.Last month, Shi published a study linking the origin of the Covid-19 virus to bats. The study published in Nature concluded that 2019-nCoV was 96% identical at the genome level to a bat coronavirus.

The 2015 study had focused on SHC014-CoV, another coronavirus strain which was found to be circulating among the Chinese horseshoe bat populations, but highlighted that recent metagenomic (study of genetic material) studies had identified sequences closely related to the SARS-like viruses in bats which could spill over into outbreaks.

Many scientists and virologists working on animal-to-human transmission of viruses saw the Covid-19 pandemic coming.

For instance, Peter Daszak, a disease ecologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a US-based research organisation, wrote in The New York Times that in a World Health Organization meeting in 2018, experts coined the term "disease X," a virus emerging in animals which would be transmitted to humans and would spread as easily as the flu but with a higher mortality-very similar to Covid-19.

A 2017 study on the diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China found a total of 73 coronaviruses in a sample of 1,067 bats from 21 species in China. Another assessment of why bat viruses are so deadly, conducted by the University of California-Berkeley in February after Covid -9 started spreading, suggested bat cells have a strong immune response, constantly primed to respond to viruses.

High virulence and infectivity wreak havoc when these viruses infect animals with tamer immune systems like humans, the study published in Science Daily concluded. Bats' ability to fly allows them to pick up pathogens over a vast area.

Several other scientific studies have suggested that land-use change or wild habitat loss are leading to more contact between bats and recipient hosts. "Disrupting bat habitat appears to stress the animals and makes them shed even more virus in their saliva, urine and feces that can infect other animals," said the Science Daily study.

Researchers working on the ground say the interplay between these factors make virus spillover and an outbreak situation even more likely.

"The relationship between habitat loss and virus spillover from bats is not that simple. There are many areas where we live in close proximity with bats, but there is no spillover. The exceptional thing about bats is that they have the ability to tolerate high viral load without getting sick themselves. In general though, interfaces between bats and people provide opportunities for spillover. We need to study and better understand which particular viruses spill over and cause outbreaks," said Uma Ramakrishnan, associate professor and senior fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Rohit Chakravarty, a wildlife biologist at the Indian Bat Conservation Unit, said certain human behaviours made people more vulnerable to Covid-19 like spillovers. "Habitat loss and bushmeat consumption bring humans in closer contact with wildlife. Large commercial wildlife markets that exist in China and Southeast Asia bring humans in contact with live animals that are kept in unsanitary conditions, thereby compounding the risk of disease transmission," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- The government banned on Thursday all international commercial flights from landing in India for a week starting March 22 and instructed states to enforce work-from-home protocol for all private sector employees, except essential services, as part of a raft of measures aimed at staving off the coronavirus epidemic that has claimed four lives in the country.

In an advisory, the Centre also advised children below 10 and citizens above 65 - except government servants, medical professionals and public representatives -- to stay at home and not "venture out".

WATCH | Govt on Coronavirus: Curtailing flights, trains; elderly, kids stay at home

Also read: PM Modi, set to address nation on Covid-19, gets a wishlist from Oppn

"States are being requested to enforce work from home for private sector employees except for those working in emergency/essential services," the statement read. The statement came hours before Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses the nation at 8pm on Thursday.

The decision was taken after a meeting of the group of ministers (GOM) formed to monitor the outbreak, including Union civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri, health minister Harsh Vardhan and external affairs minister S Jaishankar. Officials at the national aviation regulator, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), said about 300 incoming flights will be impacted.

The government also suspended all concessional travel on trains and flights, except for students, patients and disabled people. The national transporter at present provides a total of 53 category of concessions out of which only 15 categories can be availed as per the new orders.

All group B and C central government employees have been asked to attend office on alternate weeks, with staggered timings.

The DGCA had earlier prohibited travel of passengers from the European Union, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, and United Kingdom from March 18 till March 31. India also issued an order expanding compulsory quarantine for a minimum period of 14 days for passengers coming from or transiting through the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman and Kuwait.

"Amidst the worldwide outbreak of COVID-19 virus and increasing number of cases in India, it has become imperative to curtail its spread and protect the most vulnerable group of population i.e people with chronic illness and especially senior citizens. Withdrawal of such concessions is also a part of a wider plan to discourage unnecessary travel by all concerned and hence concessional booking of all tickets have been withdrawn except patients, students and divyangjan [disabled] category for both unreserved and reserved segments," the railway ministry said.

The Railways have seen a decline of Rs 454 crore in its earnings over the last week as at least 164 trains have been cancelled in the wake of the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak.

India is currently grappling with stage 2 of the coronavirus outbreak, with 169 cases and four deaths. The Indian Council of Medical Research has ruled out community transmission - where the origin of the infection is not known -- as of Thursday morning.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 7 -- Health authorities say they are focusing on four areas within a 4km radius in northeast Delhi's Dilshad Garden that appear to be reporting a bunch of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases. Experts suggest limited community spread has begun in the area, after reports that in many of these cases the source of the patient's infection is unclear.

Officials have declared these four places as containment areas. Each of them has a focal patient (the person who might have infected others). Three of these containment areas were declared on Monday - two separate blocks of GTB Enclave and one in Dilshad Colony. Officials have been unable to establish travel or contact history of the focal patients in these areas.

The developments come amid a debate on whether India has entered the community transmission stage of the pandemic, in which the source of a patient's infection could not be traced or isolated.

"One of the blocks (in GTB Enclave) is linked to a nurse from Delhi State Cancer Institute who tested positive and the other is linked to an old man. We are not sure where he got the infection from," a senior Delhi government official said, requesting anonymity.

On Monday, 10 nurses from the Delhi State Cancer Institute in GTB enclave tested positive for Covid-19, taking the hospital's tally to 18 (of which two are doctors and 16 nursing staff). After this, the cancer institute decided to test all 48 of its patients.

"We have sent all samples for Covid-19 testing. If they test negative, patients will be moved to various private hospitals. However, if they test positive, they will be taken to the nearby Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital, which is a dedicated Covid-19 centre," said an official from the Delhi State Cancer Institute.

Rajiv Gandhi Superspeciality Hospital is one of the two Delhi government hospitals completely dedicated for treatment of the deadly infection caused by the Sars-Cov-2 virus. At present, there are 85 Covid-19 positive and 164 suspected patients admitted to the hospital.

Separately, in the Dilshad Colony containment area, a middle-aged man (the focal patient) with unclear history (meaning no foreign travel or no established contact with a Covid-19 positive case) tested positive for Covid-19.

The fourth containment area is linked to two mohalla clinic doctors who practise in Dilshad Garden. (So far, 34 health care workers and hospital sanitation staff have tested positive for the viral infection across Delhi).

The J and K blocks of Dilshad Garden were declared containment areas after a 38-year-old woman (the focal patient), who returned from Saudi Arabia on March 10, passed on the infection to at least 11 people, including the two mohalla clinic doctors. Six of them are from the Dilshad Garden area. In the same cluster, officials were not able to establish the source of infection of a patient in Maujpur. This patient did not have any direct contact with the woman who returned from Saudi or the two doctors.

"In hot spots, some community spread may be occurring," said Randeep Guleria, director, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and a member of the national task force on Covid-19.

Although a Union health ministry document late last month said limited community transmission of the Covid-19 disease has begun in India, authorities maintain that the country is not witnessing large-scale community spread.

Jacob John, professor emeritus and former head of virology at Christian Medical College, Vellore, said community transmission was happening in the Dilshad Garden containment areas.

"Now, we should not focus so much on getting the history of the patient and figuring out where they might have got the infection from.We must focus on keeping people out of hospitals. And, to slow the community spread, everyone must wear masks," he said.

There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 18 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi and US president-elect Joe Biden on Tuesday said they would work closely to advance the bilateral comprehensive global strategic partnership and to cooperate in areas ranging from post-Covid-19 recovery to the Indo-Pacific.

During a phone conversation with Biden, Modi discussed the shared concerns and priorities of India and the US. He also congratulated Biden on his election, describing it as "testament to the strength and resilience of democratic traditions in the US", according to a readout from the external affairs ministry.

"The leaders agreed to work closely to further advance the India-US comprehensive global strategic partnership, built on shared values and common interests," the readout said.

They also discussed their priorities, "including containing the Covid-19 pandemic, promoting access to affordable vaccines, tackling climate change, and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region".

Modi recalled his earlier interactions with Biden, including during his official visits to the US in 2014 and 2016. Biden had chaired the joint session of the US Congress addressed by Modi during the 2016 visit.

The Prime Minister also extended congratulations and best wishes to vice president-elect Kamala Harris, the first woman and also the first person of Indian-American origin to be elected to the position.

"Spoke to US President-elect @JoeBiden on phone to congratulate him. We reiterated our firm commitment to the Indo-US strategic partnership and discussed our shared priorities and concerns - Covid-19 pandemic, climate change, and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific Region," Modi tweeted.

"I also conveyed warm congratulations for VP-elect @KamalaHarris. Her success is a matter of great pride and inspiration for members of the vibrant Indian-American community, who are a tremendous source of strength for Indo-US relations," he said in a second tweet.

There was no immediate readout from the US side on the conversation.

Earlier, Modi had congratulated Biden and Harris on Twitter on November 8, when it became clear the Democratic Party candidate was set to clinch the presidential election.

He had lauded Biden on a "spectacular victory" and described his contributions as the former vice president to strengthening Indo-US relations as "critical and invaluable". He had added, "I look forward to working closely together once again to take India-US relations to greater heights."

On the same day, Modi had also congratulated Harris through a tweet, saying: "Your success is pathbreaking, and a matter of immense pride not just for your chittis, but also for all Indian-Americans. I am confident that the vibrant India-US ties will get even stronger with your support and leadership."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 30 -- Eight of the 11 passengers who had tested positive for Covid-19 at Delhi's India Gandhi International airport have the new UK variant of Sars-CoV2, which potentially spreads 70% faster according to experts.

Of the eight, seven are admitted to a special isolation ward of Delhi government-run Lok Nayak hospital.

The eighth person infected with the new variant of the virus was a woman, who escaped while being transported from Delhi airport to Lok Nayak Hospital, and travelled to Andhra Pradesh.

"The eight people who were found to have the new variant of the infection were among those who tested positive at the airport when the passengers from UK were being tested for two days. The genome sequencing of the other samples is yet to be done," said a senior official from the Delhi government's health department.

All eight are either Indians or Persons of Indian origin, the official said.

"Some of the people who tested positive had also gone to other places and then returned to the hospital," the official said. On the second day of mandatory testing, another man - along with the woman from Andhra Pradesh - had given the authorities a slip and travelled to Ludhiana. He has been brought back to Lok Nayak Hospital by the authorities.

The Indian government had suspended air travel from the United Kingdom from December 23 onwards after a new variant of Sar-CoV-2 was found to be circulating in London and other parts of that country. The new variant - which has 23 mutations, including one on the receptor binding protein on the spike used by the virus to enter the human cells - is thought to be 70% more transmissible, raising concerns of super-spreading events.

None of the people found to have the new variant had severe symptoms of the disease. "All the patients have mild symptoms; none of them are in need of oxygen support. They are all isolated in separate rooms and will be monitored till the infectious stage is over," said a senior doctor from the hospital.

The 2,000-bed Lok Nayak Hospital was designated as the nodal centre for isolation of people who are suspected to have the new variant of the viral infection - those who have either returned from the UK between November 25 and December 21 or those who have tested positive after coming in contact with UK returnees.

The hospital has set up a special ward for UK returnees and their contacts, who are each allotted separate rooms within the ward. So far, the hospital has at least 35 people admitted in this special ward. The genome sequencing of many others are awaited.

Delhi's revenue minister Kailash Gahlot said, "The government will leave no stones unturned in ensuring testing, tracing and isolation to prevent possible spread of the new variant of the virus."

"Rigorous contact tracing is being done in compliance with the standard operating procedure (SOP) issued by the Union ministry of health," said Delhi's chief secretary Vijay Dev.

The SOP of the Union health ministry says that once a UK-returned person tests Covid-19 positive, all of his or her contacts are to be isolated in institutional quarantine. "The contacts of all UK returned Covid-19 patients who have been identified so far are already lodged in a government-run isolation facility in Chhatarpur or a paid facility at a hotel in Aerocity," said an official, on condition of anonymity.

Around 14,000 passengers arrived at the Delhi airport between November 25 and December 23, of which around 1,500 are Delhi residents. However, HT reported on Wednesday, hundreds of them have so far evaded the city government's outreach programme through incorrect and inadequate contact tracing details.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Gurugram, March 11 -- Members of the district rapid response team on Wednesday visited the Indian Army's quarantine facility at Manesar, where 83 evacuees - 74 Indians and nine of Indian origin - from Italy arrived early morning.

"The evacuees have been screened at the airport and in the camp, as informed by the health staff deployed at the camp," a member of the response team said.

"Evacuees were assigned barracks, considering the safety measures. They were also counselled to take precautionary measures that would help in preventing the Covid-19 contagion to spread. The evacuees would be examined daily," the team member, who interacted with the doctor at the camp, said.

According to the district health department, since the evacuees have been brought to Haryana, therefore, it was mandatory for them to visit the camp.

Rajiv Arora, state's additional chief secretary, said, "We are in contact with the team at the army camp. However, the army will be taking care of the evacuees, from their screening to sample testing."

Of the 83 evacuees, 40 are male, 26 female, 16 children, and one infant. A team of doctors and staff members will monitor the evacuees. If any individual is suspected to be infected, he/she will be shifted to an isolation facility.

The evacuees will be allowed to leave after 14 days with their detailed documentation sent to the district or state surveillance units for further surveillance. Those found infected will be shifted to the isolation ward at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for further medical exams and recovery.

In February, more than 200 evacuees from Wuhan were also shifted to the quarantine facility.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Shimla,, Aug. 31 -- Grappling with labour shortage and transportation challenges in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, fruit growers of Himachal Pradesh have now urged the central government to take steps to check the sale of apples and kiwi fruit from Iran and Turkey that are finding their way into fruit markets across the country.

This year has been tough for apple growers. Himachal's Rs 4,500-crore apple economy sustains the livelihood of 1.65 lakh families. Of the 12 districts, apple is grown in seven with Shimla, Kullu and Kinnaur being top apple-producing districts. The primary concern of fruit growers was the labour shortage with skilled Nepalese labourers unable to return in time due to the sealed borders. The apple orchardists managed with local labour and worked overtime as harvest got off to a slow start in mid-July.

Since the crop was lean, the growers got a good price for premium apples being sold for Rs 1,400 to Rs 2,500 per box of 20 kg. But the growers now fear that unregulated and uncontrolled imports from Iran and Turkey could have an impact on the apple prices.

"Uncontrolled and unregulated cheap imports of kiwis and apples from these countries is affecting our realisation from the market," said Lokinder Singh Bisht, the president of the Progressive Growers Association. Bisht has written to Union commerce minister Piyush Goyal to draw his attention towards the issue.

"Most of the imports with sanctions are routed through hawala transactions, undervaluing the fruit to ride over the 33% tax barrier of import duty. Besides the quarantine inspections are overlooked and the fruit is being dumped in third grade plastic, becoming an environmental hazard," he said in the letter.

"If this goes on unchecked, it will not only lead to insects being imported with the fruit but will also make the cash crop unviable in our region," he said.

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority data shows that Turkey dumped 7,500 metric tonnes of apples in 2017-18 which grew to 32,289 metric tonnes in 2019-20. While the apple import from Iran was 7,020 MT in 2018-19, it grew to 21,521 MT in 2019-20.

Three years ago, the Centre allowed the import of kiwis and since then the volume has grown to 30,000 metric tonnes in 2019-20.

"Fruit imports should complement our consumption and not replace our domestic crop. There are more apples from Iran this time. The only way to differentiate the apple from Iran is from its packing," says Abhinav Jaggi, a Delhi-based apple importer.

Apples from Iran change the port of origin in Dubai. There are reports that the apples are also smuggled from Afghanistan and later sold under different trademarks.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- Around 1.5 lakh migrant workers were transported to their home states from Rajasthan on Shramik specials on Monday and around 45,000 were brought back as Indian Railways continues to facilitate movement of migrants stranded due to the lockdown to ease a humanitarian crisis.

The HT Guide to Coronavirus COVID-19

The North Western Railway (NWR) on Tuesday said it operated 105 trains from origin points in Rajasthan to other states including Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, and carried more than 148,000 passengers on the shramik special service on Monday. Railway officials added that about 45,000 passengers arrived in the state on board 39 inbound Shramik trains.

According to the railway figures released on Monday, over 40 lakh migrant workers have been transported to different states in over 3,000 Shramik specials since May 1. Another 2,600 Shramik special trains are expected to transport close to 36 lakh migrant population to their home states during the lockdown. Passengers identified and screened by the state governments travel on these special trains.

For Coronavirus Live Updates

NWR chief public relations officer Abhay Sharma said among the outbound Shramik special trains, 49 went to Bihar, 12 to MP, 32 to UP, five to Jharkhand, three to West Bengal and one each to Uttrakhand, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.

"Until Monday evening, we have transported 148,619 passengers out of Rajasthan," he said.

Among the inbound trains, 14 came from Maharashtra, seven from Karnataka, six each from Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, two from Tamil Nadu and one each from Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, and West Bengal. The inbound trains brought 45,109 migrants into the state.

The NWR said it is coordinating with other states to plan operation of more Shramik special trains for workers as per requirements.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 22 -- A 41-year-old woman in Pune tested positive for the coronavirus disease or Covid-19 on Saturday, becoming the second patient in India with no history of foreign travel or documented contact with previous cases and fuelling fears that the country had slipped into the deadly third phase of the infection when the contagion spreads rapidly.

At this stage of the outbreak, known as the community transmission phase, the origin of any individual patient's infection cannot be pinpointed to travel to a global hotspot of the disease, or documented contact with a previously infected person. This means that the virus is freely circulating in the community, making it tough for authorities to control its spread or enforce containment measures.

In countries worst-hit by the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19, such as China, Italy, Iran or South Korea, the number of infections and fatalities rose sharply once the country moved into the community transmission phase.

Late evening, authorities in West Bengal reported that a 57-year-old man, who had not travelled abroad and had no documented contact with a previous patient, had tested positive for Covid-19 - indicating that more cases of people with no obvious origin of infection were showing up across the country. The case was confirmed by two state government laboratories but not by the NIV, the national nodal authority, at the time of going to print.

Govt dismisses

The government dismissed claims of community transmission, and said the two cases simply represented a failure of contact tracing, a process by which authorities identify everyone a coronavirus patient has come in contact with. This is crucial in figuring out how many people a particular patient might have potentially infected.

"Right now we are focussing our efforts on tracing the contacts of all the positive cases. Contact tracing is not a simple exercise -we are currently monitoring over 7,000 people who have come in contact with those who tested positive. So far, there is no evidence of community transmission," said Lav Agarwal, joint secretary, Union health ministry.

But experts point out that having no obvious source of an infection, or not being able to immediately trace an infection to either foreign travel or direct contact was a clear indication of community transmission. Moreover, because of a paucity in testing - India has tested just 16,911 samples so far,one of the lowest testing rates in the world - experts had no clear idea if community transmission was occurring among patients.

In denial?

"We need to expand testing to identify the infected early and treat them effectively and delay their getting into a critical stage...just the same strategy as we followed for HIV AIDS.... Yes, it (the possibility of community transmission) has been worrying me for over a week," said Sujatha Rao, former health secretary, ministry of health and family welfare, and former director general, National AIDS Control Organisation, India's apex body for preventing HIV in India.

"We have wasted time being in denial, exactly the way we were with HIV AIDS. We haven't learnt lessons."

A senior health ministry official said that community transmission could only be confirmed when national surveillance network picks up a high number of positive cases. "Or we start reporting 200 or 300 cases and don't know the source of a high number - 50 to 60 of these cases," he added, suggesting that two or three cases that can't be explained do not confirm community transmission.

There are four stages of an outbreak. Stage I is when cases are imported by travellers from other countries, Stage II is when these travellers then pass on the infection locally to people living or working around them, Stage III is when community transmission happens and the health care workers are unable to trace the source of infections, and the last Stage IV is when the disease is widespread in a population.

India is currently in the Stage II of the outbreak, according to the health ministry.

"Yes, there are cases where we haven't been able to pinpoint the source of the infection. However, I will consider this to be the failure of our contact tracing efforts rather than community transmission," said the Union health ministry official.

Knowing whether there is community transmission is important as people with undetected infection could lead to an explosion in cases like in Italy, where Covid-19 cases and related fatalities shot up suddenly when community transmission began. "I think it is just a matter of time that India sees an explosive rise in the number of cases," said Lalit Kant, former head of epidemiology and communicable diseases at ICMR. The Pune woman was brought to the government-run Bharati hospital on March 16 with complaints of fever and breathlessness.

"As per the information from her family, she started developing initial symptoms on March 3. After that, she took public transport to travel to an anganwadi and also attended a wedding in Navi Mumbai," said Sanjay Lalwani, medical director of the hospital.

Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said four of her family members were isolated at their homes while the driver of taxi she had hired was quarantined.

"We have already traced over 100 people who came in contact with the patient and also contact tracing those who came in contact with the four family members. This number may run in hundreds. A central government team has visited the hospital to decide on whether the case is of local transmission or community transmission," he added.

The case came a day after the government said it was yet to trace the origin of infection of the 20-year-old Delhi man who travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai on March 17.

In the Bengal case, the man, a resident of Dum Dum on the northern fringes of Kolkata, was admitted in a private hospital on March 16 after being ill with fever, accompanied by a dry cough, since March 13, a top state health department official said. His condition deteriorated on March 19 with the onset of acute respiratory distress syndrome and he was put on ventilator, the official said on condition of anonymity

Tracing difficulties

Authorities argue that contact tracing becomes incredibly difficult, especially when people travel in public transport like in the case of a 46-year-old Delhi man who took the Metro for days before testing positive. Delhi authorities said they were able to trace his contacts in the neighbourhood where he lived and at his workplace, but there was no way of tracing the people on the metro.

The same was true of one of the three initial cases in India.

"If you remember the first three cases of Covid-19 in India, one of them had taken multiple flights, trains and other public transport. Do you think we were able to trace all of the people on those vehicles? No. And, someone else might very well contract the infection in transit and we will not know the source. But, does it suggest community transmission? No," the health ministry official said.

To detect community transmission, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex health research body, has been conducting surveillance testing by lifting random samples of patients suffering from severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), including severe pneumonia.

These samples are taken from people with no travel history or contact with a positive patient. All 826 samples collected during the second round of community testing in March returned negative for Covid-19, according to ICMR. With the ICMR expanding its testing criteria to include all patients hospitalised with SARI Friday onwards, early detection of community transmission is likely.

"The ICMR says that there is no community transmission as of now, but my feeling is we just haven't been able to pick up. Initially, we were just testing symptomatic people who had travelled abroad and those who came in contact with them, how would we then be able to detect if anyone among the 1.3 billion people have it? The revised criteria that allows for testing all patients with SARI will help in picking up community transmission," said Dr Kant.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 25 -- Muslims from the Sufi or the Barelvi school of thought celebrate the birth anniversary of the last Prophet of Islam, Prophet Muhammad, as Eid Milad-un-Nabi or Eid-e-Milad which is also called Nabid and Mawlid in colloquial Arabic. The festival is celebrated by the Sufi and Barelvi sect during Rabi' al-awwal, the third month in the Islamic calendar.

The moon for the beginning of the month of Rabi' al-awwal began in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and other parts of the subcontinent region was sighted on October 18 this year. As per the gregorian calendar, October 19th was the first date of Rabi ul Awwal.

Date of Eid-e-Milad 2020:

For the uninitiated, the Islamic calendar or lunar calendar differs from the Gregorian calendar on the basis of the crescent moon sighting. Those from the Sunni community of Muslms, who celebrate Eid-e-Milad, mark it on the 12th day of Rabi' al-awwal whereas the Shia community celebrates it on the 17th of Rabi' al-awwal. This year, Eid-e-Milad will be celebrated on October 29 in Saudi Arabia and on October 30 in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and other parts of the subcontinent region.

History and significance

The origin of celebrating Prophet Muhammad's birthday can be traced back to the early four Rashidun Caliphs of Islam and the idea of marking this day was first initiated by the Fatimids. Some Muslims believe that Prophet Muhammad was born in Mecca on the twelfth day of Rabi' al-awwal in 570 CE.

Though the word "Mawlid" means to give birth or bear a child in colloquial Arabic, Eid-e-Milad is also mourned by some because it is also believed to be the death anniversary of the Prophet. First celebrated as an official festival in Egypt, the celebrations of Eid-e-Milad became more popular during the 11th century.

At that time, only the then ruling tribe of the Shia Muslims in the region could celebrate the festival instead of the general public. Eid-e-Milad began to be celebrated by Syria, Morocco, Turkey and Spain only in the 12th century and soon some Sunni Muslim sects too started celebrating the day.

Celebrations

Since it began in Egypt, the earlier celebrations were marked by Muslims offering prayers after which the ruling clan gave speeches and narrated verses from the Holy Quran followed by a large public feast. People of the ruling clan were honoured as they were believed to be Caliphs, which were considered to be representatives of Muhammad.

Later, as the practices got modified under heavy Sufi influence, the celebrations were marked with animal sacrifices, public discourses, night time torchlight processions and a public banquet. In current times, Eid-e-Milad is celebrated by Muslims wearing new clothes, offering prayers and exchanging greetings.

They get together at a mosque or at a dargah and start their day with a morning prayer followed by a procession carried out from the mosques to the town and back. Children are narrated stories of Prophet Muhammad's life and preachings as mentioned in the Holy Quran, community meals are organized, donations are made towards the needy and poor people, friends and family are invited to be a part of the festivities and social gatherings wherein they have night-long prayers are held.

With the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic this year, it is still unclear whether Juloos-e-Mohammadi, which is the procession taken out on the 12th of Rabi' al-awwal to commemorate the Prophet, will take place. Juloos-e-Mohammadi is scheduled to take place on October 30 this year and a day before the procession, homes and localities are decorated and lit as a part of Jashan-e-Chiraaga.

Bidaah

Even though Eid-e-Milad and its traditions are widely followed in India and other countries, many different sections of the Muslim community believe that the birthday celebrations of the Prophet has no place in Islamic culture. Since evidences found in the Holy Quran and Sunnah prove that celebrating any event other than Eid al-Fitr and Eid-e-Adha is a kind of biddah or innovation in religion, Muslims from Salafi and Wahhabi schools of thought do not mark the tradition of festivities.

They believe that the observance of Eid-e-Milad or Mawlid is an innovation or act of biddat since it was not even celebrated during the era of Prophet Mohammad himself and his appointed successors.

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 19 -- US President Joe Biden will announce on Friday a total contribution of $4 billion to the Covax facility, a programme backed by the World Health Organization (WHO) to ensure equitable distribution of Covid-19 vaccines around the world that his predecessor Donald Trump had spurned over his feud with the global health body.

India is the largest beneficiary of Covax, clinching a deal earlier this month to receive 97.1 million of the 2 billion doses to be distributed under the programme, according to an agreement announced earlier in February.

Covax is a collaboration involving the WHO, the Gavi vaccine alliance, and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI).

Biden will announce the new contribution during a virtual meeting of the G7, according to a senior administration official.

The first tranche of $2 billion will go to Gavi, the White House said in a note. The remaining $2 billion will be released over 2021 and 2022. The first lot of $500 million will be paid after initial donor pledges are fulfilled and first vaccine doses have been delivered.

"In close cooperation with Gavi, this additional $2 billion in funding will serve to expand Covax's reach," the White House note said. "We also call on our G7 and other partners to work alongside Gavi, to bring in billions more in resources to support global Covid-19 vaccination, and to target urgent vaccine manufacturing, supply, and delivery needs."

Former US president Donald Trump had kept the United States out of this programme as he had fought with the WHO for what he had called partisan support of China's misleading initial claims and statements about the origins of the coronavirus.

Trump had terminated US funding for the WHO - as its biggest contributor - in the middle of the deadliest pandemic to hit the world in more than 100 years.

It turned out to be a part of a pattern that defined his legacy - the US left Unesco, the Paris Agreement on climate, the Iran nuclear deal, and UN human rights council during his tenure.

On his first day in office, Biden announced that the US will rejoin the Paris Agreement and the WHO.

He has since vowed to return the US to the world stage and reclaim its leadership role that was forsaken by Trump as he had sought to pursue an America-first agenda.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 21 -- Manjeet Singh Riyat, an emergency medicine consultant who was 'hugely respected and much loved' by colleagues and patients in Derbyshire, died on Monday after being infected by coronavirus, making him the latest Indian-origin medical professional to fall victim to the virus.

Riyat, who got his medical qualifications from the University of Leicester in 1992, was the first Sikh accident and emergency consultant in the National Health Service, and was instrumental in building the emergency medicine service in Derbyshire, his hospital trust said.

Gavin Boyle, chief executive of the hospital, said: "I want to pay tribute to Mr Manjeet Riyat, who has sadly passed away.He was an incredibly charming person and he was loved. Manjeet knew so many people here in the hospital, we will all miss him immensely".

Riyat's colleague, Susie Hewitt, said: "In 2003, Manjeet became one of four consultants in Emergency Medicine at the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary...Manjeet was enormously valued and much loved as a colleague, supervisor and mentor".

"Manjeet's passion for teaching and contribution to medical education were constant during his career.he had many skills, but was most comfortable as an emergency medicine consultant", she added.

Riyat has left behind his wife and two sons.

Earlier this month, cardio-thoracic surgeon Jitendra Kumar Rathod, who gained his qualifications in India and moved to the UK, passed away in Wales. The Cardiff and Vale University Health Board described him as 'a greatly respected doctor and colleague'.

Riyat, Rathod and east Sussex-based pharmacist Pooja Sharma are among over 50 non-white medical professionals who have passed away in the coronavirus pandemic. Frontline medical staff treating patients includes many Indian origin doctors and nurses.

Initial hospital data suggests that minority non-white people in the UK constitute 35 per cent among those in critical care hospitals, prompting an inquiry.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 13 -- Coronavirus cases across the globe are inching toward the 2 million-mark while more than one lakh people have lost their lives to the deadly contagion worldwide.

What started in the Chinese city of Wuhan has now spread across the globe, infecting hundreds and thousands across various continents, bringing some of the biggest economies to a halt.

There's very little known about the virus or its origin. There are no proven vaccines or medication against the same. A study conducted by the Pew Research Centre suggests that most Americans believe that Covid-19 was lab-grown.

Nearly three in ten Americans or a quarter of the American population, as many as 29% of those surveyed, believe that novel coronavirus was grown in a lab, the survey indicated.

43% of Americans believe that the virus came about naturally.

The findings were obtained after conducting a survey between March 10 to 16.

According to Johns Hopkins University, the United States recorded 1,514 coronavirus fatalities over the past 24 hours. However, the number of fatalities was lower than the previous day's toll of 1,920.

The outbreak has now claimed at least 22,020 lives in the US, the most of any country.

US President Donald Trump has lashed out at leading American newspaper The New York Times (NYT), accusing it of carrying fake report on his administration's Covid-19 response.

"The @nytimes story is a Fake, just like the "paper" itself. I was criticized for moving too fast when I issued the China Ban, long before most others wanted to do so. @SecAzar told me nothing until later, and Peter Navarro memo was same as Ban (see his statements). Fake News!" he tweeted on Monday morning.

In India, 620 new Covid-19 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. The overall coronavirus tally breached the 9,000-mark with 9,152 total cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The closure of the Suez Canal, one of the world's most critical water bodies, due to a large container vessel, the MV Ever Given, running aground on March 23 while in transit, has caused enormous disruption to global shipping. Sustained efforts by the Suez Canal Authority (SCA) and the Egyptian government to dislodge the vessel and refloat it have been less than successful.

More than 300 ships waiting to cross the Suez that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Seahave piled up on either side of the canal. On an average, 50 ships transit the Suez every day and, as per SCA, in 2020, nearly 19,000 vessels with a net tonnage of 1.17 billion tonnes transited the canal, which is the second-highest load in the history of the Suez. The value of goods shipped through the canal is estimated to be $9.5 billion daily - the MV Ever Given, for example, was laden with cargo worth $1 billion. Annually, this is about 8% of global trade and the canal generated $5.3 billion in revenue for the Egyptian exchequer in 2017.

The origins of the Suez Canal go back to the ancient period and the first waterway was dug during the reign of Senausert III Pharaoh of Egypt (1874 BC). However, this rudimentary canal was abandoned due to silting and reopened several times in the intervening centuries. The modern Suez was built in the mid-19th century through efforts by the French and opened for navigation on November 17, 1869. This was a tectonic development for global maritime connectivity and impacted colonial history in a definitive manner. The rise of the British Empire was enabled considerably by this canal. Since its inauguration, the Suez has been closed five times - the longest period being the eight years from 1967 to 1975 during the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The current closure will be very expensive for global trade - the shipping industry and insurance companies - and it is estimated that the loss per hour is almost $400 million. Some positive movement is being reported, and it is hoped that the Suez will soon be open for transit. In the event that the MV Ever Given remains wedged across the breadth of the canal for a longer period, the negative impact on the intricate and delicately balanced global supply-chain and oil prices will impose additional costs on the customer globally.

This aspect points to the fragility of global trade. While the worldwide logistic management chain has acquired a high degree of efficiency by way of manufacturing goods to tight schedules and keeping inventory/warehouse/shipping costs to the bare minimum, even while ensuring timely delivery to the customer, an unforeseen accident such as the Suez closure can lead to a cascading downstream disruption of trade with attendant economic consequences. This is bleak news in a Covid-19-scarred world.

The Suez along, with the Panama (that links the Pacific and Atlantic oceans), are the two most critical canals in the global maritime domain along with the Volga-Don and the Grand Canal (China). Each canal has its own navigational challenges and protocols, and in most cases, local pilots are deployed for every ship to ensure safe passage. Tug boats are used to enable the safe passage through restricted waters, and as the history of the Suez demonstrates, the kind of canal closure related to the MV Ever Given is an exception.

While the exact cause for the current accident is yet to be ascertained, preliminary reports suggest that very strong wind conditions that occur often in the region may have exacerbated the complex transit of a large vessel. In shallow waters, when a heavy vessel displaces water, it is not replaced immediately as would be the case in deeper waters and a partial vacuum occurs near the propeller. Steering behaviour can then become sluggish and this is compounded by what mariners refer to as "smelling the ground" when a ship in a channel nears a shoal and then lurches from one side to the other, making it difficult to navigate.

Whatever the final verdict about why the MV Ever Given ran aground, it would be fair to surmise that the causes would be a mix of material failure, human error and unanticipated local conditions. Given the scale of the consequences - both fiscal and supply-chain disruption - the need to objectively review existing procedures and protocols specific to the Suez merits the highest priority.

Incidentally, the crew on board the stricken MV Ever Given are all Indians and while the resilience of merchant ships and maximum profit orientation of the shipping industry are under scrutiny, the welfare of the seafarer in these times merits policy review. Working conditions at sea for the crew are very exacting and this is an issue that warrants empathetic attention even as global attention is focused on ensuring that the Suez Canal is navigable again.

Commodore (retired) C Uday Bhaskar is director, Society for Policy Studies

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 29 -- Rajesh Gupta, an Indian-origin doctor working in the United Kingdom, was found dead in a hotel earlier this week where he was staying to protect his family from coronavirus.

Gupta had gained medical qualifications from Jammu University in 1997, moved to the UK in 2006 and was working as a specialist pain medicine and consultant anaesthetist .

Many medical staff have been living away from homes while working in hospitals as the National Health Service grapples with the pandemic. As of Thursday evening, there have been 37,837 deaths and 269,127 cases in the UK.

The Frimley Health NHS Foundation Trust on Friday paid tributes to Gupta, who was working in its hospital near London.

"Rajesh, who worked as a consultant at Wexham Park Hospital, was found dead on Monday afternoon in the hotel where he had been staying to protect his family while he worked with us during the coronavirus pandemic. At this stage the cause of his death is not known".

"Rajesh was a popular and well-known figure across the trust, described by colleagues as an outstanding clinician with a passion for pain medicine. He had recently been appointed to a substantive post at Wexham after working for a period as a locum consultant at Frimley Park", the trust said.

Colleagues described Gupta as a gifted poet, painter, photographer and cook who was known for his enthusiasm and kindness. He wrote several books and contributed to a number of publications.

The trust added: "He will be greatly missed. On behalf of the whole trust we would like to pass our deepest condolences to Rajesh's family and loved ones, including his wife and young son. This news has come as an enormous shock to Rajesh's immediate colleagues and we are supporting them at this difficult time".

Besides Gupta, the grim list of Indian heritage doctors and nurses dying during the pandemic include Jitendra Kumar Rathod, Manjeet Singh Riyat, Krishan Arora, Rajesh Kalraiya, Pooja Sharma, Jayesh Patel, Vivek Sharma, Kamlesh Kumar Masson, Amarante Dias, Sophie Fagan, Hamza Pacheeri and Amrik Bamotra.

EOM

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 2 -- State governments were on Friday putting in place protocols and guidelines to receive millions of migrant workers who were likely to take trains back to their hometowns after the Centre allowed their movement in a controlled manner amid the Covid-19 outbreak.

The Union home ministry allowed on Friday interstate movement of labourers, students, pilgrims and others stuck across the country by special trains, widening the scope of a previous order that said such transportation can happen only by buses.

Following demands of the state governments to run special trains, the Indian Railways said it decided to run 'Shramik Special' trains to move stranded migrants. The railways said the Shramik Special trains were meant for "nominated people" identified by state governments.

The first train from Lingampally in Andhra Pradesh was expected to reach Jharkhand's Hatia station late on Friday after it departed from its origin station earlier in the day. The other special trains to run on Friday were from Aluva in Kerala to Bhubaneswar, Nasik to Lucknow, Nasik to Bhopal, Jaipur to Patna and Kota to Hatia. These trains were scheduled to run non-stop and cover the distance to the destinations in 12 to 24 hours.

According to the railway ministry, it is the responsibility of the state governments to arrange transport for stranded people to reach railway stations. Similarly, at the destination station, the local administration will have to arrange for medical check-ups of passengers and their onward travel.

On arrival at Hatia, where the first train was expected to reach late on Friday, the passengers were to be first scanned for body temperature and then taken in sanitised buses to their villages, where they will be quarantined at home or government schools and primary health care centers.

"On their arrival in respective districts, all of them would go through medical screening. Depending on their condition, they will be put in home quarantine or institutional quarantine accordingly," a state government official said on condition of anonymity. He added that all passengers will be served packed dinner at Chakradharpur station after entering Jharkhand.

Jharkhand chief minister Hemant Soren welcomed the Centre's decision to allow trains to ferry workers and said that such a decision should have been taken earlier. "At this point, I will say better late than never. We should look forward rather than fight over the past," he said.

Bihar's minster of building construction department, Ashok Kumar Chowdhary, said on Friday that the Centre heeded the demand of the state government. "We thank the government of India for heeding our request and a strategy is being finalised to give shape to their (migrants) return," he said.

The minister maintained that the state was fully prepared to take care of migrants, close to 250,000, who were willing to come back. The state government appointed principal secretary, Pratyaya Amrit, as the nodal officer to facilitate the return of migrant workers.

Kerala, from where a special train was to leave late on Friday from Aluva in Ernakulam district to Odisha, has asked district collectors to prepare a list of priority workers. There are around 360,000 stranded migrants in Kerala, mainly from Wet Bengal, Assam and Odisha. The railways could be looking at running five special trains from Kerala every day. A government spokesperson said the workers have been told not to leave the camps to prevent overcrowding at the stations.

Chhattisgarh chief minister Bhupesh Baghel on Friday requested Prime Minister Narendra Modi to run special trains to bring back workers of Chhattisgarh stranded in other states. "In the present situation, point-to-point special trains could be run to ensure safety, convenience and hygiene of these workers," the CM said, adding that the state's request for special trains was pending with the home ministry.

Uttar Pradesh, which was the first state to bring back stranded students from Kota and then workers from Haryana in government buses, has earmarked special quarantine centres near major railway station for workers coming back.

"Nothing new is being done. We have already set up quarantine centres in major cities for stranded workers who are being brought back in buses. More, if required, will be created," said a UP government official who asked not to be named. He said buses have been arranged to take the passengers to their villages.

Maharashtra, where about half a million workers from other states are housed at 4,600 shelters, has started allowing workers to go back and has appointed nodal officers to facilitate their travel. "We have no information about the places from where the special trains will run," said a state government official, who was not willing to be named.

"The number of Maharashtrians stuck in other states is too little compared to the people from other states in Maharashtra. We have started taking the requests in stipulated formats from the migrants stuck in Maharashtra. District collectors in rural areas and police commissioners in urban areas will issue the passes," said IA Kundan, secretary, Maharashtra government.

The first special train to take back students was to leave Kota on Friday night, taking around 1,000 coaching students to Jharkhand.

Till now, 27,000 students of 11 states and four Union territories have been taken back by their respective states in the past month, officials said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 2 -- Every celebration is an opportunity for conversation. During its 68th session in December 2013, the United Nations General Assembly decided to observe World Wildlife Day on March 3. The reason was to raise awareness of the world's wild animals and plants. The choice of date was to mark when the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) was signed in 1973.

The theme for World Wildlife Day 2021 is Forests and Livelihoods: Sustaining People and Planet. The objective is to highlight the importance of forests with all their living residents and how they support the livelihoods of millions of people across the world. It also focuses on local and indigenous communities as an integral part of the forest ecosystems and their synergetic interactions.

There is no way to avoid depending on wildlife, in urban or rural areas. Take just one example. If bees and other pollinators are not doing well, our food production mechanism will be severely affected, as predicted in the recently published Living Planet Report 2020 (LPR).

Since the Covid-19 pandemic, people worldwide have become familiar with zoonotic diseases - where the infection is naturally transmissible from vertebrate animals to human beings. There are over 200 known types of zoonosis. Whether Covid-19 had a zoonotic origin is still being debated, but what we know is that zoonotic diseases are rising.

This is attributed to two environmental risks. The first is the large-scale conversion of land for agriculture, which increases interactions between wildlife, livestock and human beings. The second is inadequate food safety standards in some parts of the world, including permitting the trade and consumption of high-risk wildlife species, which is increasing human exposure to animal pathogens.

Human-wildlife conflict is also on the rise in India. This is most prominent when large mammals such as tigers, leopards, elephants, and ungulates like nilgai, wild boar, and human populations coexist and share limited resources. The distinction between human-use areas and those used by wildlife is thin and often broken, which increases conflict and poses a threat of zoonotic disease transmission. It is estimated that approximately 500 people and 100 elephants die every year in India due to negative interactions between humans and elephants. Most of these conflicts are avoidable.

Negative interactions between humans and wildlife intensify when local communities feel that wildlife needs or values are given priority over their own needs. In case government authorities fail to address the bonafide needs of local people or work with them to address such conflict adequately, the negative interaction intensifies, becoming a conflict between humans and wildlife - and between humans about wildlife.

An antagonistic approach develops among people towards wildlife, manifestations of which have been seen in recent times. Many will remember the poignant case of a pregnant elephant suffering a painful death after it reportedly ate a crude-bomb masked in a fruit that was meant to illegally kill wild crop-raiding herbivores. Too often, when wildlife conservation initiatives suffer, what weakens is the economic and social well-being of local people. Local support for conservation declines and, in effect, eco-development efforts meant to offset more general "costs" of living near a protected area may be hindered.

Therefore, wildlife conservation needs to be prioritised, and development plans at country, state and district levels need to take cognisance of wildlife needs. Of late, we have seen that wildlife conservation needs are not adequately addressed while submitting developing projects, where a large swathe of forest lands is proposed to be diverted or a road passing through a large mammal corridor is proposed without appropriate mitigation measures. We tend to forget that wildlife and natural resources are mostly irreplaceable and cannot be bought. The pandemic in 2020 suggests that we need to reduce the risk of zoonotic diseases. For this, land-use change that destroys wildlife habitats needs to stop, and unsustainable extraction of wildlife for human use needs to be curbed.

Dipankar Ghose is the director of the Wildlife and Habitats programme, WWF India

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 13 -- Bhopal/Chandigarh

More regions were forced to reintroduce curbs on social movement due to a sharp rise in coronavirus disease cases, as India recorded a daily surge in infections with 160,676 new cases on Monday.

While a complete week-long lockdown was announced in Madhya Pradesh capital Bhopal, the Haryana government decided to impose night curfew across the state.

These are the latest in a string of regions across the country that have again started enforcing curbs ranging from night curfews to limits on public assembly as they struggle to reel from the second wave of Covid-19 cases.

On Monday, Bhopal district collector said Avinash Lavaniya said a lockdown has been imposed from 9pm on Monday till 6am on April 19. "The emergency services including medical and health, transportation of goods, movement of students for examination, construction work, vegetable and fruit vendors will be allowed during the curfew," Lavaniya said.

The state recorded 6,489 new cases on Monday, taking the state's tally to 344,634, according to HT's dashboard. Till Sunday, there were 5,234 active Covid-19 cases in Bhopal.

"Despite all efforts, the Covid 19 cases are not coming down. To contain the spread, Corona curfew has become important," the Bhopal collector said.

Madhya Pradesh medical education minister Vishwas Sarang said that anyone found violating the lockdown norms would be booked under section 144 of the CrPC.

In Haryana, the state government clamped a night curfew with immediate on a day that the state recorded 3,818 new cases. The state has recorded more than 21,000 infections in the last nine weeks.

"Night curfew between 9 pm and 5 am will be imposed from tonight and will remain in force till further orders," state home and health minister Anil Vij was quoted as saying by PTI.

Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management, Sanjeev Kaushal in an order said that it is imperative to put in place strict measures for social distancing to contain the spread of the virus.

"A lot of non-essential movement of people and vehicles has been reported during night hours,'' the order said. "No person shall leave their home or move on foot or by vehicle or travel or stand or roam around on any road or public places during the above said hours."

Emergency services like hospitals, pharmacies and ATMs will be allowed to function round the clock and people would be allowed to avail medical services, the order said. Passengers going to or returning from bus stands, airports or railway stations shall also be exempted.

The order further states that there are no curbs on inter-state and intrastate movement of essential and non-essential goods. "All vehicle and persons in bonafide transit shall be allowed to pass, but only after verification of point of origin and destination," the order said.

The state government also decided to restrict gathering of maximum 200 people in indoor spaces and 500 in outdoor. All schools and colleges have been closed till end of this month.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 27 -- Haryana chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar spoke to Ramesh Vinayak and Hitender Rao about reviving the economy after the pandemic, the virus trajectory in Gurugram, and running a coalition government, among other issues. Edited excerpts:

How is the economy shaping up post the lockdown? How good are revenue receipts and how much is your dependence on the market borrowings? April was bad for us. In fact, the revenue shortfall for April, May and June was about Rs 9,000 crore. We have tried to make up for it by borrowing from the market. Revenue started trickling in after the lockdown was relaxed and the collections were about 60% in June. By July 20, we have recovered well and are at par with our projections. We are now able to meet our routine expenses on our own.

What budgetary cut are you contemplating in the revised estimates? It is quite understandable considering the deficit. The Rs 9,000 crore revenue shortfall would force us to recalibrate our outlay.

How will the downturn in fiscal health impact the state's development projects and welfare schemes? There will be no impact on welfare schemes, though our development projects have been delayed by three months. During the pandemic, we have spend an additional Rs 1,500 crore to give relief to people including Rs 600-650 crore cash distribution. This money was spent on the medical services, ration distribution, arranging return of migrant labour, and relief camps.

In your role as finance minister, how do you plan to boost the economy during the pandemic?The central government package of Rs 20 lakh crore is a big relief. In the changing scenario due to the Covid-19 situation, I feel that the service sector will suffer but the manufacturing and agriculture sectors will do well.

The central government has sought the views of the state and parents of students about reopening of schools. We will not open primary schools and will take a call for higher classes in August. Colleges and professional institutions would be the first to start.

Projections show a rising coronavirus infection trajectory in the coming months. How do you plan to augment the health infrastructure including ventilator beds to meet any eventuality?See, what essentially matters is the number of active cases and not the cumulative numbers. How many patients have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic is important since such patients qualify for home isolation and takes pressure off our systems. As per our current projections and rate of recovery, we are doing well in terms of health infrastructure. But we keep reviewing it.

The NCR districts of Gurugram, Faridabad and Sonepat have a majority of Covid-19 cases. Health minister Anil Vij hinted at the possibility of stricter curbs. Is a curfew or a selective lockdown on the cards?The weekend lockdowns will not bring us results. Things are slowly coming back on track and the imposition of a fresh lockdown would mean putting pressure on people. Our strategy instead is to go for aggressive containment in the NCR districts. We are screening more people and conducting more tests.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommended that NCR districts should follow Delhi's model for combating the spread of the coronavirus. Do you see a need to work with Delhi since the increase in the number of cases in Gurugram has been attributed to the movement of people between the two cities? We, along with Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, are implementing a common strategy for combating the infection. Infection travelled to Haryana from Delhi initially, but now both states are at par in terms of contagion spread. Since there is so much back-and-forth movement from Delhi to Haryana, it is hard to conclude now on the origin of the contagion.

Gurugram was kept in the orange zone despite a sharp rise in the number of cases to facilitate the reopening of the industry. What impact did the closure of businesses in the Millennium City have on the state's revenue? How is the government planning to boost the local economy? We cannot overlook the adverse economic impact of three months. But if you look at the power consumption for the industry, it is at par with 2019. This means that the industry is operating at the same capacity as it was last year. Of course, there could be workforce engagement related issues because of the need to maintain social distancing.

You recently spoke in Mewat about enacting a Freedom of Religion law to prohibit religious conversions by force, allurement or marriage. Why do you feel the need for such a law?There were complaints regarding forced conversions and marriages from many districts. People are free to adopt any religion in an informed manner but using coercion, allurement to force religious conversions is a matter of concern. Such incidents vitiate the atmosphere of society. We are studying similar laws enacted by other states and accordingly take a call.

How has been your experience of running a coalition government so far? The BJP and Jannayak Janta Party have not been able decide on the common minimum programme. Any deadline? We are not new to coalition politics in the state. The BJP and the JJP both are like-minded entities, and both oppose the Congress. Common minimum programme is not a major issue because we do not have any conflict with our ally. We are well synchronized. The proposed 75 % private sector quota law is an example that we are on similar page.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- For the first time in its history, the famous Rath Yatra of the Jagannath temple in Puri, Odisha, began on Tuesday morning with priests pulling the three colourful chariots of the presiding deities in the absence of the tens of thousands of devotees who typically throng the town every year for the annual event.

Around 1,500 priests of the iconic 12th century temple milled around the wooden chariots which they started pulling from the main temple to the Gundicha temple amid the beating of cymbals and drums in praise of the resident deities: Lord Jagannath, Lord Balabhadra and Goddess Subhadra.

The pulling of the chariots -- Nandighosh, Taladwaja and Darpadalana -- is the main ritual of the festival. It was performed by the priests who had been tested for Covid-19 on Monday.The Supreme Court on Monday allowed the conduct of the Rath Yatra, recalling its June 18 order that prohibited the event, but laid down strict conditions, including a ban on pubic attendance and the imposition of a curfew in Puri during the festivities. The festival was telecast on Doordarshan.

The erstwhile King of Puri, Gajapati Dibyasingha Deb, who is also the first servitor of the Lord, performed the Chhera Panhara, a ritual sweeping of the chariots, before they were pulled by the priests.

"It's hard to imagine Rath Yatra without devotees on Badadanda (Grand Road). But Lord Jagannath stepped out of temple for the whole universe," said Deb. Puri Govardhan Peeth Shankaracharya Nischalananda Saraswati paid obeisance to the deities atop the chariots along with his disciples.

Until Monday afternoon, uncertainty clouded the Rath Yatra as a three-judge bench of the apex court led by chief justice SA Bobde heard dozens of intervention petitions seeking recall of the court's June 18 order that stayed the festival over fears of a mass congregation amid the coronavirus disease pandemic. For a few days, it seemed that the Rath Yatra would not be held for the first time in 285 years.

The judges on Monday afternoon reversed their decision after an appeal by the petitioners as well as an affidavit by the state and the Centre arguing that the event had been held continuously for centuries, and even in 1918, when the world was in the grip of the Spanish flu. The apex court agreed to allow the festival subject to conditions.

Since Tuesday morning, the district administration disinfected the 2.5 km long road from the main temple to Gundicha temple ahead of the pulling of chariots. From 9 pm Monday, the police enforced a curfew around the holy town restricting anyone's entry or exit for the following 41 hours.

"We have mobilised 50 platoons of forces in Puri with two primary objectives - smooth and incident-free movement / pulling of the chariots from origin to destination and restricting entry of unauthorised persons into the town," said state director general of police (DGP) Abhay, who goes by one name.

The devotees, who are an intrinsic part of the festival, remained glued to TV sets as Doordarshan telecast the proceedings live. "It's all the wish of Lord Jagannath. I am happy with the decision of the Supreme Court. I will see my Lord after the lockdown is over," said Binapani Mallik, a housewife in Bhubaneswar.

"After the SC order last week, I had given up hope. But I knew that the Lord of Universe would perform a miracle to come out on the road and show his face to his millions of devotees," said Prabodh Mishra, a septuagenarian.

On Monday, 1,143 servitors of the temple were tested for Covid-19 and one tested positive. The servitor who tested positive was shifted to a Covid hospital before the beginning of the Rath Yatra rituals.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 1 -- Visitors arriving in Leicester by train are greeted with welcome signs in Hindi, Gujarati, Punjabi and Urdu, among other languages, reflecting the city's multicultural reality, but dealing with the diversity during the pandemic may have contributed to a spike in new infections.

Leicester in the east Midlands has been placed under a lockdown while the rest of England will largely re-open from Saturday, spreading disappointment among its over 3 lakh population, nearly half non-white, including nearly 30 per cent of Indian heritage.

Official messages in the city are invariably translated in Indian and other languages, but reports allege that the new infections may be the result of coronavirus-related messages not being translated for the benefit of some sections of the population.

Other causes for the spike mentioned include high levels of economic deprivation, congested housing and allegations of exploitation of undocumented migrants and workers by owners of garment and food factories, who reportedly insisted on them working despite being infected.

Local resident Prabin Hazarika, brother of cultural icon the late Bhupen Hazarika, said: "The lockdown is a huge disappointment. There were already indications that many people were not taking official advice seriously enough".

Trisha, his wife, added: "I am very angry and also very sorry for the mostly young workers who are exploited by food-processing and other factory owners. No PPE, no social distancing at work. This is earning a bad name for Leicester".

Leicester mayor Peter Soulsby and other leaders said that until recently they did not have data from central health authorities to deal with the situation. The spike in infections was evident in tests carried out outside hospitals, whose figures are not usually published.

Labour Behind the Label, a campaign group that works to improve conditions and empower workers in the global garment industry, said in a new report that factories in Leicester are no stranger to illegal working conditions, with numerous reports of low pay and intimidation of vulnerable workers.

It said that garment manufacturing is a major industry in Leicester with over 1000 known sites, excluding home-working; most are small workshops, often housed in dilapidated buildings with little investment in building safety and modern ventilation.

The group said it had reports that workers have been told to come to work - even when they showed symptoms of Covid-19 - and would lose their jobs if they did not: "We have heard of several incidents, whereby workers who had tested positive were told to come into work, and of managers telling workers not to tell anyone else about positive cases".

According to an analysis by local health officials, more people in Leicester from BAME (Black, Asian, Minority Ethnic) backgrounds are dying than White British people from the virus.

This, the analysis adds, is likely due to a combination of factors that include: more BAME people being exposed to/contracting the virus in the first place; they are more exposed to the virus as they form a significant majority of health and social care work force (44% of NHS medical staff) as well as other frontline service professionals (such as delivery drivers and transport staff); and because people from certain ethnic backgrounds are more likely to have long-term health conditions, which likely exacerbate symptoms and/or severity of the virus.

Expressing disappointment at the lockdown, former Labour MP from Leicester East, Keith Vaz, said that because of its large South Asian origin population, Leicester has one of the largest number of diabetes sufferers in the UK.

Calling for wide testing for diabetes, he said: "What we also need to do is to ramp up the testing for diabetes, it is now established that one of the underlying health conditions that causes Coronavirus complications is those who have diabetes and it is essential that they are tested for diabetes and are able to manage their condition".

Leicester has been held up as a poster city of multiculturalism due to its success in assimilating waves of migrants that included thousands of Indians who were expelled from Idi Amin's Uganda in the early 1970s. They have since rejuvenated the local economy and gone on to hold senior positions in various walks of life.

Local businessman Uday Dholakia said: "Considering the diverse majority communities in Leicester, the communication and conveyance of trust has fallen short. The local media, politicians and community stalwarts have been preoccupied with issues like the Gandhi statue, important though, that is".

"The reality of making a living is a hard reality for many. The public intervention, although commendable at national level, has been patchy locally. Many business and community support networks have been systematically destroyed. Exclusion in all facets of life is obvious to see. Covid-19 has brutally exposed it", he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 9 -- Since the first case was reported on January 31 of coronavirus disease (Covid-19), with a Kerala student from Wuhan testing positive, India has reported 41 positive cases of the viral disease so far. While information about the virus and the disease so far is limited, in India the disease pattern so far suggests mild infection.

The virus and the disease

Official name was announced for the virus and the disease it causes by the World Health Organisation (WHO). The disease is called coronavirus disease (Covid-19). The virus has been named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).

The disease pattern

The global data suggests, in about 80% of the cases the disease is mild, and 15% are severe infection, requiring oxygen, and 5% are critical infections, requiring ventilation. While the true mortality of Covid-19 will take some time to fully understand, the data so far indicate that the crude mortality ratio (the number of reported deaths divided by the reported cases) is between 3-4%. For seasonal influenza, mortality is usually well below 0.1%.

Not influenza

While both viruses cause respiratory illnesses, the speed of transmission is an important point of difference between the two viruses. Influenza has a shorter median incubation period (the time from infection to appearance of symptoms) and a shorter serial interval (the time between successive cases) than Covid-19 virus. The serial interval for Covid-19 virus is estimated to be 5-6 days, while for influenza virus, the serial interval is 3 days, meaning influenza can spread faster.

Children less affected

For Covid-19 virus, initial data indicates that children are less affected than adults and that clinical attack rates in the 0-19 age group are low. Further preliminary data from household transmission studies in China suggest that children are infected from adults, rather than vice versa.

Who are at high-risk

Those most at risk for severe influenza infection are children, pregnant women, elderly, those with underlying chronic medical conditions and those who are immunosuppressed. For Covid-19, our current understanding is that older age and underlying conditions increase the risk for severe infection.

Cure and prevention

No licensed medicine is available for Covid-19 currently; anti-HIV/AIDS medicine (Lopinavir and Ritonavir) are being given to severely ill patients under restricted use. Several clinical trials are on for drugs, and about 20 vaccines are under development.

What we still don't know about Covid-19

Origin of the virus: There is still no definitive animal source identified but preliminary research suspects the virus jumping into humans from snakes, rats or bats

Incubation period: How long does it actually take for the virus to show symptoms

Mutability: Whether or not it's prone to mutations; how fast will it mutate.

Population based behaviour: How will it behave among people of a particular race or region

Cure: There's no cure for the disease; clinical trials for many possible drugs are on and 20 vaccines are in development

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 1 -- Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau on Tuesday expressed concern about the protest by farmers in India against laws to liberalise farm trade, saying these concerns had been conveyed to the Indian government.

Trudeau made the remarks while participating in a Facebook video interaction organised by Canadian MP Bardish Chagger to mark Gurupurab or the 551st birth anniversary of Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion. Joining him were Canadian ministers Navdeep Bains, Harjit Sajjan and members of the Sikh community.

In his opening remarks during the interaction, Trudeau said, "I would be remiss if I didn't start also by recognising the news coming out of India about the protest by farmers. The situation is concerning and we're all very worried about family and friends.

"I know that's a reality for many of you. Let me remind you, Canada will always be there to defend the right of peaceful protest. We believe in the importance of dialogue and that's why we've reached out through multiple means directly to the Indian authorities to highlight our concerns."

Also read | Farmers' protest: All you need to know

There was no immediate response to Trudeau's remarks from Indian officials. People familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity that the comments appeared to be aimed at Canada's influential Indian-origin diaspora.

Trudeau also referred to the Covid-19 pandemic and said this "is a moment for all of us to pull together". He added, "We're going to be there to continue to work together as we are there to help each other out." He also said it was important to remember Guru Nanak's teachings of compassion, equality and selfless service, which are at the heart of both Sikhism and Canadian values.

Trudeau is probably the first world leader to comment on the protest by Indian farmers, which entered its fifth day on Monday. The protest is aimed at against a set of laws to liberalise farm trade and open up agricultural markets. The Union government has offered talks to the protestors camping at New Delhi's borders, but they have insisted on the repeal of the laws.

The comments are unlikely to be seen favourably in New Delhi, especially at a time when both India and Canada have been taking steps to restore normalcy to bilateral ties that were hit by Trudeau's perceived softness on pro-Khalistan activists in Canada during his first term.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 30 -- Italy wants an independent inquiry into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic in China and backs India's calls for reform of multilateral bodies such as WHO that didn't perform as expected during the current crisis, the country's minister for European affairs Vincenzo Amendola has said.

With Italy and India set to take on the presidency of the G20 in 2021 and 2022, Amendola said the two countries would also play a key role in helping shape the post-Covid-19 world order, including global supply and value chains and ways to recover from the economic crisis created by the pandemic.

In an interview with Hindustan Times over Skype, Amendola said Italy backs Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call, made during the G20 virtual summit on March 26, for reforms of international bodies such as the World Health Organization to meet the needs of a changing world.

"The WHO for this crisis didn't perform according to some criteria and.it's necessary.to open an independent inquiry on what happened in China that was the starting place of this Covid-19 crisis," he said.

"Your prime minister was right because the multilateral aspect of the global order is not updated [with] the risks and opportunity of the current period. The WHO, I don't think, it performed in a correct way during this crisis, there were many delays and many problems," he added.

Describing Europe and India as "sisters", Amendola spoke of the need for closer cooperation between Italy and India both to shape the agenda of the G20 and to help fashion a new world order.

"If I look where we are going to invest, I see that you [India] are the actor relevant for our common future," he said, referring to the possibility of working together on green technologies such as renewable energy and digital transition, for which India is well placed because of its technological capability and human capital.

With Italy set to become the G20 president in 2021 and India taking on the same role in 2022, Amendola said: "We are going to be the two countries that will bring the G20 out of the recession. We have a coordinated responsibility to present to the main actors on the global level how we can recover from this pandemic and this global economic crisis."

The Covid-19 had emerged as a "big test for multilateral cooperation", he said.

"A few months ago, there were many people who wanted to participate in the funeral of multilateralism but nowadays it is clear that multilateralism is necessary in order to strengthen the resilience of the global economy."

Amendola was also critical of China's Belt and Road Initiative, saying Italy and India will have to work on "different aspects of free and fair trade" and "global legal standards" as the post-Covid-19 set-up moves towards new supply and value chains.

"There is not just one way like the Belt and Road Initiative, there are many ways that we have to restore the global chain. There should be not just one way of distributing, producing and giving the ownership of this trade track. There should be.different options and the European Union is.devoted to diversification of rules of trade and creation of value chains," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 9 -- Initial data and anecdotal evidence of medical professionals suggest that 35% of critically ill coronavirus patients are of Indian and other non-white origin in the UK, with London boroughs with large Indian population figuring among the most afflicted.

Britain's health authorities have not released ethnicity data of the over 7,000 dead or of the over 60,000 cases in hospitals. But new data from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre says 35% of the critically ill are from black or minority ethnic backgrounds.

The London area has the largest number of cases in the UK: 14,355, followed by the Midlands (including Birmingham, Leicester): 8,589. The London boroughs with high number of cases include Brent (853), Barnet (752), Ealing (553) and Harrow (530).

Kamlesh Khunti, a medical expert at the University of Leicester, told BBC: "A lot of people have been concerned about this issue based on anecdotal reports and now this data is showing a signal regarding a higher number of black and minority ethnic populations being admitted to intensive care units."

NHS doctors who have died so far are all from minority origin, including Jitendra Kumar Rathod. Nurses who have passed away also include some of Asian origin. Their deaths have been highlighted by anti-racism campaigners who hail their contribution to the NHS.

According to Khunti, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the figures, despite accounting for only 14 per cent of the UK population, include many coming from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, working in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

A large number of doctors and nurses who qualified in India are on the frontline of treating thousands of coronavirus patients across the UK. India-qualified doctors account for the second largest group in the NHS, after those qualifying in the UK.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 10 -- The England Cricket Board had decided to honour frontline healthcare workers who are involved in the fight against Covid-19. The England cricket team wore jerseys with names of health workers as international cricket resumed in Southampton after a gap of 117 days. One of the doctors nominated in the 'Raise The Bat' campaign was Dr. Vikas Kumar. He works at the critical care unit of a National Health Service (NHS) Trust hospital at Darlington in Durham.

35-year-old Kumar's name was featured on the jersey worn by England's captain Ben Stokes. So what was Kumar's reaction when he saw England's World Cup hero wearing a jersey with his name on the back of it?

"It was overwhelming to see Stokes and others putting that message out. It's been very difficult for all of us. NHS staff have made a lot of sacrifices. This recognition is for the entire medical fraternity, including my doctor friends in India," said Kumar as quoted by Indian Express.

Kumar graduated from Delhi University and completed his post-graduate diploma in anesthesia from Maulana Azad Medical College. He moved to England in 2019 along with his wife and two-year-old son. Kumar said that he played cricket at his college but with all my family members into studies, he also decided to become a doctor like his brothers.

"I was a cricket fan, and played for my medical college, but all my family members were into studies. So I had to become a doctor like my brothers," he says, laughing.

Kumar got a heart-warming video message from Stokes.

"Hi Vikas, a big thanks for everything you have done throughout this pandemic. I want to wish you a happy return to cricket, all the best mate, get as many runs and wickets as you can."

Three other Indian-origin health workers, Dr. Jamasp Kaikhusroo Dastur from Norwich, and Harikrishna Shah and physiotherapist Krishan Aghada from Leicester also got their name featured in the campaign for the ongoing series against the West Indies.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 28 -- With Covid-19 cases increasing steadily in Kerala, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Sunday asked all departments engaged in the fight against the pandemic to co-ordinate their work effectively and take quick measures to contain the spread of the disease.

What really worries the state is the number of people with no known source of infection, is on the rise. In state capital Thiruvananthapuram and Malappuram in north Kerala, many such cases have come to light. Medical workers say in such cases it is difficult to trace their primary contacts and source of origin.

The state has also decided to increase the number of tests after people returning to the state have gone up considerably. On an average, 40 flights are arriving in the four international airports in the state, all from the Gulf countries.

There was criticism that the state is keeping its tests very low to keep its records but the government has denied it. The CM said from next month, at least 15,000 samples will be tested every day. Now the daily average tests are between 5,000 and 5,500 but many experts said it has to increase its testing rate immediately.

"We have started anti-body tests at all airports for returning expatriates. This will help in containing imported cases. We will increase tests by next month," said state health minister K K Shailaja.

After NRIs and people stranded in other states returned and the government relaxed lockdown norms the state witnessed a steady increase in coronavirus cases but contrary to initial efforts it failed to ramp up its testing, experts said. As on Sunday 2,16,780 people were tested but they are very low when compared to other states..

Meanwhile, the total number of cases went up to 4,189 with the 118 new patients on Sunday. Out of this, 2,150 have recovered and active cases are now 2,015. At least 1,75, 734 people are under observation. The state has reported 23 deaths so far.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, April 28 -- Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the origin of the coronavirus, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Australia shot back, cautioning China against any threat of "economic coercion".

In the past week, Morrison spoke with the leaders of the US, France and Germany to gather support for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Beijing didn't take the move lightly. Chinese ambassador to Australia, Cheng Jingye, told The Australian Financial Review on Sunday that the call for the probe was "dangerous".

"If the mood is going from bad to worse, people would think 'Why should we go to such a country that is not so friendly to China?' The tourists may have second thoughts," Cheng said, adding, "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine?'"

"The parents of the students would also think... whether this is the best place to send their kids," he added.

China is not only Australia's largest export market for wine and beef, it is also the largest markets for energy exports, education and tourism. Bloomberg reports that Australia's economy is the most China-reliant one in the developed world.

On Monday, Australian foreign minister Marise Payne cautioned China against attempts at "economic coercion". Payne said in a statement that Australia had made a "principled call" for an independent review of the Covid-19 outbreak, which first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

"We reject any suggestion that economic coercion is an appropriate response to a call for such an assessment, when what we need is global cooperation," Payne said.

China had earlier called the move to ask for an independent inquest politically motivated.

"With the pandemic still spreading across the world, the most pressing task is to put people's life and health first and work together to defeat the virus," Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang had said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 30 -- The two overriding emotions that India is witnessing these days, thanks to the coronavirus-induced crisis, are fear and happiness. The first stems from the panic that the virus has caused and the harsh impact it has had on the poor and the economy. At the same time, there is a degree of relief at the impact on the environment; air and water bodies are cleaner now, and snow-clad mountains are visible from cities situated in the foothills.

But are these a cause for celebration? Many commentators point out that these developments are only a short-lived reality. When the lockdown is over, it will be business as usual, and we won't slow down to remember this magical interlude.

The last two months, however, have made us intensely aware of the linkages that exist between the destruction of the ecosystem and the systematic plunder of the natural environment to the coronavirus crisis. These observations are not new, but now they are gaining traction because we are collectively facing a crisis. It is known that zoonotic diseases emerge due to anthropogenic activities, linked to unsustainable economic practices of plundering diverse ecosystems through deforestation, mining, and illegal trade in wildlife. The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), like Avian influenza, Ebola, Nipah, and Zika, has origins in excessive human influence on natural environments. The recent exhortation by the acting executive secretary of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, to ban wildlife markets is testimony to this.

A return to business as usual will be suicidal. A balance must now be achieved in how humans and other living beings, as well as natural ecosystems, survive, if not thrive, in each other's company. The concept of "One Health" for humans, animals, and ecosystems can work as a guide to nations.

Originating from the discussions on biodiversity and the health of ecosystems, "One Health" is defined by the World Health Organization as "an approach to designing and implementing programmes, policies, legislation, and research in which multiple sectors communicate and work together to achieve better public health outcomes". The areas of work in which a 'One Health' approach is particularly relevant, the WHO says, is "food safety, the control of zoonoses (diseases that can spread between animals and humans...) and combating antibiotic resistance." We believe that "One Health" should become a key pillar of India's environmental policy.

A recent European Commission report highlights the links between the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the climate crisis. The report noted: "Experts suggest that degraded habitats coupled with a warming climate may encourage higher risks of disease transmission, as pathogens spread more easily to livestock and humans. Therefore, it is important - now more than ever before - to address the multiple and often interacting threats to ecosystems and wildlife to buffer against the risk of future pandemics, as well as preserve and enhance their role as carbon sinks and in climate adaptation."

Realigning the focus of environmental policy with the "One Health" concept will be transformational. It will prioritise the resilience of ecosystems as well as the relationships of humans and other living beings to their ecosystems, rather than focus on solutions like pollution control.

Such transformative change also requires new kinds of partnerships and alliances between actors within the government, civil society, and the private sector. To draw up a plan of action, the involvement of environmentalists, conservationists, and medical doctors will be a must. The ministries of environment, forests, climate change, and health and family welfare would have to work to develop and implement this transformative agenda.

There are some elements of this plan in the Government of India's programmes, but these have to be more emphatically articulated and implemented. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought with it untold misery. But it's given us an unexpected gift - the potential to press the reset button of the planet. We might celebrate the moment by taking photographs of peacocks on our terraces, but we shouldn't lose the opportunity of a large-scale overhaul of our environmental policies.

Bharati Chaturvedi is founder and director, Chintan Environmental Research and Action Group.

The article has been co-authored by Ashish Chaturvedi, director, Climate Change, GIZ, India

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 12 -- In the absence of international flight operations and owing to the ongoing nationwide lockdown in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, the ministry of external affairs has stepped up the process of reaching out to people of Indian origin abroad through high commissions and embassies, said an official aware of the details.

The ministry gets hundreds of phone calls, emails and messages on social media platforms from people seeking help in flying back as well as for aid in visa renewals.

Minister of state for external affairs V Muraleedharan said on Sunday apart from the helplines that are operational, he has also started answering phone calls from Indian nationals who call on dial-in programmes on Malayalam television channels.

"In the last few days I was part of at least four such programmes where I answered calls from people based in the Middle East, United Kingdom and other countries. These were on Malayalam channels, since a large number of people from Kerala are in countries around the world," he told HT.

Even as the Congress has criticised the ministry for failing to bring back Indians stuck abroad, especially students, the minister said high commissions and embassies are taking care of students whose universities and colleges are shut.

"In the United Kingdom for instance, we are providing food at subsidised rates for students, who could not take the flight back home. Temporary arrangements have also been made for their accommodation. Helplines are being run across many countries and our missions are taking all the steps required to help people," he said.

Citing examples, he said the mission in Dubai was able to reach out in hours to an expectant woman who needed medicines and to a group of three people who needed quarantine facilities after a fourth person sharing space with them tested positive for Covid-19.

The minister said special arrangements have been made to help those whose visas are expiring or have expired during the pandemic.

From March 20, the ministry has received as many as 7,100 calls from Dubai and Abu Dhabi; 450 from Jeddah, 700 from Riyadh, 920 from Oman, over 200 from Qatar.

Arrangements have also been made for Indian students in Bangladesh. These students are being put up in Dhaka, where their food and other necessities are being looked after, said a person aware of the details.

But Congress spokesperson Jaiveer Shergill alleged that while the BJP government is in "active mode" for foreign nationals, it is in "sleep mode" for the Indian students stranded abroad.

As per the external affairs ministry, he said, over 20,000 foreign nationals have been evacuated to different parts of the world by India while there over 200,000 Indian students stranded in the United States, 300 at Heathrow airport, 16.000 in Philippines besides hundreds of others in Australia, Canada and Malaysia.

"When the India government can facilitate evacuation of 20,000 foreigners then why not adopt the same approach for stranded Indian students?" Shergill asked. He said the government should give a "definitive timeline" of their evacuation to the worried parents.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- India has 559 deaths so far due to Covid-19 and has recorded 17,656 coronavirus cases. India has also eased lockdown in certain areas of the nation to restart economic activity. Nationwide containment zones still continue to be under the ambit of lockdown rule. Global death toll has surpassed 1,60,000 and 2.4 million continue to be affected. The United States, continues to be the nation most affected by coronavirus, recording more than 746,000 coronavirus cases and 40,000 deaths so far. US with 40,000 deaths and 700,000 cases has now become the epicentre of the coronavirus in the West.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Lockdown 3.0: Stringent curbs continue at Noida-Delhi border

Stringent restrictions continued to be in place at the Delhi-Gautam Budh Nagar (GBN) border on Monday, the day lockdown 3.0 began in India with area-specific relaxations.GBN district magistrate (DM) Suhas Lalinakere Yathiraj tweeted the dos and don'ts of interstate travel on Sunday. Read more.

India lodges 'strong protest' over Pakistan SC's poll order on 'Gilgit-Baltistan'

India has lodged a strong protest with Islamabad against Pakistan Supreme Court's order allowing general elections in the so-called "Gilgit-Baltistan" region and asked it to immediately vacate all areas under its illegal occupation. Read more.

Nearly 12,000 Covid-19 patients recover in India, daily testing capacity rises fivefold

The number of coronavirus cases in India has breached the 42,000-mark. On Monday, the Ministry of Health updated the country's Covid-19 tally at 42,553. 2,553 new infections and 72 deaths were reported in the last 24 hours in India. Read more.

US has very 'conclusive' report on Covid-19's China origins, says Trump

President Donald Trump promised a "conclusive" report from the U.S. government on the Chinese origins of the coronavirus outbreak, adding that he has little doubt that Beijing misled the world about the scale and risk of the disease before it became a global pandemic. Read more.

'Would've given my life for him': Gautam Gambhir narrates Australia series story to credit India legend

That former India opener Gautam Gambhir refers legendary India spinner Anil Kumble as the best captain he has played under, is not a secret anymore. Read more.

Silver Lake-Reliance Jio deal: 5 key things you need to know

US-based private equity firm Silver Lake will invest Rs 5,655.75 crore in Jio platforms, said Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and Jio Platforms Limited on Monday. Read more.

Anushka Sharma, Kareena Kapoor, Katrina Kaif: Throwback to the best metallic trends

One of the most dazzling trends of 2019, metallic tones have been on the style radar for a while now and not only for its celebrity-like glamorous appeal but also for its texture and dramatic appeal. Read more.

Ratan Tata takes on fake news again, says didn't write quote attributed to him

Ratan Tata has once again taken on fakes news by busting a news article falsely attributed to him. In a tweet posted last evening, the Chairman Emeritus of Tata Sons took to Twitter to share a clip of the article and denied saying or writing the quotes attributed to him. "I'm afraid this too, has not been said by me," he wrote in his tweet. Read more.

Does covid-19 affect children differently, how airports will be different: Top 5 from HT

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top 5 stories you need to know. In today's episode, Sunetra talks about the number of Covid-19 cases in India, impact of lockdown on India's economy, effect of covid-19 on children, how airports will be different and more. Watch here.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- I work from home. Maryland state, where I live, just on the northern edge of Washington DC, is not under stay-at-home orders that are in force in more than 17 other states, including New York, California and WashingtonDC - the three states hit the hardest in the United States (US). But all non-essential businesses and activities have been shut down; schools and colleges are closed; restaurants have either switched to take-out or home delivery or closed, and offices are closed.

Both our children are home, one from college and the other from high school, which are both closed until sometime in April. They are grudgingly, but increasingly, reconciled to staying home. But not on vacation; there are no sleepovers, late-night ice-cream hunts or soccer hang-outs.

They stay home, have lunch and dinner with us, talk - argue (fight), if it gets a little crabby around the house - and share in the daily chores, pick up the laundry, take turns unloading the dishwasher and putting out the trash bin.

We are in the suburbs where social distancing is somewhat more convenient than in the high-rises of New York City, the epicentre of the outbreak in the US, or other close-living arrangements, where every trip up or down the elevator can be a health hazard. Someone has to hit the floor-level buttons and you can never be too sure about the infection status of the person before you. A morning run or walk in crowded open spaces such as Central Park can turn out to be dangerous.

But these social distancing-compliant circumstances cannot, and have not been able to, mitigate one of the most damaging social consequences of the outbreak: The targeting of Asian Americans, a catch-all description of people from China, where the outbreak started, and south-east Asian and South Asian countries such as India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.

On my morning run the other day, I encountered an elderly Asian-origin man I had seen and nodded to every time we crossed each other in the past months. This time, I ran around him, cutting a six-feet distance from him - as I do with everyone, irrespective of who they are as a part of social distancing. It had felt wrong and, more notably, rude. Rude to him, and all my Asian-American friends and acquaintances, given the hate crimes being reported against them from various parts of the country, and the world, irresponsibly stoked by political leaders.

On another of my daily runs, I saw a familiar Asian American couple, who I had admired for their fitness and habitual courteousness. This time, as I neared them, they went off the sidewalk, stepped over the grassy buffer zone, and were practically on the road as they went around me. I wasn't sure if they were avoiding me as a possible contaminant - an Asian man (Indian, actually) - or to save me the embarrassment of going around them. Either way, it felt extremely wrong and disconcerting.

yashwant.raj@hindustantimes.com

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, March 31 -- Three new positive cases of Covid-19 were reported in Worli Koliwada and the adjoining Janata Nagar and Adarsh Nagar on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases to 12 in the area. A 60-year-old resident of Worli Koliwada, who had died in Nair Hospital on Monday, was also revealed to be positive for Covid-19 after his test results were confirmed on Tuesday.

Of the three latest patients, one man worked as a technician with the doctor at Saifee Hospital who also tested positive for Covid19 last week. The other two were staff nurses who worked with the same doctor, according to an official from the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC)

On Sunday, when the first four persons from Worli Koliwada tested positive for the coronavirus, the BMC revealed that neither had a history of travel or close contact with a person who had traveled to another affected country.

However, when asked if the most recent infected persons, who were in contact with the Saifee Hospital doctor, could be traced as the origin of the spread of Covid-19 in Worli Koliwada, the BMC official said, "It is too early to say this. The results of these three persons came only today. We are examining this possibility."

The G South ward, that has jurisdiction over Worli Koliwada, also recorded 15 other cases up from 12 reported on Monday, all of them from a single chawl at Elphinstone Road. A food vendor living in this chawl tested positive for Covid-19 on March 24. She died three days later.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 31 -- Railway minister Piyush Goyal on Sunday rejected allegations that special trains meant to ferry migrant workers back home were mismanaged and some of them took wrong routes and said every single train reached its desired destination, with only a fraction diverted, and in a five-day period that saw a rush of trains headed for East Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, to avert congestion.

Several Opposition leaders, including Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, have alleged that the trains, labelled "Shramik Specials", were running late by days. Others have alleged that a large number of trains was diverted. According to data collected by the Railway Protection Force and reported by HT, around 80 travellers on these have died, although, to be sure, some of them, according to the force's own report, had pre-existing health conditions.

The railway minister said the allegations on widespread delays and diversions were "completely baseless and wrong". "Almost all trains up to May 19 were before time... (So far) only 71 out of 4,040, which is 1.75% trains, were diverted. Charges like 'kahin se nikle, kahin chale gaye' (they left from somewhere and went off somewhere else), all that is nonsense. Every train reached the destination, only took a slightly longer route to ease the congestion and keep the flow of trains running. Otherwise, I would have to stop the operation," Goyal told Hindustan Times in an interview. It was only between May 20 and May 25 that a rush caused a congestion and resulted in diversions and delays, he added. And no train has taken seven or nine days to reach its destination as is being claimed, the minister said.

So far, 4,040 Shramik Specials - necessitated by a national lockdown brought on by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) - have carried more than 5.4 million passengers. The minister said almost 80% of the trains were travelling to Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, leading to congestion on the limited routes. And stations which received around three trains a day were being asked to deal with many more.

On being asked why the special trains for migrant workers began operating only by May 1, Goyal said: "The purpose of the lockdown was containment and the idea was that we have to break the coronavirus chain and, therefore, starting the trains any earlier would have been counterproductive. The idea was that all migrants should stay where they are... We also requested states to ensure that they were well-looked after."

"It needed that five weeks at least to break that coronavirus chain but then, we found that people are getting very anxious... We decided on May 1 to start this and we continued to ramp it up," the Union minister said.

In March, the Centre halted all passenger rail operations in an attempt to stop the spread of Covid-19. It later announced that special trains for migrant workers and some other passengers would be allowed, but only with strict social distancing norms and other health care protocols.

The Indian Railways said on Sunday it will begin operation of 200 special trains from June 1 and more than 145,000 passengers will travel on the first day as the lockdown measures are relaxed over the coming weeks. These services will be in addition to Shramik Special trains, and other special trains being run since May 12.

Goyal said that the reasons for delays of most of the special migrant trains were not the journeys, but "at the end". "There were only seven places where maximum trains were headed... Trains were just bunched up. Local administrations were taking precautions, taking three hours for each train or two hours for each train to disembark. Fewer platforms were there. So the bunching and delay happened because of the congestion at the end..."

He said beyond a point, states demanded more stoppages for the trains that were initially origin-to-destination. They couldn't bring people to the stations in time, the minister said, adding that this caused bunching up. "To ease that congestion, we took a considered view and diverted 71 trains."

These trains, he said, took a little longer to reach their destinations but that they took "seven to nine days" was a gross exaggeration. "No train took seven or nine days," he said.

"We never refused a single train. On the contrary, states could not use many of the trains that we provided. Nearly 250 Shramik trains which were provided had to remain unused because the states could not get the passengers in time. Maharashtra alone was over a 100 trains which could not be used. It's a very unfortunate situation," he said.

The minister added that despite the diversions, and eateries being closed due to the lockdown, the railways provided food and water, five-six times in some journeys, in the diverted trains. He said 11.9 million meals were provided by the railways in addition to 5.4 million of them provided by the states at the point of embarkation. The railways also provided 15 million water bottles other than those provided by the states. And the states also provided food when the migrants disembarked, Goyal pointed out.

On the issue of deaths - there have been about 80 deaths on board the Shramik Special trains between May 9 and May 27, according to data from the Railway Protection Force - Goyal said they found that in all cases, there were existing ailments. "Some of the stories are sought to be portrayed as if people died of hunger or starvation. I can say with confidence that no one died of hunger," he said, adding that in long-distance travel, some deaths occur even in normal operations.

He added that Railways has been transparent about the deaths, and insisted on compiling a list of them, and finding out causes even as news reports suggested that "eight or nine migrants" died on trains. The real number has emerged only because of this, he suggested.

"We are very concerned... My heart goes out to the families (of those who have died)," the minister said.

Goyal said some of the deaths could have been prevented with better medical screening but the doctors who were dealing with a heavy flow of people could not be blamed.

He added that 36 pregnant women who were expecting to deliver were allowed to travel in the trains and they went into labour in the course of the journey. "They should have never have been on the train."

Praising the efforts of railway employees across the country, the minister said: "In such adverse circumstances, moving 54 lakh people, with all the associated health protocols, is certainly not an ordinary operation. And in the extraordinary circumstances, I will say that the railway employees put in their heart and soul... They are as much front-line corona warriors..."

The minister said the special trains will run for as long as there is a demand from states. "We have been asking states... The current demand today is 250-300 trains. Maximum demand is now to West Bengal and to Odisha."

But the flow is also starting in the reverse direction, he suggested.

"The good news is that a lot of people are travelling back from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Trains are getting booked in the reverse direction also."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 31 -- Several countries across the world are witnessing a surge in their daily coronavirus disease (Covid-19) tally as the winter season is approaching. Lockdowns, aggressive testing, timely provision of drugs or medicines are some of the ways in which governments are trying to avoid the recurrence of another spread of the viral disease, which has infected nearly 46 million people and killed 1,193,744.

Another crucial factor that governments are taking into consideration to successfully combat Covid-19 is the development of a vaccine. Several companies and organisations, either independently or in collaboration with government authorities, have come up with vaccines which are undergoing a testing and approval process. They are yet to complete the several stages of trials. China, which has been the origin of Covid-19 and has been criticised by many for not revealing the spread of the disease on time, has also stepped up its vaccine research and production.

Here are the latest developments of the Covid-19 vaccine:

1. American medical device company Johnson & Johnson has planned to start its experimental vaccine in children falling under the age group of 12-18. The company in a statement said that it is currently in discussions with regulators and partners regarding the inclusion of the paediatric population in its vaccine trials. It also plans to include even younger children in its trials afterwards.

2. Another American company in the vaccine race, Novavax Inc, has outlined specific diversity targets for its large-scale vaccine study which is expected to start next month in the United States and Mexico. The company at a meeting of advisers to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that it plans to include 10% to 20% Latinos, 15% Black or African Americans and 2% Native Americans in its study.

Also Read| Covid-19: What you need to know today

3. In India, the Union health ministry has urged states and union territories (UTs) to set up committees in order to monitor and coordinate vaccination at ground level while ensuring that there are minute interruptions in other health care services. Union health secretary Rajesh Bhushan in a letter to states and Union territories said the committees will coordinate cold chain augmentation, capacity building activities of vaccinators and field staff if required.

4. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) is likely to submit a proposal to its ethics committee in order to start the Phase 3 trial Bharat Biotech's Covid-19 vaccine candidate in Delhi. Last week, Bharat Biotech got an approval from the drugs controller general of India (DGCI) to conduct phase 3 clinical trials of its vaccine candidate named Covaxin and AIIMS Delhi is one of the sites which has been selected for carrying out trials across India.

Click here for complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

5. The United Kingdom's drug regulator has started accelerating reviews of Covid-19 vaccines under development from Pfizer Inc. and AstraZeneca Plc, as it gets ready to approve the first successful shot at the earliest. Pfizer and AstraZeneca are among the front runners that could have shots cleared for use this year.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- There is no evidence of community transmission of the coronavirus infection in India as all samples collected randomly to check the spread of the Covid-19 disease have tested negative, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) director-general Balram Bhargava said on Thursday.

"All random samples that we tested for severe acute respiratory infections are negative for Covid-19. This suggests there is no community transmission in India yet," Bhargava said.

India has so far registered three deaths and 166 positive cases.

Community transmission takes place when a person tests positive for the disease but doctors are not able to trace the source of the infection. It indicates undiagnosed and often asymptomatic people are unknowingly causing infection, which makes it difficult to break the chain of transmission.

ICMR has been conducting community surveillance by lifting random samples from intensive care unit (ICU) patients suffering from severe acute respiratory infections (SARI), including severe pneumonia. These samples are taken from people with no travel history or contact with a positive patient.

Almost all of 1,000 samples collected since March 15 have returned negative for Covid-19, Bhargava said. ICMR is expected to release the exact data later in the day.

However, a section of experts says the sample size is too small and that community transmission began in India two-three weeks ago.

According to ICMR, India is still at stage II of the disease. There are four main stages of disease outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

"The exercise of random testing is to establish evidence of community transmission," said Dr Nivedita Gupta, scientist, ICMR. According to Gupta,a sample returning positive would mean that the infection has found its way into the community. That would call for a change in the disease control strategy, she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 21 -- The Midlands city of Leicester is reputed to hold the largest Diwali celebrations outside India, and Durga Puja in the popular London Sharad Utsav attracts many, but the Covid-19 pandemic has forced organisers to adopt innovative ways to ring in the festive spirit this year.

The Leicester City Council that funds and promotes celebrations on the arterial Belgrave Road said that this year will be the city's first virtual Diwali Day celebration. There will be no gatherings on the road for traditional entertainment and fireworks.

Instead, the council has invited people to join the celebrations from the safety of their homes.

It said in a statement: "Members of the public can send in their personal video messages, which could feature in an hour-long package of entertainment that will be streamed on the Visit Leicester website on Diwali Day - Saturday 14 November."

The council said each video filmed on a mobile phone should be around 30-45 seconds long, shot in landscape format and recorded in English. People can use their video to wish a friend, or a family member, a Happy Diwali, or they could share their tips for a socially-distanced celebration with people around the world.

Leicester has a large population of Indian origin, many of whom migrated after being expelled by Idi Amin in Uganda in the early 1970s. Several Indian banks, shops and restaurants catering to the population are based on Belgrave Road.

Deputy city mayor Piara Singh Clair said: "We all need to find different ways to celebrate important festivals like Diwali and Christmas this year. Although we can't meet up with our extended families in person this year, our virtual Diwali celebration will help bring people together".

"We hope that people will enjoy recording their messages, and we look forward to sharing as many of them as possible as part of our Diwali Day programming," he added.

The council said that besides the video messages, the Diwali Day programme will feature music, story-telling, dance and the traditional lighting of the 'diva' lamp. It will not organise fireworks, but footage of the spectacular displays from previous years will be included in the virtual event.

In London, this year's theme for the London Sharad Utsav is 'A Ray of Hope' to pay tributes to the legendary filmmaker Satyajit Ray (1921-1992) on his birth centenary year, as well as reflect optimism in the time of pandemic. Its organisers are also making use of innovative technology.

Suranjan Som, vice-president of London Sharad Utsav, said: "No one will miss our Pujo. Anyone will be able to offer Anjali or pray during Sandhi Pujo from their home. We are using Google VR technology to ensure London Sharad Utsav reaches every home and mobile device across the world.

"With a relatively inexpensive Google Cardboard VR headset, they will feel that are sitting right in front of our idol, while our priest carries out the regular ceremonies."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- An explosive device went off on Thursday a short distance from the site in Kabul where the cremation of the 25 Sikhs killed in a terror attack was underway, though there were no casualties, according to media reports.

The device exploded in a house in Qalacha area, not far from where members of the Sikh minority were cremating those killed in the attack on a Sikh place of worship at Shor Bazar on Wednesday. A second explosive device was defused by Afghan security forces in the same area, the media reports said.

People familiar with developments confirmed on Thursday that an Indian national named Tian Singh, a resident of New Delhi, was among the 25 people killed in the attack. Singh's wife, in a letter sent to the Prime Minister, requested the repatriation of his body.

External affairs minister S Jaishankar tweeted: "Deeply concerned at the blasts reported near the cremation site of those killed during the attack on Gurudwara Sahib in Kabul." He added the Indian embassy was in touch with Afghan authorities to "ensure adequate security onsite as well as safe return of families to their homes".

Jaishankar also said the Indian embassy was working to repatriate the body of Tian Singh. Though Singh's wife, in her letter, also called for those wounded in Wednesday's attack to be shifted to New Delhi, Jaishankar said medical opinion was "against moving [the] injured at this stage".

The external affairs minister said there was "understandable grief and anger" over the terror attack and the Indian embassy was in touch with the families of those killed and injured.

Indian ambassador Vinay Kumar visited the Sikh place of worship and met community leaders and families of the victims on Thursday. He was told the injured were receiving satisfactory treatment.

The Islamic State claimed the attack, though Afghan officials said the Pakistan-based Haqqani Network was behind it. In a statement issued late on Wednesday, the Islamic State claimed the attack was "revenge" for developments in Kashmir and that it was carried out by an attacker using the "kunya" or assumed name of "Abu Khalid al Hindi", suggesting that he was of Indian origin.

The Islamic State provided no other information about the attacker. Afghan officials have said four suicide attackers were involved in the incident and that they were all killed.

The suicide attackers targeted a "dharamshala" in Kabul's Shor Bazar, which has a sizeable population of the Hindu and Sikh minorities. Reports said the attack began at 7.45am Afghan time.

Images of the shrine posted on social media showed bloodstains on its floor. Other photos showed security forces and local residents evacuating the injured in ambulances. Witnesses said they heard several explosions during the gun battle.

On Wednesday, India condemned the attack and commended the Afhgan security forces. "Such cowardly attacks on the places of religious worship of the minority community, especially at this time of Covid-19 pandemic, are reflective of the diabolical mindset of the perpetrators and their backers," the external affairs ministry said in a statement, in which it hailed the "valorous response to the attack and exemplary courage and dedication" of the Afghan forces.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 17 -- Ten days ago we had no Covid-19 vaccines. Now we have two, the latest from Moderna (after the one from Pfizer/BioNTech). Sure, the first statement may be a bit of an exaggeration - there were 12 vaccines in late stage trials, some with more than an even chance of succeeding and what we were witnessing is just that. The two that have cleared the first hurdle - an adequate success rate in an interim analysis of early results - are both messenger RNA or mRNA vaccines, which use a genetic messenger code to instruct the body's own cells to make a protein found on the shell of the SARS-CoV 2 virus that causes Covid-19, thereby provoking an immune reaction, resulting in protection from the virus.

There's every chance that another candidate, perhaps the one being developed by Johnson & Johnson or AstraZeneca/Oxford could join the ones from Pfizer and Moderna before the end of the year (to end 2020 with three successful vaccines would be something). And there is every chance that both will be approved for use and available, at least to those whose needs are the highest, before the end of the year. Wider commercial availability will follow next year, perhaps by early spring.

Also Read| Covid-19: What you need to know today

Pfizer will make 50 million doses available this year (once approved) and Moderna, 20 million. Both are two-dose vaccines which means 25 million and 10 million people, respectively, can be vaccinated. Next year, Pfizer plans to boost production up to 1.3 billion units, and Moderna up to between 500 million and a billion. That should be enough to vaccinate around 15% of the world's population, which is a start. The other successful vaccines will add to the number. It's entirely possible that if two more vaccines are successful, around 40% of the world's population could get a vaccine next year. But that's on paper, because supply won't just be a function of availability - it will be driven by pre-existing deals between countries and vaccine makers. The US, for instance, has deals with both Pfizer and Moderna. The UK has a deal with Pfizer and five other vaccine makers, in all accounting for 350 million doses. Its population is 66 million, so even if some vaccines entail multiple doses, its population is covered. The country was scrambling to strike a deal with Moderna before the company announced the interim analysis of the preliminary results of its Phase 3 clinical trials. And the EU has deals with both Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech.

Pharma analytics company Airfinity said in September that rich countries accounted for at least 50% of the 5.3 billion doses for which deals had been struck at the time. That number is likely to increase. Indeed, the announcements by Pfizer and Moderna are both likely to result in some frenzied deal-striking - and they should. A vaccine is the best investment a country can make at this point in time. The origins of the ongoing global economic crisis are not really economic, several experts have said (correctly) that a vaccine is the best stimulus/cure for an ailing economy.

Now comes the tough part of managing the acquisition, logistics, and administration of the vaccine -- and there too Moderna had some good news; its vaccine lasts longer in the refrigerator than previously believed (it still needs to be frozen), and even lasts 12 hours at room temperature.

Also Read: Moderna says its Covid-19 vaccine is nearly 95% effective

But what of the science behind the results announced by Moderna on Monday and Pfizer/BioNTech last week? Both involved waiting for a certain number of test subjects (some were given the vaccine and others a placebo) to get infected -- and then see who got what. In Pfizer's case, based on 94 people who got infected, and in Moderna's case, based on 95, the vaccines were found to be over 90% and 94.5% effective. While there is safety data to be reviewed, and the studies themselves (both clinical trials cover tens of thousands of subjects) will have to run their course, it is unlikely that these results will change.

I believe this is a tipping point in the fight against the virus -- it reduces, by a significant amount, the uncertainty surrounding a vaccine, and offers a tentative timeline on when one could be available commercially.

Government and public health responses may have faltered in the face of Covid-19, but the pace and progress of the scientific response to the pandemic has been revolutionary and unprecedented. It is, like many other things that have come before, another triumph of human ingenuity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- The suicide of a young man, who was admitted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital after flying in from Sydney, even as test results to ascertain whether he had the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) were awaited, is a wake-up call. There has been commentary on safety measures required to deal with the outbreak and the individual, social and institutional actions required. But not enough attention has been paid to the toll the disease - and the messaging around it - is taking on mental health.

Covid-19 is new. Rarely, if ever, in recent history have human beings across the world - be in Boston or Bengaluru, Wuhan or Doha, Rome or Seoul - experienced a common set of concerns, driven by a single factor. From its roots to its symptoms, from its treatment protocol to a possible cure, uncertainty is rife. This uncertainty is causing fear, anxiety, panic among people - about themselves, about their loved ones, about their future. This is coupled with a sense of shame among those who are either suspected or have the infection, because of the stigmatisation of Covid-19 patients. Yes, there are people who could have been more careful; yes, there has been a streak of irresponsibility in those should have followed treatment protocols. But it must be emphasised that a patient who gets infected is not guilty, but is actually a victim. Targeting individuals or families with traces of the case is wrong. Unacceptable racial attacks - be it against Chinese-origin Americans in the United States or against people from the Northeast in India - is only adding to this sense of vulnerability. Misinformation is not helping.

The government must weave in the mental health dimension in the way it approaches Covid-19. There has to be sustained counselling and therapy for patients and suspected cases. There has to be better messaging, which battles the sense of shame associated with Covid-19 and emphasises that social distancing is a temporary measure and patients are not criminals. There has to be kindness and empathy in the way families, neighbours, and communities engage with each other. Only a humane response can help deal with the deeply vulnerable human condition of these times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 16 -- It is a season that should have marked a happy occasion for Formula One, 2020 being its 70th anniversary, a time to recall its origins when Italy's Giuseppe 'Nino' Farina went from pole to flag at Silverstone in the first ever race in 1950. The Covid-19 pandemic though has put such celebrations on hold, throwing the season into uncertainty.

F1 CEO Chase Carey recently said there is a danger of the season not happening at all if the situation didn't improve.

Seven of the 22 races have already been cancelled, including the Monaco Grand Prix-it will be the first time since 1954 that the race won't wind through the narrow streets of the principality. Azerbaijan, Japan and Singapore joined the list last Friday while many others have been postponed or unlikely to happen.

The return of European top-flight football though has given hope. With the Bundesliga, Serie A and La Liga resuming behind closed doors and Premier League scheduled to restart on Wednesday, professional sport appears to dig deep into its resources and organisational capabilities for a revival.

F1 too is now preparing an initial list of eight races-all in Europe. The season is expected to finally start with the Austrian Grand Prix in Spielberg on July 5 followed by the Styrian GP-named after the Austrian state where the venue is-a week later. Both the closed-doors races will be held at the Red Bull Ring circuit.

Hungary will stage a race in July before the season moves to England with Silverstone hosting two races-British GP and 70th Anniversary GP-on August 2 and 9. It will be followed by races in Spain, Belgium and Italy. Like European football, all races will miss the buzz of the fans, especially at a venue like Silverstone that sees an overall weekend attendance of 350,000.

Eyeing russia

Though not finalised yet taking the health issues into consideration, F1 then intends to move to Russia, Asia (Vietnam and China) and the Americas (Canada, United States, Mexico and Brazil) to host postponed races. The organisers aim to end with races in Bahrain and Abu Dhabi in late December or early January.

That plan will heavily depend on air travel and quarantine restrictions easing, countries opening their borders and other logistical factors. It could see more European races, to achieve F1's target of 15-18 races this season. That would still be a world of improvement for race drivers stuck to virtual racing.

"We have made significant progress with existing and new promoters on the revised calendar and have been particularly encouraged by the interest that has been shown by new venues in hosting a Formula 1 race during the 2020 season," an F1 statement said on Friday.

New Venues

There are reports that old venues like Hockenheim (Germany) and Imola (Italy) are close to sealing deals to host races. Imola, which last held a race in 2006 when Michael Schumacher won, have renewed their FIA Grade 1 licence, needed to host a race. Venues like Portimao (Portugal) and Ferrari-owned Mugello (Italy), which are yet to stage F1, are also in contention with more double-headers like Austria and Britain also not being ruled out.

"There is a contingency to have an extended European season with another one or two races if needed," F1 motorsports chief Ross Brawn told F1.com last week. "There are a number of good European tracks where we could add another one or two races to make sure we have a comprehensive season."

Sticking to Europe is logistically and economically convenient as most F1 teams are based there. Also, with several European countries lifting curbs and border restrictions, visas won't be an issue as the Schengen Area covers 26 countries.

GO EAST

The real expansion of F1 into a global sport only happened in the last 20-25 years as a result of former F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone's 'go east' policy. Asian races introduced under him like Singapore, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi (all night races) have become permanent, even at the cost of traditional races like Germany and France. Other races in Malaysia, India and South Korea have stopped.

In F1's inaugural season, six of the seven races were held in Europe. It began to move out gradually-South America in 1953, Africa in 1958 and Asia in 1976.

Even in 1999, Europe hosted 11 of the 16 races-a share of 68.75 %. But in 2019, Europe only held 10 of 21 GPs, less than 48 percent-also indicating the spread of global wealth.

Asia hosted only one race (Japan) until 1999 when Malaysia was introduced. The number touched five last year-without adding transcontinental Azerbaijan-before Vietnam was included from this year.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has at least temporarily halted the 'look east' approach with four out of the seven races cancelled this year being outside Europe and more likely to follow.

GETTING STARTED

Following a long shutdown, F1 teams are slowly opening their shutters. Reigning champions Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes have started preparations, testing their 2018 car ahead of next month's season opener.

"I didn't feel like I've ever left the water, so that's a positive," Hamilton said, having driven a F1 car after more than 100 days. "Every time you take a big break you always wonder whether you can still drive. So, it's a good feeling to know of course I can, I'm ready, I feel fit."

Racing Point, Ferrari and Renault have scheduled testing in the coming weeks.

NEW NORMAL

The pandemic has forced organisers to introduce new non-racing rules to protect F1 personnel like no podium celebrations, pre-race driver parades or assembling for the national anthems.

"The practices we have had in the past just can't be done," Brawn said. "The podium procedure can't happen, but we're looking at doing something on the grid after the race. We can't present the trophies, as you can't have someone in close proximity presenting a trophy, (but) we have plans and procedures. We're looking at how we can present it on TV."

Teams will be kept in 'bubbles', staying in isolation with no contact with the surrounding community.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 2 -- There is an increase in the number of Canadians viewing India's growing economic power as an opportunity, while more and more of them now see China's rise in the domain as a threat. These are among the findings of a national opinion poll conducted by the Vancouver-headquartered non-profit Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada (APF Canada).

The organisation that strives to be a bridge between Canada and the Asia-Pacific region has been tracking Canadian attitudes towards the economic rise of India and China since 2004.

"Between 2018 and 2020, the change in perceptions for China and India has followed opposing paths, something we have not observed before. While 72% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of India is more of an opportunity than a threat, a modest increase since 2018 (71%), only 35% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of China is more as an opportunity than a threat, down from 60% in 2018," the results of the annual survey revealed.

This is the also the first time that the survey has shown the majority of respondents seeing China's economic power as a threat, at 57%.

Again, the perception towards India is headed towards a positive direction with just 18% seeing its economic growth as a threat, which the APF Canada described as "an all-time low".

Canadians' general feeling towards India has also remained stable. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means "very warm, favourable", India scores 5.7.

"Over the past decade, the governments of India and Canada have been making efforts to build a mutually beneficial relationship, which can only prosper further if the Canadian public also holds a positive view," the report noted. "On the flip side, Canadians' feelings towards China, which had been remarkably stable for the past decade until 2018, dropped from 4.9 to 3.6 in 2020."

The survey said there was support for Canada entering into a free trade agreement (FTA) with India, though that was not the case with regard to China. Just about one-third voiced support for an FTA with China, which 59%.

"It marks the lowest support for an FTA with China since we started polling Canadians on the subject in 2012," the report stated.

One of reasons behind the growing animosity of Canadians' towards China is the Covid-19 pandemic. Two-third of Canadians disagreed with the statement that the Chinese government "acted responsibly" at the beginning of the outbreak in Wuhan.

The vast majority, at 68%, "feel that Canada should support an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 virus".

Human rights abuses and the arrest and detention of two Canadians by the Chinese government are also feeding into the escalating negativity.

"The majority of Canadians (83%) feel that Canada should stand up to China as Canadian national values such as the rule of law, human rights, and democracy are on the line," the report pointed out, while "67% think Canada should work alongside the US and other allies to pressure China, and about 67% also believe Canada should take a more aggressive approach towards China" to liberate the two imprisoned there.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Working from home to be the new norm in Covid-19 aftermath: Ravi Shankar Prasad

Work-from-home will be the new norm in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic, minister of communications, and electronics and information technology Ravi Shankar Prasad said on Tuesday, and asked the departments under his charge to work on putting in place a platform to facilitate the emerging trend.

Lockdowns may have only arrested first wave of Covid-19, says WHO

The sweeping shutdowns across the world appear to have absorbed what may only be the first wave of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections, according to officials from the World Health Organization (WHO) and findings by researchers in France - one of the countries hardest hit by the pandemic.

Trump's immigration suspension to last 60 days, targets those seeking green cards

President Donald Trump has said he expects to sign an executive order Wednesday that will suspend immigration - mostly impacting Green Cards - for the next 60 days to ensure Americans hits by record layoffs caused by the coronavirus outbreak get a first shot at all available jobs.

Facebook to buy 9.99% stake in Reliance Jio platforms for $5.7 billion

Facebook on Wednesday announced an investment of USD 5.7 billion (Rs 43,574 crore) to buy a 10 per cent stake in the firm that houses billionaire Mukesh Ambani's telecom arm Jio as the social media giant looks to expand presence in its largest market in terms of subscriber base.

'Instead of squash, thinking of groceries': Saurav Ghosal

Saurav Ghosal, the world No. 13 squash player who became the only Indian male to break into the top 10 of the world rankings last year, says he during the lockdown due to Covid-19, instead of analysing my performance in the French league, which would have taken place on the weekend of March 14, playing the Egyptian league and playing in El Gouna by the Red Sea soon after, he is thinking of groceries these days.

TV actor Rashmi Desai calls leaked bank statements disturbing

Television actor Rashami Desai is disturbed by screenshots of her bank statements posted on social media. She says she had sent those screenshots to her accounting team after returning from Bigg Boss house.

Are you violating video-call etiquette?

We've never video-called more than at present. Office meetings, catching up with friends, parties, consulting your doctors or checking in on loved ones. But there is a right way and a wrong way to do this.

Covid-19: China vs Germany as Angela Merkel demands 'transparency'

War of words have erupted between China and Germany over Covid-19. Beijing hit back after German Chancellor raised questions on virus' origin. German Chancellor, Angela Merkel said, "I think that the more transparently China makes clear the story of the emergence of this virus, the better that is for us all in the whole world to learn from it."

Watch the full video for more.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 12 -- In the absence of international flight operations and owing to the ongoing nationwide lockdown in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, the ministry of external affairs has stepped up the process of reaching out to people of Indian origin abroad through high commissions and embassies, said an official aware of the details.

The ministry gets hundreds of phone calls, emails and messages on social media platforms from people seeking help in flying back as well as for aid in visa renewals.

Minister of state for external affairs V Muraleedharan said on Sunday apart from the helplines that are operational, he has also started answering phone calls from Indian nationals who call on dial-in programmes on Malayalam television channels.

"In the last few days I was part of at least four such programmes where I answered calls from people based in the Middle East, United Kingdom and other countries. These were on Malayalam channels, since a large number of people from Kerala are in countries around the world," he told HT.

Even as the Congress has criticised the ministry for failing to bring back Indians stuck abroad, especially students, the minister said high commissions and embassies are taking care of students whose universities and colleges are shut.

"In the United Kingdom for instance, we are providing food at subsidised rates for students, who could not take the flight back home. Temporary arrangements have also been made for their accommodation. Helplines are being run across many countries and our missions are taking all the steps required to help people," he said.

Citing examples, he said the mission in Dubai was able to reach out in hours to an expectant woman who needed medicines and to a group of three people who needed quarantine facilities after a fourth person sharing space with them tested positive for Covid-19.

The minister said special arrangements have been made to help those whose visas are expiring or have expired during the pandemic.

From March 20, the ministry has received as many as 7,100 calls from Dubai and Abu Dhabi; 450 from Jeddah, 700 from Riyadh, 920 from Oman, over 200 from Qatar.

Arrangements have also been made for Indian students in Bangladesh. These students are being put up in Dhaka, where their food and other necessities are being looked after, said a person aware of the details.

But Congress spokesperson Jaiveer Shergill alleged that while the BJP government is in "active mode" for foreign nationals, it is in "sleep mode" for the Indian students stranded abroad.

As per the external affairs ministry, he said, over 20,000 foreign nationals have been evacuated to different parts of the world by India while there over 200,000 Indian students stranded in the United States, 300 at Heathrow airport, 16.000 in Philippines besides hundreds of others in Australia, Canada and Malaysia.

"When the India government can facilitate evacuation of 20,000 foreigners then why not adopt the same approach for stranded Indian students?" Shergill asked. He said the government should give a "definitive timeline" of their evacuation to the worried parents.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 17 -- The United States State Department has released a fact sheet on the activity at Institute of Virology in China's Wuhan, the city where the outbreak was first reported late last year.

In the fact sheet, the state department has accused the Chinese government of "systematically preventing" a transparent and thorough investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic. It also said that the Communist Party of China devoted enormous resources to deceit and disinformation.

The fact sheet is divided in three parts - illnesses inside the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV), the research there and Secret military activity at the institute.

The fact sheet said that the US government has "reason to believe" that several researchers inside the Wuhan institute became sick in autumn of 2019, before the first identified case of the outbreak. "This," the state department said, "raises questions about the credibility of WIV senior researcher Shi Zhengli's public claim that there was 'zero infection' among the WIV's staff and students of SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-related viruses."

It also said that accidental infections in labs have caused several previous virus outbreaks in China.

The Communist Party in China prevented independent journalists, investigators, and global health authorities from interviewing researchers, which the fact sheet said is crucial for inquiry into the origin of the virus.

The state department document came out on a day when a team of international experts of the World Health Organisation (WHO) arrived in China to investigate the origins of Covid-19.

"WHO investigators must have access to the records of the WIV's work on bat and other coronaviruses before the Covid-19 outbreak. As part of a thorough inquiry, they must have a full accounting of why the WIV altered and then removed online records of its work with RaTG13 and other viruses," the state department said.

The fact sheet added that in 201the researchers at WIV were conducting experiment involving RaTG13, the bat coronavirus identified in January 2020 as its closest sample to Sars-CoV-2.

"Despite the WIV presenting itself as a civilian institution, the United States has determined that the WIV has collaborated on publications and secret projects with China's military. The WIV has engaged in classified research, including laboratory animal experiments, on behalf of the Chinese military since at least 2017," the state department said.

It also said that the United States will continue to do everything it can to support a credible and thorough investigation.

The WHO team, meanwhile, has started its work by holding virtual meetings with their Chinese hosts from a hotel in Wuhan, where the pandemic first emerged.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 26 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

It was noted that the world community was still trying to forge a coordinated response three months after the crisis began, though the virtual summit had shown that the world community could come together, the people said.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UN Security Council, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic. The WHO too has faced some criticism for not acting more decisively on the crisis.

The G20 communique said the unprecedented pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

"We will share timely and transparent information; exchange epidemiological and clinical data; share materials necessary for research and development; and strengthen health systems globally, including through supporting the full implementation of the WHO International Health Regulations (IHR 2005)," it said.

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label Covid-19 as the "Wuhan virus".

"The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics. There is a need to empower it so that it can take the lead, and to boost its capacity to provide early warnings, help states develop protocols and to forge common solutions to future crises," said a person.

The people said further discussions of the G20 members were underway to frame an "action paper" with specific steps to be taken to counter the pandemic and its fallout.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday it was premature to launch an investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic, hours after more than 100 countries including India and ally Russia backed an international probe into the outbreak which emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at the regular ministry briefing on Monday that the vast majority of countries in the world believe the pandemic is not yet over.

China has been pushing back international demand for a probe, saying that the US and Australia, which has been in the forefront in demanding a probe, were politicising the issue and could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The resolution, drafted by the European Union, has been put up to the World Health Assembly (WHA), the annual meeting of the WHO. The foreign ministry statement came hours before the UN's global health agency's two-day virtual meet begins on Monday.

The resolution does not single out China or any other country but calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the (WHO)-coordinated international health response to Covid-19."

"Initiate, at the earliest appropriate moment, and in consultation with Member States, 1 a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, 2 as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19," the draft resolution said.

Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said on Monday Australia wants the resolution to stipulate that the inquiry be "impartial, independent and comprehensive."

In a separate statement, the Chinese foreign ministry announced that President Xi Jinping will address the World Health Assembly's opening ceremony via videolink later on Monday. President Xi had not been listed as a speaker in the schedule circulated by the WHO earlier. The foreign ministry said President Xi had been invited to speak by WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

After emerging in China, the virus had rapidly spread around world, killing more than 315,000 people and infecting at least 4.7 million.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 11 -- An India-Nepal body that oversees the implementation of development projects funded by New Delhi is set to meet in Kathmandu next week, the first high-level contact between the two sides since ties were hit by a border row that erupted last year.

The joint oversight mechanism, which was launched in 2016 and reviews progress in bilateral projects, is scheduled to hold its next meeting on August 17, people familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity.

Two of the people cited above said the meeting between Indian envoy Vinay Mohan Kwatra and Nepal's foreign secretary Shanker Das Bairagi, who jointly chair the mechanism, is being seen as a positive development after the border row took relations to a new low.

"The mechanism will only focus on the implementation of India-funded projects in Nepal. However, it could help break the logjam in relations," said a person.

During its seventh meeting in July last year, the mechanism reviewed the implementation of projects such cross-border rail links, petroleum pipelines, roads, bridges, integrated border check posts, energy, irrigation, and post-earthquake reconstruction.

The border row erupted late last year after Nepal objected to the inclusion of Kalapani region, which is claimed by Kathmandu, in a new map of the union territory of Ladakh that was issued by India. The row was exacerbated in May, when India opened a new road to Lipulekh region on the border with Tibet, as this area too is claimed by Nepal.

Nepal responded by issuing a new map that showed Kalapani, Lipulekh and Limpiyadhura, which are all controlled by India, as part of Nepalese territory. Kathmandu also said New Delhi has not responded to several requests for talks on the border issue, though India said a meeting couldn't be arranged because of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nepal's foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali told The Kathmandu Post on Tuesay: "We don't have alternatives to talks...We can't hold our entire ties hostage to the differences over the boundary issue."

Gyawali said Nepal is confident its partnership with India will move in a positive direction. "For the time being, the boundary issues can be isolated...Differences over one issue should not overshadow our entire bilateral relations...We believe in constructive engagement, and the upcoming meeting is just one positive step towards that end," he added.

In recent weeks, the two countries have also engaged in a war of words over the origins of historic figures such as Lord Ram and Gautam Buddha.

Nepal on Sunday responded to external affairs minister S Jaishankar's remarks that Gautam Buddha was one of the two greatest Indians for people around the world by saying historical and archaeological evidence shows the founder of Buddhism was born in Nepalese territory.

Last month, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli sparked a controversy with his remarks that the "real" Ayodhya is in Nepal and that Lord Ram was Nepalese. He also said Nepal had "become a victim of cultural encroachment" and its history was manipulated.

Following protests in India, the Nepal government clarified Oli's remarks were "not linked to any political subject" and there was "no intention...to hurt the feeling and sentiment of anyone".

Nischal Pandey, director of the Kathmandu-based Centre for South Asian Studies, was quoted by the Nepalese media as saying: "A weekly war of words between Indian and Nepali officials and subsequent issuance of clarifications does not bode well for bilateral ties."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 29 -- India on Saturday recorded 135 new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), one of the highest single-day spikes, as the number of cases crossed 1,000 amid a mounting challenge of controlling the spread of the disease that has killed over 28,000 people across the world.

Fresh deaths were reported in India from Kerala, Gujarat and Maharashtra, taking the death toll from the disease to 21, according to official data from states. Maharashtra has reported the highest number of Covid-19 cases so far at 186, with 29 fresh cases on Saturday, followed by Kerala at 182. In Telangana, the number went up to 67, while Karnataka has reported 76 cases so far.

The official data of the Union health ministry, however, said the case count was 918, which showed there was a lag in the official numbers released by states being taken into account.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who on Tuesday declared a 21-day national lockdown to contain the spread of the disease, announced the creation of a Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund where people can contribute and help in the fight against Covid-19.

"It is my appeal to my fellow Indians, kindly contribute to the PM-CARES Fund. This Fund will also cater to similar distressing situations, if they occur in the times ahead," he said. "This will go a long way in creating a healthier India," Modi added.

A statement posted on his official website said that while the Prime Minister is the chairman of the new public charitable trust, its members include the defence minister (Rajnath Singh), home minister (Amit Shah) and the finance minister (Nirmala Sitaraman).

As per officials in Kerala, which has the second highest number of cases after Maharashtra, the state reported its first Covid-19 death on Saturday after a 69-year-old man being died at Ernakulam Medical College Hospital, but it was not included in the central data.

The man was admitted to the isolation ward on March 22 after his return from Dubai, the government hospital said. Maharashtra has reported 286 cases.

In Delhi, among the eight people who tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday was a 48-year-old doctor at a private clinic in Hari Nagar. The Delhi health department wasn't immediately able to trace the source of the infection. "From the history given to us by him, he had gone for a home visit to a person who had returned from New Zealand. However, no such person has tested positive in Delhi yet," said a senior official from the Delhi health department. The total number of cases in Delhi went up to 49.

The Union health ministry's joint secretary, Lav Agarwal, said the government was working with states on health infrastructure preparedness and the focus was having dedicated Covid-19 hospitals and blocks in every state. Arrangements were being made to ramp up isolation and intensive care beds. Seventeen states have so far started work on this, he said, adding that doctors and nurses were being provided online training from the All India Institute of Medical Scienes.

The developments came on a day the government faced a fresh challenge - the exodus of many of India's 100 million migrant workers from the national capital after a nationwide lockdown left them stranded without jobs, food and shelter.

India's response to Covid-19 has been "pre-emptive, pro-active and graded", the government said, brushing aside the allegation that the nationwide lockdown was announced without any planning.

The information and broadcasting ministry said the government had already put in place a "comprehensive response system" at the borders of the country, much before the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a public health emergency of international concern on January 30.

The ministry of home affairs issued another advisory urging all states and Union territories (UTs) to take immediate relief measures to provide temporary accommodation, food, clothing and medical care to homeless people, including migrant workers stranded due to the lockdown.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Singh Puri said aircraft were crisscrossing the Indian airspace to ensure that the Covid-19 testing kits of ICMR reached their destinations on time. The Indian Navy, too, deployed its aircraft to help the Goa government transport 60 samples to the Pune-based National Institute of Virology (NIV) for testing, an official said on Saturday.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said there were "sporadic cases" where the origin of the infections could not be traced but denied that there was an alarming spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the country.

"Till the time we see a significant number of cases to indicate community transmission, let us not over-interpret things," said Raman R Gangakhedkar, head of the Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases at ICMR.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 30 -- The Manipur government on Sunday launched a website to reach out to citizens stranded outside the state after the nationwide lockdown to tackle the outbreak of Covid-19.

The website (www.tengbang.in) has been developed by CubeTen, a private firm, in coordination with the Information and Technology (IT) department as part of their corporate social responsibility activity.

"The government is also ready to launch a mobile app version of tengbang (assistance). It will be available as soon as Google and Apple clear the application for hosting on their Play Store and App Store," chief minister Nongthombam Biren Singh said while launching the website in Imphal.

Also read: With fewer cases so far, North-east stays on maximum alert

The website is also integrated with a payment gateway so that people who want to donate to the Chief Minister's COVID-19 Relief Fund, which was created last week for making available funds promptly for emergency requirements with a corpus fund of Rs 10 crores, can do so online.

"We are also thinking of adding a feature for permanent persons of Manipur origin residing in metros like Mumbai, Delhi and Bangalore to volunteer/act as a nodal point for the state in distributing/assisting so that the reach of the state government is increased," Biren added.

He said the condition of a Covid-19 patient, who is undergoing medical treatment at the JNIMS hospital, is improving and is stable now and called upon people to pray for their speedy recovery. Manipur reported its first Covid-19 case on March 24.

Dr Radheshyam Yumnam of MANTRON & MANIDCO, L Susindro of Loktak Development Authority, Dr Rajesh Kumar, additional chief secretary (IT) and Nambam Deben besides Haobam Joyremba, director (IT) of CubeTen, a website developer, were also present at the launch.

Many citizens from Manipur, mostly students, are stranded in various states of India after the Centre clamped a 21-day nationwide lockdown.

The state government on Saturday appointed PK Singh, the resident commissioner at the Manipur Bhawan in New Delhi, as the nodal officer to help and guide the stranded citizens of the state.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Mumbai, March 31 -- Three new positive cases of Covid-19 were reported in Worli Koliwada and the adjoining Janata Nagar and Adarsh Nagar on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases to 12 in the area. A 60-year-old resident of Worli Koliwada, who had died in Nair Hospital on Monday, was also revealed to be positive for Covid-19 after his test results were confirmed on Tuesday.

Of the three latest patients, one man worked as a technician with the doctor at Saifee Hospital who also tested positive for Covid19 last week. The other two were staff nurses who worked with the same doctor, according to an official from the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC)

On Sunday, when the first four persons from Worli Koliwada tested positive for the coronavirus, the BMC revealed that neither had a history of travel or close contact with a person who had traveled to another affected country.

However, when asked if the most recent infected persons, who were in contact with the Saifee Hospital doctor, could be traced as the origin of the spread of Covid-19 in Worli Koliwada, the BMC official said, "It is too early to say this. The results of these three persons came only today. We are examining this possibility."

The G South ward, that has jurisdiction over Worli Koliwada, also recorded 15 other cases up from 12 reported on Monday, all of them from a single chawl at Elphinstone Road. A food vendor living in this chawl tested positive for Covid-19 on March 24. She died three days later.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 29 -- The WHO-led team of experts began their probe into the origins of the Covid-19 virus in the central Chinese city of Wuhan by meeting Chinese scientists and visiting the hospital that treated the first patients suspected to have been infected in December, 2019.

"Extremely important 1st site visit. We are in the hospital that treated some of the first known cases of Covid-19, meeting with the actual clinicians & staff who did this work, having open discussion about the details of their work," Peter Daszak, a member of the team led by World Health Organization, tweeted on Friday.

The itinerary of the expert team has not been announced, though the UN agency has said it plans to visit the seafood market linked to the first cases in the early days of the outbreak in Wuhan and the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which conducts research on pathogens.

Speaking to state media, team leader Peter Ben Embarek, said: "[We hope to] understand the setting, see the places where cases were linked, reconstruct the initial event there, search for records of animals, products traded there. And possibly talking to some of the merchants who were there (Huanan seafood market) at that time."

"My understanding is that there will be no restrictions or limitations in working with our Chinese colleagues or in visiting places the joint team deem of interest," Ben Embarek told the tabloid, Global Times.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said on Friday that WHO and Chinese experts were working together to trace the origin of the virus, but stressed that the mission was not a probe.

"It is part of a global research, not an investigation," Zhao said at the regular ministry briefing.

"It is important to remember that the success of this mission and origin-tracing is 100% depending on access to the relevant sources," Thea Fischer, a Danish member of the team, told Reuters on Thursday.

"No matter how competent we are, how hard we work and how many stones we try to turn, this can only be possible with the support from China."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh,, Nov. 9 -- Even though Diwali is just a few days away, sellers of string lights and diyas are facing dark days because of the Covid-19 pandemic, complaining that demand has dropped by 50% when compared to the previous years. A firecracker ban by the administration is also not helping, they say.

Interestingly, buyers have been asking about the origin of the fancy lights and not picking up products made in China.

Electrical shops selling string lights are empty, except for the Sector 18 Electronics Market, with RP Gupta, chairman of the sector's Market Dealer Association saying, "This year we have barely managed to sell 50% of our stock compared to sales in previous years. Fancy lights are not selling and even though there are a few days left for Diwali, the footfall in the markets and the response of the shopkeepers have been discouraging."

Many shopkeepers in other sectors have skipped the annual ritual of stringing up lights outside. Gurpreet Singh, proprietor of an electronics shop in Sector 35, said, "We have not received a single enquiry about Diwali lights, which is why the entire stock hasn't been unpacked. Due to the pandemic, people's spending power has been impacted. Many families are making do with what they bought last year."

The China effect

Although it is not very pronounced, shopkeepers have also reported that people are refusing to buy Chinese products.

Confirming this, RP Gupta says unlike previous years, shopkeepers have been stocking the comparatively more expensive India made lights, which are selling faster than the Chinese ones.

Rajwinder Singh, who also runs a shop in Sector 18, adds that there has been a shift away from the China made lights, but not necessarily for patriotic reasons. "Today brands of repute such as Philips have started making fancy decoration lights for Diwali which are more durable and people are willing to shell a few extra bucks to get them instead of the Chinese products that develop faults quickly."

Simple designs, fewer buyers

Diyas too have no takers. "A year ago we were making pillars of diyas and other works of art, but now we are stocking diyas with simple designs," says Vinod Kumar, the president of the potters group which sells its wares in Sector 24.

All hope was not lost, however, as he added that an order had come in for a three-foot diya pillar from Sector 15 that would cost Rs900.

Laxmi of Jagatpura, who has been selling diyas in Sector 46 for the past 15 years, says this year will be tough for her. "These are difficult times. Everyone knows someone close to them who has been affected because of Covid. The festive spirit is lacking in the markets, due to which our diyas are also not selling."

Laxmi failed to sell a single diya on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 13 -- Extreme far-right groups are planning counter-protests over the weekend in London when large numbers of Black Lives Matter activists are expected to stage another demonstration, prompting officials to protect statues of Mahatma Gandhi and Winston Churchill.

The London mayor's office confirmed on Friday evening that Gandhi's statue has been "temporarily covered for its protection", as mayor Sadiq Khan and others appealed to people to stay away from the weekend demonstrations, which also pose challenges in the context of coronavirus.

Khan said: "I'm extremely concerned that further protests in central London not only risk spreading Covid-19, but could lead to disorder, vandalism and violence. Extreme far-right groups who advocate hatred and division are planning counter-protests, which means that the risk of disorder is high".

"Be in no doubt these counter-protests are there to provoke violence, and their only goal is to distract and hijack this important issue. Staying home and ignoring them is the best response this weekend", he added.

Last Sunday witnessed the first major BLM demonstration in London, when the statues of Churchill and Gandhi were targeted, among others. In Bristol, the statue of slave trader Edward Colston was pulled down and thrown into the Avon river.

A series of tweets, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said on Friday that it is "absurd and shameful" that Churchill's statue had been targeted, and appealed to people not to join the weekend protests.

Johnson, who wrote a biography of Churchill in 2014, added: "We cannot now try to edit or censor our past. We cannot pretend to have a different history. The statues in our cities and towns were put up by previous generations".

"They had different perspectives, different understandings or rights and wrongs. But those statues teach us about our past, with all its faults. To tear them down would be to lie about our history, and impoverish the education of generations to come".

The Leicester City Council is reviewing all street names, statues and monuments in the city with a large population of Indian origin. A petition for the removal of Gandhi's statue there enlisted over 5,000 signatures by Friday evening.

Keith Vaz, who was Leicester East MP for 33 years, said: "This is a dreadful petition that seeks to divide communities in Leicester and in the country. Those behind it know full well the consequences of what they are asking for. Gandhi's statues in Leicester and London are an inspiration for peace, harmony and non-violence".

"He was one of the greatest peacemakers in history. If this is not withdrawn I will certainly refer it to the police to consider whether it incites racial hatred. We have come a long way in 33 years on racial equality but clearly there is a long way to go. If there is any attempt to remove it I will be there to defend it personally."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 9 -- Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday spoke about filling the self-declaration form at the airport, which will help authorities in tackling the coronavirus outbreak.

The 'self reporting form', is issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and asks for details about the flight number, the origin of the journey and a passenger's final destination (in case he/she is staying in India for layover), apart from the regular details about the person's name, address, mobile number, e-mail ID etc.

Coronavirus Outbreak: Track Live Updates

Below this information, there is a set of questions specifically about China, where the coronavirus originated in December last year. The questions mentions on the form ask a passenger what all cities he/she visited in China, if Wuhan was one of them; if yes, the period of stay in Wuhan and did the passenger visit any seafood market.

Finally, the traveller has to declare if he/she is suffering from fever, cough or any other respiratory distress.

The advisory issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has made it mandatory for the passengers to furnish duly-filled self-declaration form to health officials and immigration officials, and undergo universal health screening at the designated health counters at all points of entry. "In addition to visa restrictions already in place, passengers travelling from/having visited Italy or Republic of Korea and desirous of entering India will need certificate of having tested negative for Covid-19 from the designated laboratories authorised by the health authorities of these countries," the advisory further says.

Speaking to reporters after chairing a high-level meeting on coronavirus, Vardhan stressed on the need to voluntarily declare the travel history so that it becomes easier to check the spread of Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.

"Voluntary declaration is for the well-being of everyone. All of us will benefit if people start filling out the form," said Vardhan.

Four new cases of Covid-19 have been reported since Sunday - one each from Kerala, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Jammu.

According to official estimates, till Monday 43 samples have tested positive out of the 3,003 samples tested for Covid-19 with 2,694 samples having returned negative results. 177 of them have been hospitalised and 33,599 passengers are under observation. 21,867 passengers have completed their observation period.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 8 -- President Donald Trump has accused the Biden campaign of politicising the search for a Covid-19 vaccine, and said Democratic vice presidential candidate Kamala Harris "will never be president."

"I watched Kamala's whole numbers drop (during the Democratic primaries) from 15 to almost zero and then drop out even before she ran in Iowa because people didn't like it. And I understand why she will never be president," Trump told reporters on Monday in a briefing that he opened with an attack on the Indian-origin California senator.

Harris had said she would not trust any vaccine announced by Trump without credible and reliable information. Calling her the "most liberal person in Congress", Trump demanded that she should "apologise for the reckless anti-vaccine rhetoric".

He said she is "not a competent person, in my opinion; would destroy this country and would destroy this economy".

Trump insisted that a vaccine may be ready "even before a very special date", referring to November 3, the Election Day. "So now they're saying, 'Wow, Trump has pulled this off. Okay, let's disparage the vaccine'," he said, adding, "That's so bad for this country."

The president denied he was himself politicising the vaccine search by talking about a breakthrough as early as October. "No, I'm saying that because we want to save a lot of lives," he said, adding, "the faster, the better. With somebody else, maybe they would say it politically, but I'm saying it in terms of this is what we need."

When asked if she would take the vaccine if it was announced before the election, Harris had said in an interview to CNN, "I will say that I would not trust Donald Trump, and it would have to be a credible source of information that talks about the efficacy and the reliability of whatever he's talking about."

Trump has repeatedly claimed a vaccine will have been found by the end of the year for Covid-19 that has killed nearly 190,000 Americans and infected more tan 6.4 million, and sent the economy into a tail spin, with millions of people left jobless by shuttered businesses.

Questions have been raised about Trump's handling of the epidemic - with most Americans rating it poorly in polls - seriously imperiling his re-election bid.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The four World Health Organisation (WHO) scientific experts who travelled to China to probe the Covid-19 pandemic's origins said that contrary to conspiracy theories, there currently is no evidence that suggests the novel coronavirus 'leaked' from a Chinese laboratory in Wuhan.

Instead, the most likely explanation is that the pandemic may have been caused by unfettered wildlife trade in the country, the experts said.

Speaking at a virtual event hosted by the Chatham House think-tank, the experts said that they found a 'link' between the wet market in Wuhan, where people first fell ill, and neighbouring regions in South China where bats were found with viruses.

Dr Peter Daszak, zoologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a global nonprofit researching human, animal and environmental health, said, "There was a conduit from Wuhan to the provinces in South China, where the closest relative viruses [to the coronavirus] are found in bats." It is thus possible that the virus crossed into domesticated and farmed animals and arrived in Wuhan on account of wildlife trade, he said.

Dr Daszak was a part of the four-member expert team sent by WHO, along with Professor David Heymann, Professor Marion Koopmans, and Professor John Watson.

Koopmans, the Head of the Department of Viroscience at Erasmus University Medical Center in Rotterdam, said that as part of their investigation, the team had also visited the three laboratories closest to the Huanan market in Wuhan and scrutinised their protocols and research.

"We concluded that it's extremely unlikely there was a lab incident," she said."

Incidentally, the three aforementioned laboratories, including the much talked about Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, have been the focus of several conspiracy theories and unfounded speculations on the origins of the virus, partly fueled by internet forums and imageboards playing the market for rumours.

The incident was also heavily politicised in the US by the erstwhile Trump administration, which defunded the National Institutes of Health also blacklisted critical coronavirus research, which was going on in collaboration with the Wuhan labs.

Addressing the issue of navigating this 'special politics' over the unfounded coronavirus origin speculations, Dr Daszak said that the scientific process related to the investigation offers a way to deal with this political intrigue.

"This scientific process here -- which involves looking at data, analysing it, coming to conclusions about what it means, and making it public -- is extremely important because it allows you to do the work irrespective of the politics. There is a purity to this process, and in other scientists reacting to it. I find solace in that," he said.

The United Nations' health agency worked for months to send an international team to Wuhan to help determine how the novel coronavirus first jumped from animals to humans. But in a tense geopolitical climate, the highly sensitive mission only landed on the ground this past January -- more than a year after the first cases were detected in the Chinese city in late 2019. The independent experts, who spent four weeks in Wuhan visiting sites linked to early cases, wrapped up their mission last month without conclusive findings.

The team, which has stressed this was just a first stage in the process, is expected to publish a report with their full findings next week.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 27 -- Coronavirus patients of Indian origin top the list of patients who have succumbed to the virus among the non-white population in England, according to latest figures released by the National Health Service, as the UK prepares to ease lockdown further from July 4.

NHS England figures show that 763 patients categorised as 'Indian' died as of June 25, followed by patients of 'Caribbean' heritage (636) and of 'Pakistani' origin (479). The 'Indian' category accounts for 3 per cent among the non-white patients who died due to contracting the virus.

Together, the non-white patients categorised as BAME (Black, Asian and minority ethnic) accounted for 3,794 deaths. Several reviews have concluded that the virus has affected the BAME communities 'disproportionately'.

Besides higher incidence of diseases such as diabetes among BAME communities, the reviews highlight the fact that individuals from such communities make up a large share of jobs considered essential in tackling the virus, many of which are public-facing. Several doctors and nurses of Indian heritage working in the NHS are among the dead.

A report by Public Health England said: "Historic racism and poorer experiences of healthcare or at work may mean that individuals in BAME groups are less likely to seek care when needed or as NHS staff are less likely to speak up when they have concerns about Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) or risk."

Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) have showed that there is a "significantly higher" risk of death from the virus among Indian and other non-white communities than the white community.

The ONS said Indian and other non-white males are 4.2 times more likely to die from a Covid-19-related death and non-white females are 4.3 times more likely than white ethnicity males and females. The UK's Indian-origin population is estimated to number 1.5 million.

The ONS said: "People of Bangladeshi and Pakistani, Indian, and Mixed ethnicities also had statistically significant raised risk of death involving Covid-19 compared with those of White ethnicity".

According to Kamlesh Khunti, medical expert at the University of Leicester, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the statistics, despite accounting for only 14 per cent of the UK population, include many coming from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, working in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 16 -- SpaceX on Sunday (early morning India time) launched four astronauts to the international space station (ISS) on the first full-fledged taxi flight for American space agency the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) by a private company.

The Falcon9 rocket took off from Kennedy Space Centre with three Americans and one Japanese, the second crew to be launched by SpaceX. The Dragon capsule on top, named Resilience by the crew in light of this year's many challenges, most notably Covid-19, was due to reach the space station late Monday and remain there until spring.

Almost two years after SpaceX launched a mannequin in a spacesuit seated in a Tesla Roadster aboard a Falcon Heavy testflight, the company owned by billionaire Elon Musk launched four living astronauts to the ISS.

"This is truly a commercial launch vehicle," Jim Bridenstine, the NASA administrator, said during a post-launch news conference, "and we're grateful to our partners at SpaceX for providing it."

It is expected that in the future space travel won't just be limited to rockets launched by NASA or other governments and anyone with the means to afford it can take off for infinity and beyond. While that might not be true to the letter, the world's first commercial space voyage does open up a host of possibilities for the future of space race.

Elon Musk's push for space exploration

In 2016, Musk shocked the world when he made public his plans to one day colonise Mars. Musk had a vision - sometime in the next decade humans will travel to Mars and become a "multiplanetary species".

"Someday soon, there will be an extinction event on Earth," the billionaire had said at a SpaceX event, adding, "We want to make Mars seem possible in our lifetimes". To that end, SpaceX soon released detailed videos explaining how they would accomplish interplanetary travel and on this Sunday brought their plans to fruition by sending to the ISS the world's first commercial spaceflight.

A report by financial services company Jeffries detailed SpaceX logged $2 billion in launch revenue. In total, Jefferies estimated these rockets brought in about $8 billion in revenue in 2018. The report also stated that Musk's company is the frontrunner for a lucrative contract under the military's National Security Space Launch program in 2020, and officials will name two companies to launch five years of government satellites.

Till date, SpaceX's Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets have succeeded in delivering multiple cargo payloads to orbit.

Other players vying for space travel

Much like Musk, the billionaire founder of Amazon, Jeff Bezos, too harbours dreams of space travel. His company Blue Origin was established in 2000 and is scheduled to launch its maiden voyage for flying wealthy patrons above the 62 mile altitude, considered to be the beginnings of outer space, so they can experience weightlessness for a few moments.

Bezos alos plans to build a moon lander for NASA astronauts and eventually commercialise space for millions of people to live and work. Another well-known individual with space plans of his own is Virgin Atlantic's Richard Branson. Branson's project suffered a tragic setback in 2014 when their test flight failed, killing the pilot and severely injuring the co-pilot.

Musk, Branson, and Bezos have talked about watching NASA's moon landing as the inspiration behind their space explorations. They were the generation that watched man land on the moon but since then NASA's advancement in space exploration has been very limited, nothing groundbreaking has happened, and now these men with means are looking to Mars and beyond.

Nasa's support for private players

None of their ambitions could, however, be realised without the support of NASA which they received when Republican party backed Jim Bridenstine, a member of Congress in Oklahoma, took office as the space agency's administrator in 2018. He told the Washington Post in an interview that NASA will end up saving money by "leveraging private industry capacity, innovation, and competitiveness".The proposition raised alarm in Democrats and in the rest of the world.

Concerns of the international community

The ISS, as the space station is commonly known, is till now the largest man-made object ever to orbit the Earth. Nasa, the Russian space agency, and 13 other countries built and run it jointly. Astronauts have lived aboard the ISS continuously since November 2000. It has no commercial viability, does not generate profit, and costs an enormous sum of money to build. The current plans for privatised expansion have irked Kremlin who do not look at NASA's privatisation drive, calling it "unacceptable".

Right now, there are two laws governing space - the 1967 UN Resolution that prohibits the placing of nuclear weapons in space, and a Federal Aviation Authority law that disallows the use of systems that have previously failed. Both are lacking in detail, which is a cause for widespread concern.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- US President Donald Trump and his administration's consistent attacks on the World Health Organisation chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus have set up a face-off at the proposed annual meeting of the World Health Assembly on May 18.

Trump, who has long accused the Tedros-led WHO of playing into China's hands over the coronavirus disease, this week suspended funding to the global health body. By then, the Ethopian microbiologist who was elected to lead the WHO in 2017 with support from Xi Jinping's China, had already galvanised support from African and most Non-Aligned countries.

To be sure, diplomats based in Geneva where the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly take place told Hindustan Times that the three-hour long video conference would end up in an anodyne resolution calling for a global fight against the spread of Covid-19 with all member nations uploading their statements. Even the most hard-hit European countries and the UK have desisted from criticising the WHO director general at this point, saying this isn't the time to play politics but fight the virus.

Also Read: Geostrategic paralysis in face of Covid-19 could open a role for India | Opinion

However, every representative of the 194-member body is expected to scrutinise the US statement as President Donald Trump has led the attack against Dr Tedros Ghebreyesus, accusing him of playing into the hands of the Chinese government and downplaying the threat posed by the deadly virus that has claimed 157,000 lives worldwide.

President Trump on Sunday went a step ahead when he warned of consequences to the Xi Jinping regime if it was found that China had deliberately suppressed facts about the origin and spread of the virus that originated from Wuhan province.

The US charges against WHO were largely summed up by the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the US Congress, which in a letter on April 9 to Dr Ghebreyesus made it clear that the organisation was "no longer serving the needs of the world and instead taking its cues from China."

Also Read: Reforming the World Health Organization | Opinion

While India has not formally taken a stand against Dr Ghebreyesus over its assessment that the focus should be Covid-19 and not WHO director general, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was first to indirectly question the body during a G-20 meeting last month when he wondered if a 20th century body would be able to handle the new-age diseases.

The US position is in contrast to the stand taken by African Union and countries and Non-Aligned Movement. Dr Ghebreyesus hails from Ethiopia, which has been a member of the movement for nearly 40 years.

The US is unhappy that as late as January 14, 2020, the WHO denied that there was community transmission in Wuhan despite warnings of human-to-human transmission by a non member Taiwan the previous month.

The WHO, the Trump administration believes, was late to declare Covid-19 as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) January 30, 2020.

By this time the disease had infected almost 10,000 people. In fact, Dr Ghebreyesus congratulated the Chinese government for taking extraordinary measures to contain the outbreak.

The WHO, despite declaring Covid-19 a PHEIC and extensive evidence of transmission through travel, did not warn any country against travel, to or from China. Between December 31 and January 31, as many as 430,000 people flew on direct flights from China to the US.

Covid-19 was only declared a pandemic on March 11 after it had raced around the world, sickening nearly 120,000 people in 110 countries and killing close to 4,400.

However, much to the chagrin of Donald Trump and US lawmakers, WHO routinely praised China for its efforts to combat the spread of Covid-19 contrary to the accusations that Beijing had underreported the threat and gagged professionals such as doctors and journalists for speaking about the severity of the disease.

Even though the World Health Assembly in Geneva may end up in a very diluted outcome. diplomats expect that there would be increasing pressure on China to respond to criticism that it hasn't been transparent enough about the disease and the WHO, for the steps that it should have taken.

At the UN Security Council meeting that belatedly discussed the pandemic last week, the US drove home the point by calling for "complete transparency" in the reporting of coronavirus data, a clear reference to China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Sept. 23 -- Although China may not have deliberately created Covid-19, it is possible that its release was the result of a lab accident at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which has been doing "gain-of-function" research on bat coronaviruses. Such research modifies a virus to make it deadlier or more transmissible - specifically, transmissible between species. We may never know the truth of the virus's origin. But, the Covid-19 pandemic has shown the Chinese government what is possible: To decimate global economies without inviting a significant economic or geopolitical toll itself. So there are new dangers.

Gene editing has now made it possible to engineer viruses whose effects range from Covid-19 to the bubonic plague. And the danger comes not only from governments: Rogue scientists and bio-hackers have access to the same tools. This is why India must take the lead in developing bio-defences. In my book, The Driver in the Driverless Car, I warned about the dangers of gene editing, forecasting that, in an era of bio-ethicists and bio-hackers, we will have to make difficult choices about whether to restrict the synthetic-biology technologies making the manufacture of these viruses possible. The danger is acute, the book explains, because in the near future, we will routinely have our genetic material analysed. With Artificial Intelligence (AI) and genomic data, scientists will decipher the complex relationships between DNA and biological processes and find treatments for diseases. Later in this decade, we will be able to download and "print" at home medicines, tissues, and bacteria custom-designed to suit our DNA and keep us healthy.

As we are seeing with the development of vaccines for the Sars-CoV-2 virus, accelerated research and development is possible. In the past, the creation and testing of vaccine candidates against pathogens have taken decades. Now, we are on track to do it within months. There are several companies using genomic blueprints made of DNA or ribonucleic acid (RNA) to teach the body how to defend itself from Covid-19. By injecting these into human cells, they cause them to produce virus antigens - which the immune system reacts to. The Moderna Therapeutics and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine candidates, now in phase-three clinical trials, were developed in weeks; it is conceivable that the same could be done in hours once the technologies are perfected.

In the updated Indian edition of The Driver in the Driverless Car, I included details of a cancer-cure plan that I presented to Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi at Kevadia, Gujarat, last October, a plan predicated on India's readiness to embrace advancing technologies. With these, India has the potential not only to provide its people with the most-advanced medical care but also to cure cancer itself. It can lead the world in research and innovation and lay the foundation for a trillion-dollar medical industry. I proposed that in order to achieve this, India launch the largest clinical trial in world history and use technologies such as genomics, synthetic biology, sensors, 3D printing, and AI to analyse data and develop treatments. Not only will this provide direct benefit to cancer patients; the discoveries will lead to the creation of hundreds of start-ups in India and fuel innovation in the medical sciences. This is the type of initiative that India must launch in preparation for the next pandemic.

India could also accelerate the process of testing vaccines - which has become the slowest part of the development cycle. In testing cancer drugs, for example, labs all over the world are creating three-dimensional cell cultures, "patient-derived organoids", from a tumour biopsy. The leading company in this field, SEngine Precision Medicine, is able to test more than 100 cancer drugs on organoids, using the tumours rather than human subjects as guinea pigs. Researchers at Harvard's Wyss Institute announced in January that they had developed the first human "organ-on-a-chip" model of the lung that accurately recapitulates human physiology and pathophysiology at organ sophistication. Massachusetts Institute of Technology engineers have been developing a microfluidic platform that connects engineered tissues from up to 10 organs, allowing the replication of human-organ interactions for weeks at a time and measurement of the effects of drugs on different body parts. Many more such systems are in development that could accelerate testing and treatment; and these are the missing component of bio-defence testing.

All of these technologies can be designed and developed in India, with an investment comparable to the cost of the Mangalyaan and Chandrayaan-2 missions. In my conversation with him, I found PM Modi to be brilliant in understanding technologies and their potential. He was excited about having India take the global leader in medical research, and asked his chief scientific adviser, K Vijay Raghavan, to present him with a proposal to implement it by February. Then Covid-19 happened and all efforts were put on hold. It is time for India to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat by the coronavirus - and to implement the grand plans to build its bio-defences and benefit the world by curing disease.

Vivek Wadhwa is a distinguished fellow at the Labor and Worklife Program of Harvard Law School and the author of The Driver in the Driverless Car: How Our Technology Choices Will Create the Future The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 2 -- Dr Maheshwar Prasad Chaurasia always wanted to write a novel. In May, he attended a webinar on how to write and publish a book. At the workshop, his writing instructor suggested that he start his journey as an author with a non-fictional work. He decided to write a book on Delhi's fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic.

Dr Chaurasia was qualified to do so -as additional superintendent at Delhi's government's Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital, he was part of the core team that set up the city's first quarantine centres, isolation wards and testing facilities in the initial months of the pandemic.

"Those were the early days of the pandemic and we did not know much about the virus. Doctors and officials went sleepless for days as they fought the pandemic. People were in a panic and were asking so many questions. My book is about how the doctors and the administration fought the pandemic in its initial months," says Chaurasia , whose book -- Just Switch Off Corona -- was released last month.

Chaurasia is not the only writer to have been inspired by the pandemic. Hundreds of books with titles such as Corona: A Checkmate; Murder in the Time of Corona; The Corona Wars; Corona Kiss; The Pandemic Plot; My Pandemic Experience, have been published in the past couple of months. Interestingly, a majority of these books -- poetry, fiction, non-fiction in English, Hindi, Tamil and many other Indian languages -- are by first- time writers and have been brought out by self- publishing companies.

The writers of these books include doctors, information technology (IT) professionals, teachers, most of whom seem to have drawn from their own experiences and understanding of the pandemic.

Dr Kumar Shyam, who lives in Hapur, a town in the National Capital Region, about 70 km from Delhi, last month published The Pandemic Plot, a novel that he says draws from the conspiracy theories surrounding the origin and nature of the coronavirus. The book that moves from Wuhan in China to Italy is the story of an international medical team comprising scientists from many countries, including India, who go on a mission to find the answers to some of the trickiest questions about the origin and spread of the virus.

His slim page-turner about this global quest ends with the conclusion that researchers at a Wuhan lab get infected and die and the virus spreads into the rest of the world.

"The governments and health systems around the world did not know what had hit them and there are so many conspiracy theories surrounding the origin and spread of the virus. l thought all of this made for a novel. I used many real incidents to connect the dots, " says Dr Shyam, a general surgeon, who owns a 100-bed hospital in Hapur."Being a doctor helped me write about virology with authenticity," says the doctor, who wrote the book every night in his personal library that boasts 3,000 books.

Rahul Bhardwaj, managing director at Yash Publications, which published The Pandemic Plot, says the book is a hit, having sold over 3,000 copies in hardback and paperback since its release last month.

"We have got 30 proposals for books on Corona and have already published three. Four more will be published next month," Bhardwaj adds.

Notion Press, one of the country's biggest self- publishing companies has brought out as many as 40 titles on the coronavirus, both fiction and non-fiction in English, Hindi and Tamil. Some of the titles published by it include Born in Lockdown, Pandemic Spell, Murder in the Time of Corona, Why and How China developed the Coronavirus.

Interestingly, Naveen Valsakumar, co-founder and CEO of Notion Press, says that one of the reasons why there are so many coronavirus-related books on his company's platform is that a lot of the writers are young and tech-savvy, who studied Google Trends and realised that there was a lot of curiosity about the pandemic.

"So, they decided to write books based on those trending searches. We made it clear to all writers that we will not publish any book offering unvalidated medical advice on Corona. For many people, writing about the pandemic has been a cathartic experience," says Valsakumar.

Love and romance are among the most popular genres among those writing on the coronavirus. Sample some of the titles in the category: Corona Kiss, Cupid Covid; Love in the Time of Corona Virus, A Second Chance with Love in Corona. In fact, there are dozens of books titled Love in the Time of Corona. A lot of these stories involve young doctors whose lives are torn apart as they fight the virus.

"Lockdown had a deep impact on relationships and that is the subject of my two Corona books" says Kawalpreet Kaur, a 26-year-old teacher. Her first book, Love in the Time of Corona Virus, and its sequel, The Dark 21 Days, feature the stories of two youngsters who battle not just caste, and but also Covid-19 in a hospital in Italy.

Sayed Arshad, founder of Blue Rose Publishers says the reason why most books have been published by self- publishing companies is their ability to bring out a book fast, something many of the writers want. "Normally it takes about seven months to bring out a book, most self- publishing companies take three weeks flat," he said.

After English, the maximum number of books on the coronavirus are in Hindi, and with some curious tiles: Namaste Corona ; Corona se Atmagyan (Enlightenment through Corona); Akash Me Corona Ghana Hai (The Sky is eclipsed by dense Corona); Corona Ek Safar (Corona, a journey). Rounak Rai, an art teacher and author of Corona se Atmagyan, a collection of 33 poems accompanied by his drawings, says he wrote the book during the lockdown.

"Corona brought out the best and the worst in human beings. My book captures the pain, the suffering and what this pandemic taught us about ourselves and about others," said Rai.

"But one of the unintended benefits of the pandemic is the fact that it encouraged people to look within and become writers," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 30 -- People of Indian-origin topped the list of non-white people who died of coronavirus in England, according to figures released on Thursday, reflecting growing number of cases in London boroughs and towns with many members of the disapora.

The Boris Johnson government has instituted an inquiry into the disproportionate number of non-white medical staff passing away. Health officials issued new guidance on Wednesday that such staff should not be deployed in the frontline of treating patients stricken by the virus.

NHA England figures show that 15 per cent of the dead were from the BAME (official categorised as Black and Asian Minority Ethnic) communities. The Indian sub-category constitutes 3 per cent, accounting for 560 deaths, followed by those of Caribbean and Pakistani origin.

According to Kamlesh Khunti, medical expert at the University of Leicester, the reasons Indian and other non-white people figure more in the statistics, despite accounting for only 14 per cent of the UK population, include many coming from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, working in public-facing occupations, holding different cultural beliefs and behaviours or being at high risk of diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

People of south Asian origin are considered more susceptible to diabetes, heart and other diseases. A majority of those passing away from coronavirus have underlying health conditions, which make recovery more challenging.

Medical staff of Indian heritage who passed away include Jitendra Kumar Rathod, Manjeet Singh Riyat, Krishan Arora, Rajesh Kalraiya, Pooja Sharma, Jayesh Patel, Vivek Sharma, Kamlesh Kumar Masson, Amarante Dias, Sophie Fagan, Hamza Pacheeri and Amrik Bamotra.

London boroughs such as Brent, Barnet, Ealing and Harrow with large population of Indian origin figure among the areas with the most number of cases. There are reports that funeral services catering to the Indian community have sees more cases than usual.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of Rs 75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, Rs 19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of Rs 6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving Rs 1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over Rs 1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around Rs 12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate Rs 1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over Rs 400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 19 -- The Sars-CoV-2 viruses causing coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has three major strains, but no key mutation specific to India has been found that affects infectiveness or disease severity, said Minister of Health and Science & Technology Dr Harsh Vardhan in his first interview after Covid-19 cases crossed 100,000 in India on Monday. He said calibrated lockdowns and public health measures have delayed the peaking of the curve in India and prevented the dramatically high numbers predicted by several modelling studies, but warned that how the pandemic progresses now will depend on how closely people follow mobility restrictions, social isolation and personal hygiene norms. Edited excerpts:

When is the pandemic expected to peak in India?

We have successfully managed to delay the peaking of the curve by imposing lockdown and other public health measures in a timely manner. There are several mathematical models which are predicting the course of the pandemic in India, but till now, we have managed to avoid the dramatically high numbers that they predicted. Right now, with the calibrated lockdowns being implemented, we have tried to contain the spread of infection. It is difficult to predict numbers as they will depend on the adherence of restrictions on mobility and intermingling, observance of personal hygiene, and prevention of exposure to infection by people in different areas. Additionally, it will also depend on the proportion of those infected among migrants and travellers from outside and within.

Has community transmission begun in India?

The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined four stages of Covid-19 outbreak: Countries with no cases, countries with sporadic cases; countries with clusters; and countries experiencing larger outbreaks of local transmission (community transmission). How large is an outbreak that constitutes a community transmission has not been defined by WHO, so what people refer to as community transmission differs from country to country.

In India, the virus has come from foreign sources through travellers coming from outside. We generally consider a case to be a 'case of community transmission' when there is no clarity on the source of origin of the infection in a new community. Let me explain again. Community spread in India would mean that cases are occurring in people who did not have any known contact with travellers from overseas infected countries. However, this is not happening, implying that there is no community transmission in India.

Although there are some clusters of local spread, the numbers being reported are not indicative of community transmission, which would have likely resulted in a larger number of cases given the expanded testing. Central teams have been deployed in 10 states witnessing a high burden of cases to investigate the sites with higher transmission. In addition, 69 districts will be brought under surveillance to understand the burden and disease trends in greater detail.

Is India prepared for the projected rise in cases after work and travel restrictions end?

India has massively scaled up all aspects of preparedness. There are around 535 laboratories across the country, more than one lakh samples are tested per day, and 24,04,267 people have been tested. The testing strategies are constantly being examined in light of emerging evidence. India has also developed ELISA-based antibody testing kits, which will provide testing alternatives.

India now has the capacity to produce over 250,000 PPE units every day. This expansion of capacity is a real success story as we were entirely dependent on imported PPEs in the pre-pandemic period. We have also scaled up the availability of hospital beds, and oxygen supply linked beds, to enable supportive treatment of Covid-19 patients. While there are sufficient ventilators, our goal is to prevent patients from going on ventilators because the global experience shows that once patients go on ventilators, the mortality rate is very high.

Overall, we are focusing on preparedness in the community (physical distancing, phased relaxation of lockdown), augmenting healthcare facilities (more beds, oxygen support, ICU) and public health management measures (surveillance, testing) to ensure that a holistic plan is in place to combat the threat of resurgent infections once the lockdown is lifted in a phased manner at varying levels in different districts.

How many genomic sequences of SARS-CoV2 has India submitted to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID)?

India has contributed around 226 genomic sequences of SARS-CoV-2 so far to the around 25,000 sequences of SARS-CoV-2 that have been shared with unprecedented speed via GISAID. A 1,000-genome sequencing initiative has been launched by Department of Biotechnology (DBT), and 500 are being sequenced by the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR).

What are the findings? Are there any key mutations in the SARS-CoV2 virus causing disease in India?

The key mutations in SARS-Cov-2 virus have been found in spike glycoprotein (D614G, G1124V), nucleocapsid (R203K, G204R), RNA dependent RNA Polymerase (P323L) . The circulating viruses in India belong to three major strains. The majority of our samples belong to A2a and about 15% to A3 genotypes. There are a few samples belonging to genotypes B, B1, B4, and A1a. They do not have any mutation that has been reported to be associated with any disease progression or acquisition so far. So, despite the fact that no key mutation specific to India has been found in the virus and it still continues to be an imported virus strain, we cannot afford to be complacent. We have to remain vigilant and continue tracking the virus to identify emerging quasi-species or strains.

How many states have the SARS-CoV2 genetic samples been sequenced from? Is there any difference in the strains causing infections across states?

Sequences are currently mostly from Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh -- most belong to A2a clade, while some belong to A3 and B1 clades. It is too early to detect major differences. We are trying for a systematic study of viral RNA sequence from different zones of India and correlate with disease severity.

What has been the role of government institutions in the Covid-19 response, including diagnostic, drug and vaccine development?

The focus is on self-reliance. We have ramped up our capacity for developing Indigenous testing kits. From being completely dependent on imports, we now have over 20 indigenous manufacturers with a diagnostic kit production capacity of nearly 50 lakh kits per month getting ready by the end of May. This includes indigenous components and reagents.

The government's role has been very proactive in supporting innovation for vaccine development, development of cost-effective diagnostic equipment , as well as drug discovery and repurposing. The Covid Consortium, under DBT-BIRAC (Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council), has supported 70 projects under various categories of vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics. Support has been also given to medical devices such as ventilators and equipment such as PPEs, N-95 masks etc, and for drugs and vaccine development. Funding start-ups that offer immediate solutions has been fast-tracked to address the Covid challenge.

Some US studies have found hydroxychloroquine to be ineffective against Covid-19? What is India's experience?

The recent study from New York which failed to find any mortality benefits associated with the use of hydroxychloroquine is a retrospective cohort study. There are several caveats in the study which need to be accounted for. First, the design of the study precludes attribution of the causal effect of the use of hydroxychloroquine on the disease outcomes. Second, the recipients of the drug were already suffering from severe disease, thus making the comparative sample groups unfair. Third, the best effect of hydroxychloroquine based strategy is seen when initiated in the mild to moderate disease stage. Several clinical trials are underway, and once their results are declared, we shall have definite evidence of the effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine.

Several studies are also underway in India, and as the results emerge, we shall be able to provide more insights into the experiences locally. However, early reports from the pharmacovigilance programme indicate that there are no unexpected spikes of adverse reactions from the use of hydroxychloroquine in the country.

What is the progress on the WHO Solidarity Trial in India?

In India, we plan to randomise at least 1,500 Covid-19 patients over five to six months. The trial has been initiated with 46 randomised Covid-19 patients, symptomatic adults who have been recently hospitalized and have not yet received hydroxychloroquine. We are not enrolling any asymptomatic Covid-19 patients. The nature of care proposed as part of the randomized trial include providing only local standard of care, administering Remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, Lopinavir / Ritonavir or Lopinavir / Ritonavir with Interferon Beta-1a. So far, around 2,500 people have been randomized globally. Being a five-arm study, large numbers (&gt; 10,000) are required, although there is no cap on sample size. It's not possible to give timeframe for outcomes as the analysis resulting from these trials is global.

Is the effect of BCG vaccination being studied in India?

BCG vaccination has been found to be an immunomodulator in malignancies and also protects against certain infectious diseases. Several high-income countries, which do not have routine BCG vaccination in childhood, have initiated clinical trials of BCG in high-risk groups, especially in healthcare workers. Currently, there are two ongoing clinical trials in India. Serum Institute of India (in Pune) is conducting a trial of VPM1002 and Cadila is conducting a trial using mycobacterium indicus pranii. However, we have to keep in mind the fact that India has very high rates of BCG vaccination at birth, and this could be an effect modifier or confounder in the results.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 12 -- The coronavirus pandemic is reshaping how the government is interacting with businesses and its citizens.

With the pandemic-related disruptions upending processes that need physical inspections and lengthy paper trails, the government is shedding its rigid ways to adopt new systems, including digitisation, to eliminate hurdles for businesses.

For instance, when finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman met businesses in mid-February when the outbreak was raging in China, the biggest fear conveyed by executives was a shortage of raw materials from India's northern neighbour, with supplies barely lasting two to three weeks.

That set off a series of steps to overhaul India's handling of cross-border trade. And, on June 8, a critical experiment in customs reforms-faceless assessment-went live. Such assessments have now been rolled out at Chennai and Bengaluru, starting with mechanical, electrical and electronic machinery, and will be gradually scaled up across the country by the end of the year.

The idea is to eliminate discretion in decision-making, ensure physical distancing and fast-track clearance of goods, saving time and costs for importers.

M Ajit Kumar, chairman of Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs, earlier this week told field officials to "leave no stone unturned" in rolling out and scaling up faceless assessment to make it uniform and speedy. "Faceless assessment would be a complete departure from existing manner of customs assessment," Kumar told officials in a June 8 letter reviewed by Mint.

Industry executives said that the move will particularly benefit small businesses.

"It will help in avoiding delays even if officials are not able to be physically present at workplace during the pandemic," said Chandrakant Salunkhe, founder and president of SME Chamber of India and SME Importers Association of India.

In its ease of doing business reports, the World Bank had flagged cross-border trade as a key area that needed reforms. In its 2020 report, India was among the top 10 countries that made progress in ease of doing business, including in cross-border trade.

The disruptions caused by the pandemic gave it momentum, with the government announcing round-the-clock clearance of goods at all customs facilities on February 20, followed by a series of steps to simplify procedures.

That included setting up a single-window Covid-19 helpdesk, automated release of consignments all over the country from March 5, provisional clearance of goods with preferential treatment without original certificate of origin, personal hearing through videoconferencing, a drive to clear pending refunds and exemption of demurrage charges during the lockdown.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, May 5 -- US President Donald Trump has promised to present a "conclusive" report on the US investigation into China's handling of the Covid-19 outbreak and the actual origin of the coronavirus.

"We're going to be giving a very strong report as to exactly what we think happened. And I think it will be very conclusive," the US president said.

"My opinion is that they (China) made a mistake. They tried to cover it, they tried to put it out, just like a fire," Trump added.

The US has disputed the Chinese government's version of the origin of the virus - from a wet market in Wuhan - and alleged that it came from a virology lab in that city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Patna, May 3 -- States receiving migrant labourers from across India are gearing up for a massive challenge: a spurt in coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases. And, some states such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha, have already unveiled unprecedented steps.

The Bihar government has made a 21-day quarantine mandatory for all workers and has cancelled the leave of all doctors and health workers. Odisha, which will test all workers for Covid-19 after a mandatory 14-day quarantine period, has instructed all community centres to remain open around the clock, and has decided to create 4,200 new isolation beds.

Like most other states, Uttar Pradesh has made a 14-day quarantine mandatory, after which each family will get food grains for 15 days. The state has created special isolation wards at district hospitals. Jharkhand will be providing cooked meals to workers during the 15-day quarantine and free rations for their families.

On Friday, railways ran special trains, called Shramik, to take migrant workers back to their villages. More trains took back workers from at least 10 states on Saturday. However, the return of migrant workers has created a fear of Covid-19 cases increasing.

At least seven migrant workers, who returned to Uttar Pradesh, have tested positive. In just one district of Bihar, 13 migrant workers have tested positive. In Odisha, 20 workers, who returned from Bengal, have tested positive.

Between April 25 and May 1, when many workers returned, Bihar reported 243 new cases, which is almost 50% of the 475 cases in the state. Officials said many of the new cases reported in the second phase of the lockdown were migrants, who somehow managed to reach Bihar, and spread infections to new areas.

Many of the new cases have been reported from districts, such as Madhubani, Darbhanga, Sitamarhi and Purnea, which were previously free of Covid-19 cases. Madhubani district magistrate, Dr Nilesh Ramchandra Deor, said all the 13 positive cases are of migrants from Delhi, Mumbai and Lucknow, while the origin of the earlier five cases was traced to a woman who came by car from Delhi. "The emerging trend of new cases shows the challenging phase for the state may have just begun with more and more people returning to their native places and we have to be prepared for it," said a senior official of the government, who was not willing to be named.

The state government has cancelled leaves of doctors, health officials and contractual workers in the health department till May 31. All medical facilities have been asked to remain prepared for the admissions of a large number of cases, an official said.

In Uttar Pradesh, seven daily wage workers, who returned from Maharashtra, tested positive. They have been put in government quarantine in Basti district. District magistrate, Ashutosh Niranjan, said that the workers had travelled in state-run buses from Maharashtra.

The state government officials said about a million migrants, who are expected to return, will be kept at the district and panchayat quarantine centres. The officials also said that additional isolation beds have been created at the district level, should there be a spurt in cases. "Special attention is being paid to workers coming back from Maharashtra, which has the highest number of cases in India," said a senior UP government official.

The state first Shramik train, carrying 847 migrants, will reach Lucknow's Charbagh railway station on Sunday morning from Nashik. Divisional railway manager (DRM), Lucknow division, NR Sanjay Tripathi, said, "We have also made arrangements at the station to strictly ensure social distancing." The district wise segregation will be done and they will be taken to buses. "We have arranged 65 buses," said Mukesh Meshram, divisional commissioner, Lucknow.

In Odisha, about 20 workers who returned from West Bengal, tested positive in the past few days in Ganjam and other districts. "More than half of the 149 Covid-19 cases in Odisha have travel history of hot spots in West Bengal," said Odisha chief secretary, Asit Tripathy. On Friday, two new cases were reported from Bolangir district with a travel history to Tamil Nadu.

About 325 workers from Surat in Gujarat, who hired seven buses to return, are in quarantine. Around 1,200 workers from Kerala, who reached Odisha on Saturday morning, have been sent to quarantine centres in their respective districts, the chief secretary said.

Four buses carrying more than 120 workers left for West Bengal from Dumka district on Friday. These buses were supposed to bring over 100 Jharkhand workers from 24-Pargana South, Howrah, Kolkata and Malda. "The buses were stopped at Bengal border and the officials there said that they have not received any such order to allow buses of other states. So, the buses were asked to return," said Dumka deputy commissioner Rajeshwari B. Dhanbad deputy commissioner, Amit Kumar, said the state is in talks with officials of the Bengal government but they are not allowing buses to enter border. "So, we have decided to send out buses to other neighbouring states," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 23 -- Over 35 coronavirus suspects, who had been quarantined at two different facilities in Delhi, went missing in suspicious circumstances, HT's Hindi language publication Live Hindustan reported.

District police of Delhi's neighbouring states have been alerted while a search operation is underway. The Delhi Police have also formed several teams to look for the missing suspects. According to Delhi Police sources, the incidents took place at Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar and Azadpur Colony in Model Town.

On April 15, more than 100 coronavirus suspects were admitted at a centre in Azadpur Colony of Model Town. Around Tuesday, night it was reported that three to four people disappeared from there. The complaint was lodged with the police on behalf of the centre in-charge as soon as the matter was detected.

The second incident was reported from a centre in Mukherjee Nagar area. Around 125 people were admitted to the quarantine centre here around April 16. From here, more than 30 Covid-19 suspects were reported missing under mysterious circumstances sometime on Monday night. The incident was also reported to the concerned police station by the centre in-charge.

According to Delhi Police sources, some Nepali origin suspects have also been reported to be among the missing Covid-19 suspects. All are being looked for. An investigation is also being done to find out the cause behind their escape. It is reported that no person from the respective quarantine centres helped these suspects in escaping.

2248 people have tested positive for coronavirus in the national capital. 48 people have died from the infection while 724 people have made a recovery, as per the health ministry's data.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 27 -- Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the coronavirus origins, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Australia has shot back against the threat, cautioning China against any threat of "economic coercion".

In the past week, Morrison had spoken to the leaders of the US, France and Germany to gather support for an international investigation into the Wuhan origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Beijing didn't take lightly to the move.

Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye said in an interview to The Australian Financial Review on Sunday that the call for the probe was "dangerous".

"If the mood is going from bad to worse, people would think 'why should we go to such a country that is not so friendly to China?' The tourists may have second thoughts," Cheng said, adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'"

"The parents of the students would also think... whether this is the best place to send their kids," he added.

China is not only Australia's largest export market for wine and beef, it is also the largest markets for energy exports, education and tourism - Bloomberg reports that Australia's is the most China-reliant economy in the developed world.

On Monday, Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne cautioned China against attempts at "economic coercion".

Payne said in a statement on Monday that Australia had made a "principled call" for an independent review of the Covid-19 outbreak which first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan in late last year.

"We reject any suggestion that economic coercion is an appropriate response to a call for such an assessment, when what we need is global cooperation," Payne said in the statement.

China had earlier called the move to ask for an independent inquest politically motivated.

"Currently, with the pandemic still spreading across the world, the most pressing task is to put people's life and health first and work together to defeat the virus," Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang had said.

"At such a critical juncture, it is highly irresponsible to resort to politically motivated suspicion and accusation. We advise the Australian side to put aside ideological bias and political games, focus on the welfare of the Australian people and global public health security, follow the international community's collective will for cooperation, and contribute to the global cooperation in fighting the virus, instead of doing things to the contrary," Geng had said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 3 -- After inaugurating Atal Tunnel in Himachal Pradesh's Rohtang, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a public rally in Solang and said the tunnel will help draw tourists to Himachal Pradesh from all across the world.

As the country is unlocking itself after Covid-19 lockdown, the tourism sector will also start getting back on track soon, the PM said, adding that the state is bound to see a rise in tourist footfall due to the tunnel.

He also took the opportunity to talk about farm laws that were passed in Parliament last month and said that the laws, just like Atal Tunnel, will help small farmers in the long run.

Small farmers who wish to sell their produce in markets far away from their origin would be able to do so with the help of this tunnel, PM Modi said.

"Our country is bound to change for the better. An example of this is the introduction of farm bills. For us, the priority is our farmers, for earlier governments it was elections," PM Modi said.

"Dreams of youth of Himachal Pradesh and all of India are important to us. These developments will help fulfil them. I would like to congratulate the state and the country again for the inauguration of Atal Tunnel," he added.

Along with the inauguration of Atal Tunnel, another decision was taken for the people of Himachal, the PM said, adding that a 66 MW Dhaulasidh Hydro Electric Project in Hamirpur was recently approved. "This project will not only give electricity to the country, it'll also give employment to the youth of Himachal," PM said.

Defence minister Rajnath Singh, Himachal Pradesh chief minister Jairam Thakur and Union minister Anurag Thakur also attend the Solang Nala rally.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 13 -- New research has confirmed that Sars-Cov-2 is very closely genetically related to coronaviruses from bat populations, and specifically rhinolophus bats, and pangolins may have been intermediate hosts in transmission to humans.

Such pandemics will become more likely and spill-over risks of dangerous viruses are increasing even as Covid-19 outbreak is bringing the world to a grinding halt.

Dr Pranav Pandit, a veterinary epidemiologist at One Health Institute, University of California Davis, said there is scientific evidence linking deforestation, rapid urbanisation, climate change with pandemics like Covid-19, which offer clues to how pandemics can be prevented.

Excerpts from an email interview:

Q. Is there scientific evidence about the natural origin of Sars-Cov-2?

A. Epidemiologically speaking, the latest evidence including a paper in Nature published on May 7 points towards a hypothesis that bats could harbour the phylogenetic ancestor virus of Sars-Cov-2. The most likely candidate is "bat coronavirus RaTG13" and Malayan Pangolins could be intermediate hosts. The earlier relationship of Sars-Cov-2 with "bat coronavirus RaTG13" was raised by the analysis conducted by other papers also.

Q. An estimated 60% of emerging human pathogens are zoonotic. Why has the threat of zoonotic diseases increased?

A. There is surely an increase in emerging viruses from animals. Just over the last five years, the world has seen great outbreaks of emerging zoonotic viruses including the Zika virus, Ebola virus, and now Sars-Cov-2. Overall, this is attributed to anthropogenic pressures that we exert on environmental systems, including cOur recent study shows that exploitation wildlife populations and degradation of habitats are one of the important ecological divers behind the emergence of viruses from wildlife to humans. https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspb.2019.2736

These rapid anthropogenic changes are animal-human interfaces where humans frequently get in contact with wild animals allowing viruses to evolve and jump into humans leading to the emergence of a new virus. Some of our earlier work has similar interpretations for a group of emerging viruses called flaviviruses (zika virus, yellow fever virus, dengue virus). https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-07896-2

Q. Did scientists see a pandemic of this scale coming?

A. Because the world is more interconnected than ever through travel and trade, it is likely that we will see pandemics at an increasing rate. We hope we can shift thinking from pandemic response to pandemic prevention. Disease emergence that occurs anywhere can affect us all and we need to all understand the impact we are having when we interact with wildlife, realise that disease emergence is an environmental issue, and find more sustainable ways to co-exist.

Q. What is the link between deforestation and zoonoses?

A. We alter the landscape through deforestation, conversion of land for growing crops or raising livestock, or building up communities, and this, in turn, alters the natural distribution of wildlife and increases the frequency and intensity of contact between humans and wildlife - creating the perfect conditions for virus spillover. Wildlife also shift their distributions to accommodate anthropogenic activities and modification of the natural landscape. This has hastened disease emergence from wildlife, which puts us at risk of pandemics because we are all globally connected through travel and trade.

Q. Could certain indigenous hunting communities have antibodies to these viruses?

A. Certainly, antibodies against some zoonotic viruses have been detected in certain tribal communities without any known detected outbreak of disease. This only means that those communities have been only exposed to those or similar viruses since many times serological response and tests are not very specific to a single virus. An example of a study in India is the following https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0007733. Studies like these show human-animal interactions lead to exposure of animal viruses to humans.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, July 9 -- China on Wednesday criticised the US move to withdraw from the World Health Organization while agreeing to allow a WHO team to visit the country to trace the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The US decision will have grave implications for developing countries, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, said.

The United Nations said the US will leave the WHO on July 6, 2021.

On the visit of the WHO team to China, Zhao said, "We came to the basic consensus with the WHO that virus tracing is a scientific issue, which should be carried out under international research and cooperation by scientists."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- In the wake of coronavirus outbreak in India, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday announced that all movie theatres will remain shut till March 31, according to ANI. The Delhi government also declared the coronavirus an epidemic.

Schools and colleges where exams are currently not being conducted will also remain shut in Delhi.

The decision was taken at a high-level meeting attended by Kejriwal, LG Anil Baijal and top government officials.

As a precautionary measure to control coronavirus spread, all the public places in Delhi will be disinfected. Whereas the vacant flats owned by Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board will be used for quarantine, Kejriwal said.

"Disinfecting all public places, including government, private offices and shopping malls, has been made compulsory," Kejriwal added.

Delhi so far has recorded six positive cases of coronavirus. The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases across India, including foreign nationals, shot to 73. Out of these 73 people, 56 are Indian citizens.

As a measure to tackle the spread of COVID-19, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that no central government minister will travel abroad in the coming days.

"Say No to Panic, Say Yes to Precautions. No Minister of the Central Government will travel abroad in the upcoming days. I urge our countrymen to also avoid non-essential travel. We can break the chain of spread and ensure safety of all by avoiding large gatherings," PM Modi tweeted on Thursday.

On Wednesday evening, India suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 2 -- Interstate bus services are set to resume in Delhi from Tuesday as the three interstate bus terminals (ISBTs) in the national Capital will be thrown open to the public after being shut more than seven months because of Covid-19 restrictions. The number of buses coming from different states, however, will be capped at 50% of pre-Covid times.

Delhi transport minister Kailash Gahlot on Monday reviewed preparations made ahead of the resumption of interstate services and asked officials to ensure strict compliance of the standard operating procedure (SOP).

The three ISBTs at Kashmere Gate, Sarai Kale Khan and Anand Vihar used to cater to 3,500 trips of interstate buses and 2,000 trips of local buses every day before the lockdown.

This will be the first time interstate bus travel will be allowed in Delhi since the lockdown was imposed in the city on March 21 to arrest the spread of Covid-19.

The states that run their buses to and from Delhi include Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana and Chandigarh.

According to the SOP prepared by the Delhi government, the interstate buses will be sanitised by the respective depots of bus operators at the point of origin and before their departure from the respective ISBTs.

Thermal checking of both passengers and the bus crew at boarding and at the point of entry to ISBTs will be must.

It will be mandatory for passengers to wear face masks. Buses will run to their seating capacity and no standing passengers will be allowed.

Social distancing will be ensured at the ground station, at the time of boarding of passengers and inside the bus, as per government guidelines.

Social distancing will be done through markers on the ground and waiting areas, similar to the ones in all buses and the metro.

"In addition to these, testing camps for rapid/ RT-PCR tests have been set up at all three ISBTs in case any asymptomatic passenger shows signs of illness after thermal screening. The safety of both passengers and staff and crew are of utmost priority to us," the minister said.

"We've been carefully monitoring patterns of travelling since we resumed bus services. Even though inter-state travel is a challenge, we are ensuring sanitisation at every point. Apart from this, regular announcements and sensitisation of passengers about Covid-19 precautions through audio-visual communication is also being made. There will be a strict ban on the use of gutka, tobacco products, etc., in the ISBT premises," the minister said.

The decision to reopen the ISBTs was taken on October 23 in a Delhi Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) meeting chaired by lieutenant-governor Anil Baijal.

But before the onset of the pandemic, the three ISBTs saw a combined footfall of over 250,000 every day. At least 3,467 buses from various states would ply through these ISBTs every day.

The state government has also allowed Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) and cluster buses to operate at full seating capacity, but no passenger will be allowed to stand and travel.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- US President Donald Trump on Tuesday took to Twitter and shared the three-page long letter that he has written to World Health Organisation (WHO) chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. In his tweet, Trump said that the letter is "self-explanatory".

Time and again, the US president has accused the global health body for supporting China during the coronavirus pandemic.

"The WHO failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself," Trump's letter read.

Trump said that the WHO "consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December" and concluded his letter by saying that "the only way forward for the WHO is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China."

Here's the full transcript of the Trump's letter to the WHO chief:

Dear Dr. Tedros:

On April 14, 2020, I suspended United States contributions to the World Health Organization pending an investigation by my Administration of the organization's failed response to the COVID-19 outbreak. This review has confirmed many of the serious concerns I raised last month and identified others that the World Health Organization should have addressed, especially the World Health Organization's alarming lack of independence from the People's Republic of China. Based on this review, we now know the following:

*The World Health Organization consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019 or even earlier, including reports from the Lancet medical journal. The World Health Organization failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself.

* By no later than December 30, 2019, the World Health Organization office in Beijing knew that there was a "major public health" concern in Wuhan. Between December 26 and December 30, China's media highlighted evidence of a new virus emerging from Wuhan, based on patient data sent to multiple Chinese genomics companies. Additionally, during this period, Dr. Zhang Jixian, a doctor from Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, told China's health authorities that a new coronavirus was causing a novel disease that was, at the time, afflicting approximately 180 patients.

* By the next day, Taiwanese authorities had communicated information to the World Health Organization indicating human-to-human transmission of a new virus. Yet the World Health Organization chose not to share any of this critical information with the rest of the world, probably for political reasons.

* The International Health Regulations require countries to report the risk of a health emergency within 24 hours. But China did not inform the World Health Organization of Wuhan's several cases of pneumonia, of unknown origin, until December 31, 2019, even though it likely had knowledge of these cases days or weeks earlier.

* According to Dr. Zhang Yongzhen of the Shanghai Public Health Clinic Center, he told Chinese authorities on January 5, 2020, that he had sequenced the genome of the virus. There was no publication of this information until six days later, on January 11, 2020, when Dr. Zhang self-posted it online. The next day, Chinese authorities closed his lab for "rectification." As even the World Health Organization acknowledged, Dr. Zhang's posting was a great act of "transparency." But the World Health Organization has been conspicuously silent both with respect to the closure of Dr. Zhang's lab and his assertion that he had notified Chinese authorities of his breakthrough six days earlier.

* The World Health Organization has repeatedly made claims about the coronavirus that were either grossly inaccurate or misleading.

- On January 14, 2020, the World Health Organization gratuitously reaffirmed China's now-debunked claim that the coronavirus could not be transmitted between humans, stating: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) identified in Wuhan, China." This assertion was in direct conflict with censored reports from Wuhan.

- On January 21, 2020, President Xi Jinping of China reportedly pressured you not to declare the coronavirus outbreak an emergency. You gave in to this pressure the next day and told the world that the coronavirus did not pose a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Just over one week later, on January 30, 2020, overwhelming evidence to the contrary forced you to reverse course.

- On January 28, 2020, after meeting with President Xi in Beijing, you praised the Chinese government for its "transparency" with respect to the coronavirus, announcing that China had set a "new standard for outbreak control" and "bought the world time." You did not mention that China had, by then, silenced or punished several doctors for speaking out about the virus and restricted Chinese institutions from publishing information about it.

* Even after you belatedly declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30, 2020, you failed to press China for the timely admittance of a World Health Organization team of international medical experts. As a result, this critical team did not arrive in China until two weeks later, on February 16, 2020. And even then, the team was not allowed to visit Wuhan until the final days of their visit. Remarkably, the World Health Organization was silent when China denied the two American members of the team access to Wuhan entirely.

* You also strongly praised China's strict domestic travel restrictions, but were inexplicably against my closing of the United States border, or the ban, with respect to people coming from China. I put the ban in place regardless of your wishes. Your political gamesmanship on this issue was deadly, as other governments, relying on your comments, delayed imposing life-saving restrictions on travel to and from China. Incredibly, on February 3, 2020, you reinforced your position, opining that because China was doing such a great job protecting the world from the virus, travel restrictions were "causing more harm than good." Yet by then the world knew that, before locking down Wuhan, Chinese authorities had allowed more than five million people to leave the city and that many of these people were bound for international destinations all over the world.

* As of February 3, 2020, China was strongly pressuring countries to lift or forestall travel restrictions. This pressure campaign was bolstered by your incorrect statements on that day telling the world that the spread of the virus outside of China was "minimal and slow" and that "the chances of getting this going to anywhere outside China [were] very low."

* On March 3, 2020, the World Health Organization cited official Chinese data to downplay the very serious risk of asymptomatic spread, telling the world that "COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently as influenza" and that unlike influenza this disease was not primarily driven by "people who are infected but not yet sick." China's evidence, the World Health Organization told the world, "showed that only one percent of reported cases do not have symptoms, and most of those cases develop symptoms within two days." Many experts, however, citing data from Japan, South Korea, and elsewhere, vigorously questioned these assertions. It is now clear that China's assertions, repeated to the world by the World Health Organization, were wildly inaccurate.

* By the time you finally declared the virus a pandemic on March 11, 2020, it had killed more than 4,000 people and infected more than 100,000 people in at least 114 countries around the world.

* On April 11, 2020, several African Ambassadors wrote to the Chinese Foreign Ministry about the discriminatory treatment of Africans related to the pandemic in Guangzhou and other cities in China. You were aware that Chinese authorities were carrying out a campaign of forced quarantines, evictions, and refusal of services against the nationals of these countries. You have not commented on China's racially discriminatory actions. You have, however, baselessly labeled as racist Taiwan's well-founded complaints about your mishandling of this pandemic.

* Throughout this crisis, the World Health Organization has been curiously insistent on praising China for its alleged "transparency." You have consistently joined in these tributes, notwithstanding that China has been anything but transparent. In early January, for example, China ordered samples of the virus to be destroyed, depriving the world of critical information. Even now, China continues to undermine the International Health Regulations by refusing to share accurate and timely data, viral samples and isolates, and by withholding vital information about the virus and its origins. And, to this day, China continues to deny international access to their scientists and relevant facilities, all while casting blame widely and recklessly and censoring its own experts.

* The World Health Organization has failed to publicly call on China to allow for an independent investigation into the origins of the virus, despite the recent endorsement for doing so by its own Emergency Committee. The World Health Organization's failure to do so has prompted World Health Organization member states to adopt the "COVID-19 Response" Resolution at this year's World Health Assembly, which echoes the call by the United States and so many others for an impartial, independent, and comprehensive review of how the World Health Organization handled the crisis. The resolution also calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, which is necessary for the world to understand how best to counter the disease.

Perhaps worse than all these failings is that we know that the World Health Organization could have done so much better. Just a few years ago, under the direction of a different Director-General, the World Health Organization showed the world how much it has to offer. In 2003, in response to the outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in China, Director-General Harlem Brundtland boldly declared the World Health Organization's first emergency travel advisory in 55 years, recommending against travel to and from the disease epicenter in southern China. She also did not hesitate to criticize China for endangering global health by attempting to cover up the outbreak through its usual playbook of arresting whistleblowers and censoring media. Many lives could have been saved had you followed Dr. Brundtland's example.

It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China. My Administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organization. But action is needed quickly. We do not have time to waste. That is why it is my duty, as President of the United States, to inform you that, if the World Health Organization does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership in the organization. I cannot allow American taxpayer dollars to continue to finance an organization that, in its present state, is so clearly not serving America's interests.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 8 -- The chorus for transparency and investigation into the outbreak of the coronavirus disease is growing louder in the run up to the truncated session of the World Health Assembly 10 days later.

The disease, which originated in China late last year, has killed more than a quarter of a million people across the world in a little over four months. China has been blamed by many countries for not giving the world a heads up about the disease that could have minimised its spread. Questions have also been asked of the World Health Organisation that has been accused of being overly deferential to China.

The loudest criticism of China and WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has come from the United States President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Michael Pompeo. Last month, the US suspended funding to the WHO to drive home the point.

But the United States isn't the only one upset about China and WHO's role.

Over the last week and more, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen also lent the grouping's backing to calls for an investigation into the origin of Covid outbreak.

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

This week, the European Union declared that it would move a resolution at the World Health Assembly for a timely review of the international response to the coronavirus pandemic including the World Health Organisation's performance.

Diplomats in Washington and Geneva suggest that the resolution, which was being drafted in consultation with a large number of countries, presented a huge test for China in the run up to the global health body's annual meeting.

Beijing has been under fire over its early handling of the virus, which has pushed the global economy toward recession as it spreads around the world. Cases have been reported in more than 210 countries and territories since they were first identified in China in December 2019.

British defence secretary Ben Wallace too questioned the role of China in the Covid-19 outbreak, asserting that China needs to be open and transparent about what it learnt, its shortcomings also successes.

Ben Wallace's remarks are seen in context of British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab's statement in April that underscored the need to ask "hard questions" about how the coronavirus came about and how it could have been stopped.

Swedish Health Minister Lena Hallengren made it clear last month that her government wanted the origin of the virus probed besides an investigation into the WHO's role in the pandemic.

It is in this context, diplomats in Washington said, that China appeared to have started approaching governments in countries for support in face of public criticism. This strategy was outed in Germany where Chinese diplomats approached German government officials to request them to make "positive public statements" on China's handling of the disease. Officials in Berlin had declined the request.

Beijing has had to battle accusations that it had attempted to cover up the outbreak of the disease and told the world about the disease much too late. For instance, questions are being asked why Chinese authorities stopped flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak but allowed international flights. Or why it clamped down on research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus.

Authorities had reprimanded doctors including Li Wenliang, who later passed away, for sharing warnings about the coronavirus infection risk in WeChat groups in late December.

Criticism about this approach to censor information reignited on Friday after a line that referred to the coronavirus disease being detected in China and spreading to the world was removed from an article written for a Chinese daily by 27 European ambassadors to commemorate the 45th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and China.

But there have been several instances of Chinese diplomats posted around the world launching attacks on the media for what they describe as efforts to politicise the Covid-19 outbreak.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 7 -- French President Emmanuel Macron dialled Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday evening to discuss a wide range of issues including the digital and strategic autonomy, deepening defence cooperation, Indo-Pacific, and the security environment in Asia and the West Asia.

PM Modi conveyed to President Macron his condolences for the terror attacks in France, and reiterated India's full support to France in the fight against terrorism, extremism and radicalism, the Prime Minister's Office said. The leaders also discussed other bilateral, regional and global issues of mutual interest including improving affordability and accessibility of Covid-19 vaccines, post-Covid economic recovery and climate change.

People familiar with the matter said the two leaders are learnt to have decided to set up a hotline between the two leaders. The move comes against the backdrop of France's greater focus on the Indian Ocean and China's aggressive posture across the region that had prompted President Macron to appoint one of France's most senior diplomats, Christophe Penot, as the country's first special envoy for the Indo-Pacific in October this year.

But French President Macron has been vocal about countering China for much longer. Two years ago, he was among the first to call for building a strategic alliance between India, France and Australia that could respond to challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and the growing assertiveness of China. This initiative had taken baby steps in September when the top diplomats of the three countries had their first meeting over a video conference.

Like India, France believes in both strategic autonomy and plural democracy and is concerned about Chinese moves in the South China Sea and the French territory spread across dozens of islands in the South Pacific, New Caledonia, an official said.

India and France's strategic partnership dates back to 1998; it was then New Delhi's first. Over the next few decades, the two countries have established a strong institutional mechanism to deepen cooperation in space, counter-terrorism, maritime security, as well as dialogues among defence chiefs and National Security Advisers.

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval had spoken to his French counterpart last month and the strategic dialogue between the two countries is expected to take place in January 2021.

The partnership between the two countries has particularly deepened over the last few years, coinciding with PM Modi's decision to buy Rafale fighter jets. The two countries are also exploring joint manufacture of fighter jet engines and ancillaries in India that can power India's indigeous LCA Mark II with a higher engine thrust.

That Paris had recently asked Qatar, which had also bought the Rafale fighter jet, not to allow Pakistan-origin technicians to work with the plane is indicative of the sensitivity that France has demonstrated to New Delhi's security concerns, an official said.

New Delhi had reciprocated such gestures of the French leadership in October this year when it issued a sharply-worded statement condemning personal attacks targeting the French President from some Islamic countries such as Turkey and Pakistan for his stand on Islam and radicalism.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- "India that is Bharat shall be a Union of States."

That is how our Constitution starts. Never has that line rung truer than now.

Parts of India that they have always been, the states today are more, much more. They are India. The India where life's breath is now drawn with vigilance, where hands and fingers move with caution and frequently come together in prayer.

Facing the biggest challenge since Independence, the states and Union territories are grappling with the pandemic hour by hour, minute by minute. Speaking to chief ministers on April 27, the prime minister got it exactly right. He said that the states are better acquainted with ground realities about the pandemic. He has been a chief minister and he knows what ground realities mean.

The clarion call having been sounded by our prime minister, all chief ministers, their health ministers, chief secretaries, health secretaries and the district administration have been holding the virus by its invisible micro-horns. Their work done with such financial and human resources as they have, and under many constraints, can only be described as heroic.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan's efforts in Kerala have been pioneering. His government took the first steps towards halting the virus in its tracks well before the rest of the country did. Odisha's achievement in controlling the pandemic has been remarkable as has Goa's record of being the first to have zero active cases. Tamil Nadu, by getting an early start in testing, has done well for itself. And Rajasthan, by setting up a framework for food supplies to the poor, and health access with a helpline, has factored care into the lockdown at a great financial cost.

Maharashtra and Mumbai being the most coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-challenged of all states and cities, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray's great firmness has to be lauded. He has shown himself to be just the type of no-nonsense leader that his state needs. Delhi's chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, has done likewise. The West Bengal chief minister's determined outreach to her people is reassuring, though it makes us worry for her own protection.

Federalism has, thus, been at work in the best sense of that first line of our Constitution. Behind this lies a constitutional sanction. In fact, a constitutional imperative. In the Constitution's division of prerogatives and duties as between the Union and the states, severally and in the Concurrent List, jointly, "public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries" form an entry in the State List.

More relevantly "prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants" is an entry in the Concurrent List which is binding on both the states and the Centre. These entries have a passivity to them in normal times. But in times we are facing now, they spring into life, federal life. They make the states of India, where we live, India.

A word here is needed on a state beyond states in India: Migrant workers. They form a floating Union Territory that requires full statehood, not territorially but civilisationally. One great responsibility that lies with the states is to ensure that during these relaxations, urban to rural migration is strictly contained, with the greatest sensitivity. Will a post-Covid-19 India give them that? If it does not, it cannot be expected to have what it takes to win the battle over Covid-19.

The virus is not going to leave us easily or soon. If India is to be safe from this and future death-dealing and death-distributing viruses, it must undertake a few urgent measures. One, seeing the zoonotic origins of this virus, end the suicidal neglect of basic hygiene procedures that lurk like a hidden Wuhan in every unsupervised meat and poultry chain, market and public lavatories. Two, demand an end to the callous and relentless spoliation of our natural resources in the name of industrialisation. Three, get over our passion for congregating en masse in places of worship and entertainment with our stubborn habit of spitting .

Emperor Asoka speaks in his edicts of his subjects' fascination for "unnecessary assemblage". Four, ask "Where do we get clean water?" if we are to "keep washing our hands". Five, demand access to basic medical facilities within walkable distances.

If we can raise the age of marriage, have fewer children than our parents did, realise that untouchability is wrong, absurd and illegal, surely we can attempt these five.

Governments have to reset their priorities dramatically, investing massivelyand immediately in clean water access and on raising the doctors/nurses population ratio. And raise the status of nurses, hustled on duty and huddled in hostels off duty, from being taken-for-granted appurtenances to being major front-ranking players.

The Constitution asks India to feel its heart beating strong in the pulse of its states.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- US President Donald Trump on Tuesday threatened to walk out of the World Health Organisation, accusing the Tedros Adhanom-led global health body chief of acting at China's behest and mismanaging the Covid-19 pandemic in the early stages.

"It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China," Trump said in a letter to Tedros Adhanom.

In his four-page letter, Trump detailed every occasion since December last when, according to the US, the WHO did not act on the available information, made misleading claims or gave the world bad advice.

Trump gave Tedros Adhanom 30 days to commit to major substantive improvements, warning that if the WHO doesn't deliver on this, "I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the WHO permanent and reconsider our membership".

Trump's letter was sent hours after the WHO's policy making body began its meeting on Monday. At this meeting, China, which had opposed a probe into the origin of the virus that has killed nearly 3.2 lakh people and infected millions across the world, was forced to back down. The formal resolution is expected to be passed today.

Trump's letter did not spell out the improvements or reforms that he was looking for. "My administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organisation," he wrote.

Diplomats in Washington and Geneva told Hindustan Times that Trump's letter, which had put the WHO chief on notice, appeared to be prepping the ground for a possible exit from the WHO.

It is argued that the WHO could not carry out any substantive reforms in a rush. The WHA, which has representatives of 194-member nations, is meeting over video conference for a truncated session that is to end in a few hours.

"Any major reform, like the one the US President appears to be looking for, can only be made with the approval of the general body, the WHA," a diplomat said.

To be sure, this isn't the first time that the Trump administration has spoken about walking out of the UN's health body. But the letter to the WHO boss makes the threat formal.

Donald Trump does have a track record of pulling the United States out of international agreements and organisations when he doesn't get his way. Trump has already led the US out of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Human Rights Council and last year, came close to backing out of the Universal Postal Union.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 11 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

'WHO assesses situation only through health lens': Pak official defends govt's Covid-19 strategy

A top Pakistani health official asserted that the government is following a "holistic" strategy to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic. Read more

'Need to make Covid-19 crisis major turning point for nation': PM Modi during 95th annual plenary session of Chamber of Commerce

The entire nation is not just fighting Covid-19 but also facing multiple challenges, prime minister Narendra Modi said on Thursday. Read more

Indian-origin doctor couple begin legal battle with UK govt over PPEs

An Indian-origin husband-wife doctor couple have launched judicial review proceedings against the UK government over what they say is a refusal to address safety issues around personal protective equipment (PPE) for doctors and healthcare workers during the coronavirus pandemic. Read more

IPL plans in motion: BCCI President Sourav Ganguly tells state units

After the International cricket council (ICC) decided to buy more time to take a call on the T20 World Cup scheduled for October-November this year in its meeting on Wednesday, the BCCI has made its own move. Read more

Covid-19 | 'US is on its way to a very big comeback': Donald Trump

As people got back to their jobs, US President Donald Trump assured that the country is on its way to a 'very big comeback'. Watch to know more

Mom's wholesome reaction to daughter getting a scholarship will make you smile ear to ear

It is almost always great to see hard work and determination pay off. This feeling may be intensified when it is our own loved ones who succeed after putting their best foot forward.Read more

Solar Eclipse 2020: Follow these dos and don'ts on Surya Grahan

An annular solar eclipse is a rare occurrence and has been observed from India in the recent past on January 15, 2010, and September 1, 2016, respectively. The most recent solar eclipse occurred last year on December 26. This year the solar eclipse will be on June 21, followed by one on December 14. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 2 -- As the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) spread across the world, India decided to opt for a complete nationwide lockdown. It indeed helped control the infection, but has, predictably, invited great economic cost too. The crisis in China was equally monumental. Can it teach us how to tackle the crisis?

China opted for a collaborative, data-based approach, with tech companies such as Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu, Huawei, and Meituan helping the government take timely action to prevent the spread of the virus and, at the same time, keep the economy running.

But the equally important fact is that China didn't opt for a nationwide lockdown as stringent as India did. China did completely lock Wuhan, the worst-affected city in China, but it let the less-affected regions partially open. It allowed the availability of e-commerce for all items throughout. Ride-hailing services continued to operate. Grocery stores and restaurants, too, remained open throughout the lockdown, even though transactions mostly took place online.

Tencent and Alibaba launched an app that alerted users if they were in the vicinity of an infected person. Alibaba Health launched a health care service with Tmall that delivered medicines to chronic patients within 30 minutes in 10 cities. Alibaba Health also collaborated with more than 50 top domestic and overseas pharmaceutical companies for the purpose. In merely a day, the number of chronic patients looking for medicines went up by 200%.

Big brands could survive, but the long period of lockdown threatened the existence of small businesses. Hyper-local delivery services such as Meituan, Koubei and Ele.me (similar to Dunzo and Swiggy Go) leveraged their online platforms to link consumers with offline services and on-demand delivery. By the end of February, 50,000 offline shops had migrated online, partly because the platforms reduced or waived-off fees. By mid-March, between 500,000 and one million merchants benefited from the commission reduction/waiver scheme from Meituan, Koubei, and Ele.me.

The Chinese government-endorsed digital migration and digital sales channels, which gave confidence to consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises to move online. As a result, categories such as health and wellness and digital accessories saw an upswing in sales during the lockdown. Home appliances such as rice cookers, sandwich makers, and juice makers saw a spike as more people cooked at home. Compared to their 2019 sales, Nike's and Uniqlo's sales went up by more than 25% between February 12 and March 12.

The surge in online sales allowed many companies to create temporary employment schemes, absorbing self-employed daily wage earners affected due to the lockdown.

But as new cases plateaued, companies resumed offline work gradually. Corporates, educational institutions, and other organisations were given customised mandates and processes on ways to minimise the risk as they opened up. Temperature checks and disinfectant stations were installed at all main entry-exit points in public places, offices, and mall entrances.

Workplaces instituted daily online health check-ups for their employees even on weekends. People using public transportation for intercity travel were expected to quarantine for seven-14 days, depending on the severity of the infection in their city of origin. Employees commuting between cities for work were mandated to use private transportations only.

Local services provided contactless meal delivery to employees and health care workers. Best practices around the resumption of work were communicated via live streaming, also leveraged by small offline stores to offset losses due to the shutdown. Flexible job openings helped small businesses resume work.

By now, China may have seen its worst off. But India is yet to touch its peak. To minimise the economic disruption, it must find ways to strategically open up the economy in a way that doesn't add up to infections. E-commerce, which the safest way to keep the economy running while ensuring social distancing, must be opened fully, in red, orange, and green zones. As of now, India allows only essential items over e-commerce platforms. But defining the essentiality of a commodity is a difficult exercise. Are online classes essential? Are the computers used to do so essentials? Is a malfunctioning phone charger essential, or are the prescription eyeglasses? The interconnectedness of the economy allows the sale of non-essential items produced by an economically weak person, with the profit nudging him to buy essentials, and thus, helping him contribute taxes.

Like China, can the Indian government work with tech-based retail firms such as Flipkart, Amazon, Swiggy, Dunzo, PayTM to keep the economy running? Opening up the economy is a slow process - and, if not planned well, involves risks. Keeping the economic activities suppressed for long, however, can have far greater consequences.

Divya Joseph is an MBA graduate of the China Europe International Business School (CEIBS) and works for Alibaba's Tmall Global Operations Team in Hangzhou, China. S Ramakrishna Velamuri is the Chengwei Ventures Professor of Entrepreneurship at CEIBS

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- Kamal Khera, the Punjab-origin member of Parliament from Brampton West in Toronto, Canada, tested positive for coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Wednesday.

In a statement released on her official Facebook page, the Liberal MP's office said that she began developing flu-like symptoms while at home and immediately went into self-isolation.

"I was tested for Covid-19 at Peel Memorial Centre in Brampton on Monday morning. Last night, I was informed that I have tested positive," she said.

Khera said that she is still experiencing symptoms but is in good spirits. "I know that many Canadians are in worse circumstances. My thoughts are with all families who have been affected by the health crisis," she said.

"I remain indebted to the incredible healthcare workers fighting this disease on the frontlines and risking their lives every single day to keep the rest of us safe," Khera said, adding: "We must all practise social and physical distancing and take precautions to protect ourselves and each other."

Khera was elected as MP from Brampton West for the first time in 2015 and retained her seat in the 2019 elections.

She is a registered nurse and first-generation Canadian. She immigrated to Canada from Delhi though she has roots in Bhago Majra village in Kharar sub division of Mohali district.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 21 -- Kamala Harris was on Wednesday sworn in as the first female Vice President of the United States by Justice Sonia Sotomayor during a grand inauguration at the West Front of the US Capitol. Harris, 56, who is the 49th Vice President of the US is also the first African-American and Indian-origin woman to hold this position. Leaders from across the globe congratulated her and President Joe Biden and looked forward to strengthening ties with the United States further.

After taking the oath, Harris took to Twitter and wrote, "Ready to serve'- which already garnered over 525,000 likes and over 86,000 re-tweets at the time of writing this piece. Her official Twitter handle currently has more than 6 million followers, 778 followings and the bio states: "Vice President of the United States. Wife to the first @SecondGentleman. Momala. Auntie. Fighting for the people." Her husband, Douglas Emhoff, is the first 'Second Gentlemen'- the first male spouse of a Vice President in the United States. He will use @SecondGentleman account on the social media site from today.

Out of the 778 profiles that Harris follows, there are tennis player Serena Williams, actors Priyanka Chopra Jonas, Neil Patrick Harris, Mark Hamill and Chris Evans. She also follows celebrated author Padma Lakshmi and the official handle of The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The tweets on her official handle are majorly focused on the ongoing coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic and the impact of the crisis on the American economy, precautions to combat the disease and updates on the number of cases and deaths.

Also Read| 'Ready to serve': Kamala Harris' first tweet as US Vice-President

Kamala Harris was born in Oakland, California in 1964 to an Indian mother and an African-American father from Jamaica. Her mother, Shyamala Gopalan Harris- who hailed from Chennai, was a breast cancer researcher and had died of cancer in 2009. While her father, Donald, is a Jamaican American professor of economics. During the US 2020 Presidential campaign trail, Harris often spoke about how her parents would push her in her stroller at civil rights marches.

Harris had won her first race for San Francisco district attorney in 2003, becoming the first black female to hold such an office in California. She also became the first black woman to be elected as California attorney general in 2010 and in 2016, she was the only second black woman ever to be elected as a US senator. Before departing as a senator from California, Harris tweeted, ' Thank you California-it has been an honor serving as your senator for the past four years. Our country has faced many challenges, but I remain certain that our best days are ahead. I promise to keep standing up for our shared values as your Vice President."

Meanwhile, during Wednesday's event- Harris and Emhoff, stood on the Capitol steps Wednesday to bid farewell to her predecessor, former Vice President Mike Pence, and his wife, Karen. The two couples stood and talked for a few moments even laughing, on the steps before the Pences got into a vehicle and were driven away.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 22 -- The death toll from the coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak continued to rise in China as it reached 2345 by the end of February 21.

The total number of cases was 76288, the national health commission (NHC) officials said on Saturday, adding that the spread of novel coronavirus in Chinese mainland was showing signs of slowing down as 18 provincial-level regions reported zero new infections.

"As of 24:00 on Friday, the daily new infections in regions outside of Hubei dropped to 31, the lowest in a month," according he NHC said.

Many other regions, such as Tianjin, Chongqing, Beijing and Guangdong, reported single digit new infections, the NHC added.

The signs of the outbreak slowing down come in amid the new worry of cluster cases breaking out across the country: New infections were reported on Friday at congregated facilities, including prisons, hospitals and senior care homes.

On Friday, a prison in Rencheng, in each China's Shandong province, reported 200 new cases of novel coronavirus infection.

Another 27 were reported in Shilifeng prison in Zhejiang province, also in eastern China.

The worst-hit central Chinese province of Hubei also reported that two prisons in the province saw 230 cases and 41 cases respectively.

:Shandong, Zhejiang and Hubei have punished those accountable. It is hoped that the punishments will strengthen the alarm bell these incidents have rung. Everyone must be clear that the virus is far from being defeated. It can break our line of defense at any time," the tabloid, Global Times said.

"These transmission accidents in prisons serve as a stark reminder that institutions and venues where people gather must step up their vigilance. We must prevent any kind of formalism and make every preventive and control measure a real safety valve," it added.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has said that the WHO-led team of international experts currently in China to investigate the novel coronavirus outbreak will travel to China's central city of Wuhan, the epicenter of the epidemic, on Saturday.

At a daily briefing, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO-led joint mission in China has been working in Beijing, Sichuan and Guangdong, and will travel to Wuhan on Saturday to continue its work at the epicenter of the outbreak.

He added that WHO is also working with partners to safeguard the health of the members of the team, and to take appropriate measures when they return to their countries of origin.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 30 -- Amid the hectic preparations for the upcoming three-phase assembly elections in Bihar, while braving the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) threat, the spectre of floods in many parts of the poll-bound state still looms large.

Retreating monsoon triggered heavy rainfall in the catchment areas in neighbouring Nepal last week, leading to swollen rivers in north Bihar that trace their origin in the Himalayan landlocked nation.

Several rivers are flowing above or around the danger mark, as per the data of the state government's water resources department (WRD).

However, WRD officials said that the rivers' water levels are showing a downward trend, much to the state government's relief ahead of the assembly polls.

Also Read: Bihar assembly election: 5 districts in focus in high-level security meeting

But, several low-lying areas in Champaran, Samastipur, Sitamarhi and Darbhanga and Saran districts and also in the Seemanchal region have reported acute waterlogging.

WRD reports showed a rising trend of major rivers such as Ganga, Mahananda and Koshi at some places.

At Karhagola Ghat, Ganga is flowing at 29.85 metres (m), a shade below the highest flood level (HFL) of 31.85 m but above the warning level of 28.96 m.

At Ramayanpur, the Ganga is flowing close to the warning level.

The Koshi is also maintaining a rising trend and flowing at 30.20 m, which is above the danger level of 30 m, near the railway bridge at Kursela.

Though the Mahananda's water level is on the ebb, it is still flowing above the danger level at seven places.

Also Read: Bihar Assembly Election 2020: JP Nadda to meet top Bihar BJP leaders over election strategy, seat sharing

In Sitamarhi district, rivers such as Bagmati, Adhwara, Lalbekiya etc. are flowing close to or above the danger mark.

In August, floods had affected around 80 lakhs people in the state and also claimed 27 lives coupled with a huge loss of crops and properties.

However, WRD officials maintained that the flood situation was under control across Bihar.

Minister for WRD Sanjay Kumar Jha said the "worst is over" as far as floods in Bihar are concerned. "In a week's time, the flood situation is expected to get back to normal. Major rivers are showing a receding trend. There were flash floods due to rainfall, measuring upto 250 millimetres (mm), in Nepal's catchment areas last week and there was also discharge of four lakh cusec of water from the Valmikinagar barrage last Friday, which affected some parts in Champaran and Gopalganj districts. Things are under control. Let's keep our fingers crossed," he added.

Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) Sunil Arora and Election Commissioners (EC) Sushil Chandra and Rajiv Kumar are on a tour of Bihar to take stock of the upcoming assembly poll preparations.

The first phase of polling will be held on October 28 for 71 seats, the second phase on November 3 (94 seats), and the third phase on November 7 (78 seats).

The results of the 243-member Bihar assembly will be declared on November 10.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, Sept. 23 -- At least seven Opposition parties boycotted proceedings in both Houses, Rajya Sabha deputy chairman Harivansh and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar said they would go on a fast, and the government hurriedly pushed through key bills on an action-packed Tuesday - with the possibility of the monsoon session being cut short and ending on Wednesday.

The eight members of Parliament (MPs) suspended for the commotion during the controversial passage of farm reform bills in the Rajya Sabha, spent Monday night protesting outside Parliament, rebuffed a conciliatory gesture by Harivansh (who went to meet them with tea in the morning), but ended their vigil after Opposition parties decided to boycott the Lok Sabha for the remainder of the session.

The Rajya Sabha, where the ruling National Democratic Alliance (NDA) does not have a majority, passed at least seven bills in just three-and-a-half hours in the absence of Opposition voices, making Tuesday's session one of the most productive in its history.

The Lok Sabha, where the NDA has a clear majority, took up three important labour reform bills, and cleared them, with the Congress and some other opposition parties boycotting the day's proceedings to protest the happenings in the Upper House.

The Lok Sabha will meet around 6pm on Wednesday and is likely to cut short the session, people familiar with the matter said on condition of anonymity. The Rajya Sabha's business advisory committee met without the Opposition's participation on Tuesday evening. The Upper House, which will convene at 9am, is set to adjourn sine die after taking up remaining bills on Wednesday, the people added.

The monsoon session of Parliament, which began on September 14, was supposed to end on October 1. HT reported on Sunday that the session may end as early as on September 23 after many parties agreed to cut it short amid a rising number of Covid-19 cases linked to the Parliament House complex; 32 Parliamentarians, including two ministers, and more than 100 officials have tested positive for Covid-19 in a testing drive in Parliament ever since the session began.

The Congress, Nationalist Congress Party, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Trinamool Congress, CPI (M), Aam Aadmi Party, Telangana Rashtra Samithi, and Samajwadi Party all boycotted the session citing the suspension of the MPs, and the way the farm bills were pushed through, without a division or voting.

The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) too walked out of the two Houses with its members saying they were not part of the Opposition but have done so on their own, alleging that the government was only trying to "bluff" the farmers.

"We will not end our boycott till the government brings another bill making it illegal for private players to buy food grains from farmers below the MSP, all state agencies comply by the MSP and the procurement price is fixed as per the Swaminathan panel's recommendations," Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad told reporters outside the Parliament building.

He also said the revocation of suspension of the Opposition members was not a demand but a request.

Azad said the House should run in coordination between the government and the Opposition. "But there should not be coordination between chair and government," he said, referring to Rajya Sabha deputy chairperson Harivansh pushing through the two contentious farm bills on Sunday while allegedly ignoring Opposition voices.

"President Ram Nath Kovind should not give assent to the bills as proper procedure was not followed in their passage in the Rajya Sabha," he added.

In its reply, the government said it was not keeping the suspended MPs away from the House but they should express regret over their behaviour.

"Let them apologise, we will consider withdrawing the suspension," Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad told reporters.

On Monday, Trinamool Congress floor leader Derek O'Brien and his colleague Dola Sen; Aam Aadmi Party's Sanjay Singh; Congress's Rajeev Satav, Syed Nasir Hussain and Ripun Borah; and KK Ragesh and Elamaram Kareem of the CPI(M) were suspended for seven days each for "disorderly conduct".

Vice-president and Rajya Sabha chairman M Venkaiah Naidu on Monday rejected a notice for a no-confidence motion against Harivansh as it was not in proper format and did not give a 14-day notice period.

Among the seven bills passed by the Upper House were The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2020, The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and The Taxation and Other Laws (Relaxation and Amendment of Certain Provisions) Bill, 2020.

The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, approved by the Lower House on September 15, seeks to remove cereals, pulses, oilseeds, edible oils, onion and potatoes from the list of essential commodities, replacing an ordinance promulgated in June. It is the third bill in the government's farm liberalisation plan.

The Lok Sabha, too, witnessed uproarious scenes with the Opposition demanding that the government should roll back the farms bills and withdraw the suspension of the eight Rajya Sabha members.

"Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha are like twin brothers...if one is in pain, the other has to be concerned. Our issue is related to the farm bills; we want them be taken back," Adhir Ranjan Choudhary, the Congress's leader of the House, said.

Parliamentary affairs minister Pralhad Joshi said it is unfortunate that the proceedings of the Rajya Sabha were discussed in the Lok Sabha. "Whatever happens in one House, it has never been discussed in another House. It is unfortunate that this thing is being discussed now."

Harivansh, meanwhile, wrote a letter - addressed to the President and Vice-President - invoking his humble origins in Bihar and went on a day-long fast on Tuesday to protest "humiliating" conduct towards him by some MPs.

"In the name of democracy, members of the House indulged in violent behaviour. There was an effort to intimidate the person in the chair. All norms of the Upper House were disregarded. The rule book was torn and thrown over me...," he wrote.

Congress member Satav, one of those suspended members, said: "We are equally pained and hurt over the way the deputy chairman conducted the proceedings in the House on Sunday. Seeking a division or amendments are our Parliamentary rights that were denied to us by him..."

NCP chief Pawar, too, said he was observing a day-long fast to protest the suspension of the eight members of the Upper House.

Addressing a press conference in Mumbai, Pawar, a Rajya Sabha member, also bemoaned the conduct of Harivansh and the government's decision of "bulldozing" the Opposition in the House.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, May 20 -- US President Donald Trump on Wednesday ratcheted up his attacks on China, claiming that its "incompetence" caused the Covid-19 pandemic, describing the episode as a "mass worldwide killing".

The US president has increasingly targeted China in an apparent bid to shift the blame for the high number of infections and fatalities in America, and the economic downturn triggered by coronavirus-related curbs.

Referring to a statement issued by what he called "some wacko in China", Trump tweeted, "It was the 'incompetence of China', and nothing else, that did this mass worldwide killing!"

The US president has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak in Wuhan in China last December and Beijing's attempts to downplay the exact extent of the crisis with the alleged complicity of the World Health Organization.

Increased testing is a 'badge of honour'

With all 50 states of the country set to reopen partially, Trump on Tuesday said that he considered it a "badge of honour" that the US has the highest number of Covid-19 cases in the world - at about 1.5 million - arguing that it was a testimony to increased testing.

Critics, however, pounced on the remark, interpreting that Trump was taking credit for the country recording the highest number of infections.

"So when we have a lot of cases, I don't look at that as a bad thing; I look at that, in a certain respect, as being a good thing because it means our testing is much better," Trump said. "I view it as a badge of honour. Really, it's a badge of honour." The US, which recorded 1,574 deaths in the last 24 hours, has so far tested 12.6 million people.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 8 -- China on Wednesday criticised the Trump administration-led US' move of withdrawal from the World Health Organisation (WHO), while agreeing to allow a team from the top health agency to visit the country to trace the origins of the coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

The US move will have grave implications for developing countries, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said, and added that the Trump administration's move undermines the international anti-epidemic efforts. He also urged the international community to step up support for the WHO.

WHO, Zhao said, is the most authoritative and professional international institution in the field of global public health security.

Also read | India may see 2.87 lakh Covid-19 cases a day by winter 2021: MIT study

The UN formally announced Tuesday the exit of US from WHO on July 6, 2021 after receiving notification of the decision by President Donald Trump. However, the pullout won't take effect until next year. That means it could be reversed by a new administration or if circumstances change.

In a series of allegations, Trump has repeatedly accused the agency of becoming a puppet for China during the emergence of the coronavirus, which was first detected in China and spread to trigger a global pandemic.

The US is WHO's largest donor, responsible for providing it with more than $450 million per year, but owes about $200 million in current and past dues. The financial obligations must be met by the US before a withdrawal can be finalised, news agency Associated Press reported.

On the visit of the WHO team to China, Zhao said the decision was taken after consulting officials from the agency.

The WHO DG, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said Tuesday that a team of WHO experts will visit China this weekend and work with Chinese counterparts to identify the zoonotic (animal to human) source of the pandemic.

Also read: Over 6 months into Covid-19 crisis, 5 mysteries that still shroud coronavirus

"We came to the basic consensus with the WHO that virus tracing is a scientific issue, which should be carried out under international research and cooperation by scientists," Zhao said.

Experts from China and the WHO will draw up the working scope and tasks of an international expert group led by the WHO, Zhao said.

The WHO, according to Zhao, believes virus tracing is an ongoing process that may involve many countries and regions, and the organisation will conduct similar visits to other countries and regions as necessary.

The WHO believed that virus tracing is an ongoing process that may involve many countries and regions, and the organisation will conduct similar visits to other countries and regions as necessary, Zhao said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 14 -- Another Indian aboard a cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Japan has been infected by the coronavirus, the embassy in Tokyo said on Friday.

This takes the number of Indians infected by the highly contagious disease on board the Diamond Princess to three.

A viral outbreak that began in China has killed 1381 people and infected nearly 64,000 on Friday since it began spreading in central Wuhan city in late December. The World Health Organization (WHO) has named the illness COVID-19, referring to its origin late last year and the coronavirus that causes it.

With the latest infection, 219 people have the virus on the cruise ship isolated at a port in Japan's Yokohama. There were 3711 people on the vessel, including 138 Indian crew and passengers.

"The Embassy of India in Tokyo has contacted all three Indians nationals who had tested positive or COVID-19 and are currently receiving treatment at medical facilities. Their health conditions have been confirmed to be stable and improving," a statement said.

"Embassy is also in constant contact with relevant Japanese authorities to ensure the well being of all Indians nationals on board the ship. Japanese authorities have confirmed they are following the designated health protocols," it added.

The Japanese government on Friday began allowing elderly passengers who test negative for the new coronavirus to leave the quarantined cruise ship and finish their isolation in government-designated lodging.

It has allowed passengers aged 80 or older in poor health or confined to windowless inner cabins on the Diamond Princess to move from the ship to accommodation on land.

But only those who test negative for the virus that has so far infected more than 200 people on board the ship have the option to move.

The Diamond Princess was placed in quarantine on February 3 after a man who disembarked in Hong Kong was diagnosed with the virus. The ship has been quarantined by the Japanese authorities till February 19, 2020.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 18 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Covid-19 vaccination drive gets underway in Delhi on day 2

After administering shots to over 4,300 healthcare workers on the opening day, Covid-19 vaccination teams across the national capital started to give vaccines to more medical staff at various hospitals on Monday. Read more

500K trout ova dispatched from Kashmir to 3 other states for rearing

From Asia's largest trout farm in south Kashmir's Kokernag, 500,000 trout ova were dispatched to Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Uttarakhand for rearing. Read more

Maharashtra gram panchayat poll results 2021: Trends show Sena, allies in lead

Ruling Shiv Sena, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), Congress in Maharashtra are leading in gram panchayat elections, according to the initial trends from counting that began on Monday morning. Read more

India vs Australia: India-origin Australian businessman recalls 'ugly and blatant' racism at SCG during 3rd Test

An Indian-born Australian businessman Darshak Mehta recalled the alleged acts of "ugly" and "blatant" racism during the third Test between India and Australia at Sydney Cricket Ground. Read more

Parler can return to App Store provided app gets moderation together, says Cook

Apple CEO Tim Cook said that Parler can make a comeback to the App Store provided the app gets "their moderation together." Read more

Liger first look: Vijay Deverakonda a cross between a tiger, lion in fiery poster

The first look of Puri Jagannadh's Liger, which marks south star Vijay Deverakonda's pan-India debut, is here. The film has Ananya Panday in the lead role. Read more

Honda H'Ness CB 350 road test review: New challenger to the 'Royal' throne

Sales in the retro classic motorcycle segment have soared in the Indian market lately and Honda is the latest entrant in the 350 cc classic motorcycling space that allures riders of all ages. Read more

Shilpa Shetty Kundra's favourite fitness routine releases pent up stress | Watch

A simple trick to help cope with stress during the lockdown or work from home amid Covid-19 pandemic is to pick an activity or exercise that you enjoy and Shilpa Shetty Kundra's latest fitness video is enough to back our claim. Read more

Girl Scout's adorable virtual sales pitch is the cutest thing you'll see today

A 6-year-old Girl Scout from Arizona, USA has won the hearts of netizens recently with an oh-so-cute sales pitch for selling Girl Scout cookies. Read more

Watch| Biden swearing-in: Security beefed up at statehouses in US amid small protests

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 21 -- The health ministry said on Monday 76 per cent of India's new cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has been reported by 10 states and Union territories. India on Monday recorded 86,961 fresh infections of Covid-19 and 1,130 casualties in the last 24 hours.

The 10 hotspots in the country include Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu as the top five contributors of the caseload. Maharashtra remains the worst-hit state in the country in terms of infections and deaths and has reported 20,627 cases in the last 24 hours. The four southern states have contributed majorly to India's caseload. Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala account for 26,161 cases collectively out of the total cases 86,961 reported on Monday.

Also read | Covid-19: What we need to know today

Uttar Pradesh, India's fourth worst-hit state, has reported 5,758 cases in the last 24 hours. The list also includes Odisha (4,330), Delhi (3,812), West Bengal (3,177) and Madhya Pradesh (2,579) among the highest contributors of the viral infection cases.

Additionally, 86 per cent of Covid-19 deaths in India trace their origin to 10 states and Union territories. These states include Maharashtra, which is reporting more than four times the number of deaths than the second worst-hit state Karnataka. In the last 24 hours, Maharashtra reported 455 deaths and Karnataka reported 101 deaths.

Also read | Local tourists queue up as Taj Mahal opens with all Covid-19 norms in place

Deaths reported in Maharashtra reflect the virulency of the strain in the state as it singularly accounted for deaths collectively more than seen in Karnataka (101), Uttar Pradesh (94), West Bengal (61), Tamil Nadu (60), Andhra Pradesh (57) and Punjab (56) in the last 24 hours.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 12 -- US President elect Joe Biden's victory has set off a frenzy to trace his roots as well as that of his team members to different parts of India. The latest to celebrate the connection is Perumapalayam village in Erode district of Tamil Nadu which is proud of Celine Gounder, an infectious diseases expert, internist and epidemiologist who has been appointed to the American President-elect's 12-member Covid-19 transition advisory board.

Gounder's father, Raj Gounder was born into a poor farming family in this village and later migrated to the US in the 1960s. According to his family members, Raj Gounder studied under street lights and is the first graduate of the village. After his death in 2014, the family set up the Raj Gounder Foundation in his hometown to support education for children. Celine Gounder, 43 had come to the village last in 2018. Accompanied by her husband Grant Wahl, a sports journalist, she inaugurated a smart classroom facility at her father's alma mater- Modakurichi Government Boys School.

On Tuesday night, Gounder spoke to her second cousin Devaraj Nallasivam on a video call about how the team hasn't officially spoken to the American press but she was swamped with interview requests from Tamil news outlets. "Celine wishes her father could see that she has been given such an important responsibility," said Nallasivam who is also secretary of the Foundation. "At least one family member visits us every year to maintain close ties. The entire village gathers at our home and Celine speaks a few Tamil words."

Besides supporting her father's school, the trust also provides daily meals to an adjacent special school that includes children with autism and other developmental disabilities. "Since schools are closed due to the Covid-19 pandemic, we have been delivering groceries to their homes," said Nallasivam.

Gounder is currently a faculty at the school of medicine in New York University. In 2015, she volunteered as an Ebola aid worker in Guinea and is an expert commentator on Ebola, Zika and opioid abuse epidemics for American news outlets.

American politician and New York City public advocate, Jumaane William tweeted that he received guidance from Gounder to develop the Covid-19 police responses and now, "the nation can benefit".

She studied TB and HIV in South Africa, Ethiopia and Brazil between 1998 and 2012. "She is service oriented," says Nallasivam. "She also conducts research on genetic diseases in our village during her visits." Gounder's aim is to work for underserved populations through the public health system.

Tamil Nadu chief minister Edappadi Palaniswami congratulated Gounder and another Indian-origin American Vivek Murthy for being part of the virus taskforce. With good wishes pouring in from Tamil Nadu and also questions about her last name-- a caste name (a politically influential community in the AIADMK), Gounder said her father had changed his name from Natarajan to Gounder as Americans had difficulty pronouncing it. My name is part of my history and identity, "even if some of that history is painful," tweeted Gounder.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 6 -- The 12th season off Kaun Banega Crorepati kicked off last week and it has already stumped contestants and the viewers with many difficult question. On a recent episode of the show, host Amitabh Bachchan asked a particularly tough question to contestant Pradeep Kumar Sood, which meant losing out on Rs 25 lakh.

Amritsar resident Pradeep, a fitness enthusiast and food lover, was asked the following question for Rs 25 lakh:

The point on Earth that's farthest from land is named after which fictional character of Indian origin?

Options: Robinson Crusoe, Captain Ahab, Captain Nemo and Phileas Fogg

After much contemplation, Pradeep decided to quit the show with Rs 12.5 lakh prize money. Amitabh later revealed the answer to be Captain Nemo.

Captain Nemo is a fictional character created by the acclaimed French novelist Jules Verne. He featured in his books Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas (1870) and The Mysterious Island (1875). He was supposed to be the son of an Indian king who roams the seas in his submarine and fights the imperialist powers. He has been played by more than a dozen actors over the years in multiple films and TV series. Naseeruddin Shah played the character in Alan Moore's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen.

Also read | Shabana Azmi on why Kangana Ranaut makes 'outrageous statements': 'She fears the day when she will no longer be in headlines'

Point Nemo is the oceanic pole of inaccessibility, the place in the ocean that is farthest from land. It lies in the South Pacific Ocean, 2,688 km (1,670 mi) from the nearest lands.The area is so remote that-as with any location more than 410 kilometres from an inhabited area-sometimes the closest human beings are astronauts aboard the International Space Station when it passes overhead.

Just like there is an oceanic pole of inaccessibility, there are also northern, southern and continental poles of inaccessibility.

Kaun Banega Crorepati's new season kicked off last Sunday. Amitabh has returned to host the show for an 11th time. He was diagnosed with Covid-19 in August but returned to work soon after testing negative for the disease.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 3 -- Actor-turned-author Twinkle Khanna brings some relief to mothers who might be overwhelmed with fellow mommies posting elaborate recipes on social media even in this lockdown - the actor's latest post is how she starts the day with a black coffee for herself and milk and toast for her young one. Twinkle and Akshay Kumar have two kids - daughter Nitara and son Aarav.

Posting a picture of the coffee and toast with peanut butter, Twinkle wrote on Twitter, "Kudos to all the moms making pancakes with strawberry drizzle and banana tarte tatin,but my goals are low.Milk and a toast with peanut butter for her,a cup of black coffee for me and we are ready to make the most of our day.Welcome to the club of the perfectly imperfect mothers."

As people spend all the time inside their homes during the lockdown amid Covid-19 pandemic, many of them are posting pictures and videos of their cooking. Quite often, these videos are quite elaborate. Twinkle's post is just what the rest of us needed at this time.

Also read: Irrfan Khan's son Babil pays tribute to actor with rare photos from his National School of Drama days. See them here

She also shared a video on disinfecting as we stay at home during this pandemic. She wrote alongside the video, "I used to tease my sister about her penchant for constantly disinfecting objects before we all got hit by this pandemic. Now I have to concede that she was on the right path.To keep my home safe, especially during this coronavirus phase, I make sure that all frequently touched surfaces like tabletops and kitchen slabs are clean and disinfected regularly. WHO also recommends the same. I am doing it so should you."

Currently in isolation, Twinkle has been sharing pictures on social media, giving fans a peek into her daily life. Sharing her feelings, she had tweeted, "Oscillating between despair and joy, this entire period-today sitting with my cousin and my son in this quarantine special,can I say that it's the happiest day of my life.I am a loner-this is all I need #grateful."

Earlier, she posted a picture of herself watching TV and wrote on Instagram, "This pandemic, perhaps because its origin allegedly lies with bats, is turning all of us a little, well, batshit crazy. Mild lunacy in the form of incessant TikTok videos is also on the rise, along with people making tutorials they feel the world desperately needs. Being someone who is easily influenced, when I began having urges to pack large members of my family into medium-sized Samsonites or to post videos of how to make a Strawberry Pistachio Tart, I forced myself to quietly sit in front of the idiot box instead of turning into a Covidiot."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
NEW DELHI, Sept. 17 -- How seriously does one take Dr Li-Meng Yan? And how seriously does one take the paper Unusual Features of the Sars-CoV2 GenomeSuggesting Sophisticated Laboratory Modification Rather Than Natural Evolution and Delineation of its Probable Synthetic Route, published by her and co-authors, under the aegis of the Rule of Law Society and the Rule of Law Foundation, New York, on September 14? As the title suggests, the paper claims the coronavirus was man-made, in a laboratory.

The paper was uploaded on open-source research repository Zenodo, run by CERN, and was reported by Hindustan Times on Wednesday (bit.ly/33uFyy4). It wasn't as widely reported as Dr Yan's comments in Loose Women, a segment of a TV show hosted by a UK TV channel, on which she pretty much said the same thing, albeit without any of the scientific arguments -- unsubstantiated ones -- presented in the paper.

Here's what that paper claimed:

One, ZC45, a bat virus, or a closely related variant or mutant, bears a striking similarity with Sars-CoV2, as shown by genome sequencing, with a 94%-100% similarity of key viral proteins.

The spike protein of Sars-CoV2 is essentially a trimer (essentially three parts) each of which has an S1 and S2 part with a furin cleavage site at the boundary between the two. Other research has already established that the human cellular enzyme furin cleaves, or breaks, the S1 and S2 unit at the cleavage site, and that the S1 unit then attaches to the ACE receptor, another protein found on the surface of most human cells. This binding then facilitates the entry of the viral protein into human cells. The virus' ability to bind with the receptor, and the presence of the cleavage site that responds to a cannon human enzyme, are the reasons Covid-19 is as infective as it is.

Both the furin cleavage site, and the binding ability of the spike protein with the ACE2 receptor aren't natural, the paper argued.

In their preface to this scientific hypothesis, the authors also claim that the process of creating such a virus in a laboratory could take only six months. They ask for further research and investigation into the origin of the virus. Even if their hypothesis is subsequently proven erroneous, this is a recommendation that no can argue with - the origin of the virus needs to be investigated, not so much to assign blame (although there will be some that too), but to prepare for the next virus and the next pandemic.

Dr Yan, currently in the US, where she fled to in late April, is a virologist who used to work at the University of Hong Kong School of Public Health, and who has for long claimed that China knew of the virus and the fact that human-to-human transmission of the infection was happening, long before it let on. Her claims on the virus being man-made are more recent.

Interestingly, a March paper in Nature titled The Proximal Origin of Sars-Cov2, authored by Kristian G Andersen of California's Scripps Research Institute, argued, again picking on the same two distinctive features of Sars-CoV2, that the virus was natural. The viral protein showed a high "affinity" to bind with the receptor, they said, but this interaction wasn't "ideal" or "optimal". In plain English this meant that if anyone had set out to engineer the virus, they would have picked the "ideal" binding relation, not just another optimal one. The paper also said that there were other coronaviruses that had similar "cleavage sites" and that this wasn't unique to Sars-CoV2.

However, the two papers differ in one significant aspect. The one published in Nature said "the genetic data irrefutably show that Sars-CoV2 is not derived from any previously used virus backbone". Dr Yan's said (again, without substantiation that) a " genomic sequence analysis reveals that ZC45, or a closely related bat coronavirus, should be the backbone used for the creation of Sars-CoV2".

Dr Yan's claims are also being seen through a political lens, with scientists in the US pointing out that the two non-profits that published the paper were linked to Steve Bannon, former Trump adviser and former executive chairman of the far-right Breitbart News, casting aspersions on the study's findings.

Clearly, only further research and investigation can shed light on the origin of the virus which has thus far infected 29,927,685 and killed 942,564 around the world. India ended Wednesday with 5,115,846 cases and 83,230 deaths.

But as Vivek Wadhwa, a columnist for this paper, a top technology thinker, and distinguished fellow at Harvard Law School's Labor and Worklife Program, said in a recent article in Foreign Policy: "If genetic engineering wasn't behind this pandemic, it could very well unleash the next one." That's because, "genetic engineering - with all its potential for good and bad - has become democratised", Wadhwa wrote.

"Thanks to a technological revolution in genetic engineering, all the tools needed to create a virus have become so cheap, simple, and readily available that any rogue scientist or college-age biohacker can use them."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, July 1 -- India suspects that China could be engaging in unfair trade practices by supplying goods and investments through a third party such as Hong Kong and Singapore, but may not bar legitimate Chinese trade and investments in India while scanning them from the perspective of national interest, people with direct knowledge of the matter said.

Data suggests significant indirect inflow of Chinese goods and investments through locations with which India has free trade agreements (FTAs), preferential trade agreements (PTAs) or other bilateral commercial arrangements. This is not only illegal but also injuring domestic industry, the people said, requesting anonymity.

The development comes a day after the Narendra Modi govenment announced ban on 59 mostly Chinese mobile applications such s Tik-Tok, UC Browser and WeChat, citing concerns that these are "prejudicial to sovereignty of India, defence of India, security of state and public order."

Sino-Indian tensions have shot up after a violent brawl between Chinese and Indian soldiers on June 15 along the Line of Actual Control in the Galwan Valley in eastern Ladakh in which 20 Indian army personnel were killed.

Data shows that total foreign direct investment (FDI) from China is minuscule, but many Indian firms have received Chinese investments. Similarly, imports from China have registered a minor decline recently, but at the same time imports from Hong Kong and Singapore have surged. These figures show that something is amiss and needs to be probed, one of the people cited above, who works in an economic ministry, said.

According to the Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO), while India's trade deficit with China narrowed by $6.05 billion to $51.25 billion in 2019, the gap with Hong Kong widened sharply by $5.8 billion in 2019, nullifying almost all the gains.

Similarly, India trade deficit with Singapore was $5.82 billion in the previous financial year, the person mentioned above said.

"The principal imports from Hong Kong, which have shown a significant increase, are electrical and electronic products where imports jumped from $1.3 billion to $8.6 billion between 2017 and 2019," FIEO director general and chief executive officer Ajay Sahai said.

The increase in imports is definitely a setback to domestic industry, he said. "If the goods made in China are re-routed through Hong Kong and Singapore, showing such origin of products, customs can always ask importers to provide the proof of adhering to the Rules of Origin," he said.

He advised the government to be extra cautious in case of imports from Singapore because of the India-Singapore Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) as well as India-ASEAN {Association of South-East Asin Nations} Free Trade Agreement (FTA) that increase the possibilities of re-routing of Chinese products to India to derive a preferential tariff advantage.

"Any increase in imports has an adverse bearing on domestic industry and thus on job creation," Sahai said .

"Many times, a product originally belonging to China enters from Singapore, Vietnam or even Hong Kong and we might lose the revenue which could come as tax. In simple terms, if consumers will get cheaper imports, market share and profit margins of the domestic manufacturer will get hurt," Trade Promotion Council of India (TPIC) chairman Mohit Singla said.

A second person working in another economic ministry said, "Even the Chinese FDI inflow also appears skewed."

The latest official data shows foreign direct investment from China between April 2000 and March 2020 was $2.378.71 billion, which is 0.51% of the total FDI inflow into the country in the two decades.

The second person quoted above said, "Apparently the FDI figures do not capture actual Chinese investments in India and possibly some investments could have flowed into the country undetected, routed through a third country. All such suspicious Chinese inflows need to be scanned properly."

Email queries sent to ministries of finance and commerce did not elicit any response.

Even before the current standoff with China over border issue, India in April clubbed FDI proposals from China with those from other hostile countries such as Pakistan, making prior government approval mandatory for any investment in the country to prevent opportunistic takeovers of Indian firms during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Burgeon Law, which styles itself as new-age boutique law firm that caters to start-ups and emerging companies, said start-ups will have to scout for other avenues of investment from newer geographies.

"With recent events of Indo-Chinese face off and developments of scrutinizing the FDI from nations that share a land border with India, the situation depicts a tightness between the neighbouring countries," said Roma Priya, founder of the legal firm. "The immediate impact of this can be observed in business relations as well, with contractions, trade deficit and fundings being put on hold."

"Companies which fall under the portfolio of Chinese investors will also have to look for newer alternatives as their transactions will get delayed due to these macro events," Priya added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 1 -- Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said on Tuesday that Ottawa has conveyed its concerns about the protest by Indian farmers to New Delhi, but the external affairs ministry dismissed his remarks as "unwarranted" as they pertained to the country's internal affairs.

Trudeau made the remarks while participating in a Facebook video interaction organised by Canadian MP Bardish Chagger to mark Guruparb or the 551st birth anniversary of Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion. The event was joined by Canadian ministers Navdeep Bains and Harjit Sajjan and members of the Sikh community.

In his opening remarks during the interaction, Trudeau said: "I would be remiss if I didn't start also by recognising the news coming out of India about the protest by farmers. The situation is concerning and we're all very worried about family and friends.

"I know that's a reality for many of you. Let me remind you, Canada will always be there to defend the right of peaceful protest. We believe in the importance of dialogue and that's why we've reached out through multiple means directly to the Indian authorities to highlight our concerns."

Hours later, external affairs ministry spokesperson Anurag Srivastava said in a brief statement: "We have seen some ill-informed comments by Canadian leaders relating to farmers in India. Such comments are unwarranted, especially when pertaining to the internal affairs of a democratic country."

Also read | Farmers' protest: All you need to know

Srivastava added, "It is also best that diplomatic conversations are not misrepresented for political purposes."

People familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity that Trudeau's comments appeared to be aimed at Canada's influential Indian-origin diaspora.

Trudeau also referred to the Covid-19 pandemic and said this "is a moment for all of us to pull together". He added, "We're going to be there to continue to work together as we are there to help each other out." He also said it was important to remember Guru Nanak's teachings of compassion, equality and selfless service, which are at the heart of both Sikhism and Canadian values.

Trudeau is probably the first world leader to comment on the protest by Indian farmers, which entered its fifth day on Monday. The protest is aimed at against a set of laws to liberalise farm trade and open up agricultural markets. The Union government has offered talks to the protestors camping at New Delhi's borders, but they have insisted on the repeal of the laws.

The comments weren't seen favourably in New Delhi, especially at a time when both India and Canada have been taking steps to restore normalcy to bilateral ties that were hit by Trudeau's perceived softness on pro-Khalistan activists in Canada during his first term.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 13 -- China is scrambling to control a new wave of Covid-19 outbreak, locking down some 28 million people across two provinces, carrying out mass-scale nucleic acid tests and appealing to citizens not to travel ahead of the Chinese New Year (CNY) holidays in February.

Several provinces and cities across China have put in place travel restrictions as health authorities work overtime to contact-trace and isolate suspected cases who have travelled out from the locked down regions.

More than 28 million residents in four cities in the provinces of Hebei and Heilongjiang have been put under home quarantine with intercity travel suspended and intracity movements restricted.

China has recorded the biggest daily jump in Covid-19 cases in more than five months with 115 new confirmed cases reported for Tuesday in the mainland compared with 55 a day earlier.

This was the highest daily increase since July 30.

The increase in new infections comes as a World Health Organization team is slated to arrive in China on Thursday to probe the origins of the Covid-19 disease, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019.

The team will fly from Singapore to Wuhan on Thursday.

The new infection numbers - though fewer than daily numbers in many Covid-hit places in the world - are a source of worry for the Communist Party of China-led government, which has repeatedly trumpeted its success in controlling the pandemic since it emerged from a Chinese city in late 2019.

Officials said that new clusters have been triggered through community transmission.

The national health commission (NHC) spokesperson, Mi Feng said the new outbreaks are characterised by long duration, wide coverage, rapid transmission, older patients, and high proportions in rural areas.

In some places, community transmission and multi-generation transmission, Mi told a press conference on Wednesday, adding that the situation was complex and severe.

The worst affected Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, has put three cities - Shijiazhuang, Xingtai and Langfang - into lockdown as part of the efforts to keep the virus from spreading further.

The northeastern province of Heilongjiang province on Wednesday declared a Covid-19 emergency, putting the city of Suihua and its 5.2 million residents, under lockdown.

Tieli, a city of about 300,000 people that borders Suihua, according to agency reports, said on Wednesday it will not allow any people or vehicles to leave for three days as part of new prevention measures.

The total number of confirmed cases in mainland China now stands at 87,706, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.

Meanwhile, China is administering domestically developed vaccines to specific groups with high infection risks, including medical workers, airport staff and people handling cold-chain imported products.

"Over 1 million people in Beijing had received the first dose of vaccine as of 11 am Monday. The city is expected to complete administering the first dose of the jab among specific groups by Friday," Xinhua, China's official news agency, said in a report on Wednesday.

The WHO's director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has said that a WHO team in China is working with producers of the Sinovac and Sinopharm vaccines for potential emergency use listings.

"I'm pleased that a WHO team is in China currently working with producers of the Sinovac and Sinopharm vaccines to assess compliance with international quality manufacturing practices ahead of potential emergency use listing by WHO," Tedros said at a media briefing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- Maharashtra cyber department on Tuesday issued a warning about Chinese cyber attackers planning a large scale phishing attack and stated that over 40,000 suspected attacks on sites related to information, infrastructure and banking were witnessed in the last 4-5 days. The advisory comes close on the heels of a similar warning issued by India's official cybersecurity agency in the backdrop of recent India-China border clashes that have led to worsening of relations between the two countries.

"In last 4-5 days, resources on cyberspace of India especially related to information, infrastructure & banking have been under attack from China. At least 40,300 such cyber attacks were attempted, most of them can be traced to Chengdu area of China," Maharashtra Cyber Department Special IG, Y Yadav was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

A report published on June 18 quoting intelligence officials had claimed that China had opened another front against India with sustained DDOS (distributed denial of service) attacks on Indian information websites and the country's financial payments system.

Also Read: China ordered attacks on Indian troops in Galwan Valley

The attacks attempted to flood a network with artificially created internet traffic and targeted a variety of sites including government websites and the banking system including ATMs.

The report claimed most of these attacks were traced back to the central Chinese city of Chengdu-a city known as the hub of hackers and also the headquarters of the Chinese Army's Unit 61398, which is PLA's covert cyberwarfare section.

These attacks were reported on Tuesday last and continued through Wednesday, however, they were unsuccessful.

It is said that several hackers in Chengdu work under the patronage of government agencies to camouflage their operation for official deniability.

Indian agencies had warned that Chinese cyber attackers could also carry out a massive phishing attack in the guise of a free Covid-19 test.

Australia, too, recently suspected a Chinese hand in a massive cyber attack on several of its strategic sites targeting administration, industries, essential services, critical infrastructure and political organizations among others.

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison had hinted at China's role by describing the attacks as "malicious and sophisticated" and carried out by "state-based cyber actor". He further added that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Australian experts explicitly named China for the attacks. Australia has been vociferously supporting the demand for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and has also backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization in the aftermath of its initial handling of the crisis.

China had retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef.

The recent warning is the latest in a series of such alerts issued including the one released last Friday which cited the threat of a cyber attack by North Korea-based cyber criminals.

As preventive measures, all the central security forces have been asked to direct their employees against opening or clicking on attachments in unsolicited e-mail, SMS or messages through social media.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order?

That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff:

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the violent brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "pre-meditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack:

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyber attack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack, adding that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger of blame at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization (WHO) for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef. India and Australia have also spoken about working together to shape the post-Covid world order.

South China Sea:

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China.

Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea. Last year, Chinese vessels repeatedly operated in areas close to the waters where state-owned ONGC Videsh is engaged in oil and gas production.

Senkaku Islands:

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation.

Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 28 -- A Nasa professor is reportedly controlling the Mars Perseverance rover from a one-bedroom flat above a hair salon in South London. According to a Daily Mail report, the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic has forced Sanjeev Gupta, an Indian-origin British geologist, to work from home while Perseverance rover is getting ready for exploring the Martian surface after safely landing in the Jezero Crater.

The mission control is at Nasa's jet propulsion laboratory (JPL) in Southern California, where the Perseverance rover was built. "I should be at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, in a series of offices each one about three times bigger than this lounge, full of hundreds of scientists and engineers with their heads buried in laptops surrounded by large screens," Gupta told the British daily.

The 55-year-old geology expert at the Imperial College of London has been a part of Nasa's Mars exploration program for a long time. He was a participating scientist and long term science planner on Nasa's Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover mission for exploring Gale Crater. Gupta has co-authored a study on the existence of an ancient lakebed in Gale Crater which was published in Science journal in 2015.

Jezero crater has also been determined as an ancient lakebed that dried up as the climate of the planet changed. Perseverance rover will be used to explore the rocks and return samples through future missions. Gupta and his colleagues will start directing the rover to various spots to drill the required samples.

The team is currently working round the clock, prompting the professor to rent an apartment in Lewisham so his family can enjoy undisturbed sleep in the nearby home, reported the Daily Mail. His flat has five computers and two other screens for Zoom-style meetings with fellow scientists.

Meanwhile, the Perseverance rover has been sending back photographs of the landing site to mission control and Nasa recently released the first 360-degree panorama taken by Mastcam-Z, a dual-camera system equipped with a zoom function.

The Mastcam-Z sent 142 individual images after rotating its mast 360 degrees on the third Martian day of the mission and the US space agency stitched them together to create the instrument's first 360-degree panorama.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 20 -- In an unusual year, the Toronto International Film Festival concludes on Sunday with an unusual choice: Its closing night presentation isn't a movie, but the TV series A Suitable Boy, adapted by Indian-origin director Mira Nair from Vikram Seth's classic novel.

The screening spans six hours, covering the entire series produced for BBC, with two intermissions of 20-minutes each for those attending in person.

Nair said she was "delighted" when TIFF chose to make this the first-ever TV project to close the festival in its 45-year history. Nair said this was the only format to do justice to Seth's monumental work: "A Suitable Boy cannot be a two-and-a-half hour film, it should not be. It should be at least six hours, in the way I've tried to do it but it could be even longer."

While the novel was first published in 1993, many of its themes remain relevant, including that of communal faultlines. In fact, Nair took the original "distillation" of the novel and "brought a lot of politics back from the story of the novel" rather than making it just one about the protagonist Lata having to choose from among three suitors.

"I love that part of it, but it was important for me to see Lata almost as the new India. So, as the country moved towards its first election, Lata moves towards finding herself."

The novel is set in the period right after Independence and syncretic culture is the foundation of the series.

"I did really want to hold a mirror in a way to the young of today to see what we were, even though we had just come out of the trauma of Partition," she said.

There was a "depth of relationships that today are really being threatened just by the politicisation of it all," she said.

Nair has already been feted at TIFF this year with the Tribute Award, along with actors Kate Winslet, Sir Anthony Hopkins, and director Chloe Zhao.

Tanya Maniktala, who plays Lata, was chosen as one of TIFF's Rising Stars. Of casting the young actor in the pivotal role, Nair said that other than her hypnotic eyes and amazing smile, she had the kind of "fluttery innocence" that was difficult to find among young women these days.

The author has two meaningful words for the director about the series - "Thank you," Nair said of Seth's reaction.

"I don't speak for him, but I think he's very satisfied."

New York-based Nair was unable to make it in person for the closing night screening due to ongoing restrictions related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The series has been acquired by Netflix and Nair said she is hopeful it will be available to an Indian audience "very soon."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- India's battle to effectively contain the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) continued on Friday as the number of infections doubled in just four days to 236, even as experts reiterated that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

On Friday, India reported 63 fresh cases, taking the tally up from 173 a day earlier. Several states across the country have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission, a point when a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Experts said that a sudden and sharp spike in cases could hinder efforts to prevent the outbreak from taking hold if more aggressive and random testing is not carried out across India. Some even believe that community transmission has already begun silently and that it can be tackled only if many more people are tested at random.

As of Friday morning, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had conducted 14,376 tests - one of the lowest diagnostic rates in the world. India currently has the capacity to test 10,000 samples per day.

South Korea, which has been able to slow the advance of the disease despite reporting about 8,500 cases, has tested about 274,000 people since February. Though the US has tested 82,000 people, Covid-19 cases have raced to alarming levels in the country, leading to widespread criticism of its authorities for intractable delays in making tests available.

On Friday, Delhi reported five fresh cases of the disease, which originated in China's Wuhan last December and has killed at least 10,000 people. The national capital has so far reported 17 confirmed cases, which include one foreigner. With 52 cases, Maharashtra remains the worst affected state, triggering calls for a complete lockdown to halt the advance of the disease.

While Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal ordered that all malls, except grocery stores and pharmacies, be shut down immediately, Maharashtra put in place similar measures by announcing that all non-essential businesses in Mumbai and across the state were shutting down from midnight through the end of March.

Public health experts warned that despite the intensifying efforts across states, the disease could spiral out of control if Indians showed callous disregard to guidelines and precautions in the fight against Covid-19.

Among the fresh cases reported on Friday was singer Kanika Kapoor, whose announcement of having contracted the disease sent alarm bells ringing in several quarters -- from Parliament house to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje, her MP son Dushyant Singh, and parliamentarians Derek O'Brien and Anupriya Patel began self-quarantines after coming into direct or indirect contact with Kapoor.

Uttar Pradesh health minister Jai Pratap Singh underwent a test for Covid-19 as it emerged that he was at a party thrown by the celebrity singer after her return from London recently. Three BJP MLAs who met him on Thursday also went into self-isolation.

Reacting to a question on Kapoor's movements across Lucknow and Kanpur, health ministry joint secretary Lav Aggarwal said contact tracing was the immediate protocol that was initiated and all action for containment of the disease began at the same time.

He urged people to follow Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call to observe the "Janta Curfew" and stay at home on March 22 from 7am to 9pm, while emphasising that social distancing was primary to curb the spread of COVID-19 infection. "One day's cooperation will help break the chain of transmission," he added.

"The Centre has asked the states to take strict action as per the appropriate law against people who are not following the social distancing directive. The state governments have the inherent power under the Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act to take action against anyone who does not follow the government directive and risks lives of people," he added.

In his first address to the nation on the crisis, the Prime Minister on Thursday appealed to citizens to display commitment and called for a "people's curfew" on Sunday, March 22, where citizens would stay home as both a symbolic message of India's determination and a test-case to prepare for future challenges.

In line with the announcement, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said on its Twitter handle: "DMRC has decided to keep its services closed (on Sunday). The move is aimed at encouraging the public to stay indoors and maintain social distancing, which is essential in the fight against COVID-19."

No passenger train, mail express train or intercity train will operate till 10pm on Sunday following the PM's call. Operations of suburban rail services in all cities will also reduce to a "bare minimum".

India also expanded universal screening at airports for all passengers coming from Australia, the US and UK. "In view of local transmission of the disease, and increase in number of cases and deaths being reported in Australia, UK and USA, it has now been decided to expand the universal screening for all passengers coming from these places, and risk profiling them for either quarantine or isolation based on risk assessment," a document prepared by the health ministry said.

The Covid-19 pandemic has killed more than 10,000 people, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, and the World Health Organization said the disease is now infecting people at a faster pace. It took three months for the first 100,000 cases, but only 12 days for the next 100,000.

Italy is set to reinforce and extend the near-total lockdown after fatalities surpassed those in China, which again reported no new cases in the outbreak's initial hub. Britain will set out a package to help save millions of jobs and Germany is considering emergency spending measures.

California announced a statewide stay-in-place order, the most stringent US effort yet to curb the spread of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 9 -- A group of experts at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have found that Covid-19 virus found its way to India via frequently visited countries in Europe, South Asia, Middle East and Oceania.

"There is a close connection between the source of the virus and the countries that are most travelled by Indians," the study stated.

The study, with lead authors Mainak Mondal, Ankita Lawarde and Kumaravel Somasundaram from the Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, was published in the scientific journal Current Science.

Also read: Delhi expected to have 5.5 lakh Covid-19 cases by July 31 - Manish Sisodia

The research noted the potential origin of Covid-19 virus in Indians to be in countries "mainly from Europe, Middle East Oceania and South Asia regions, which strongly imply the spread of the virus through most travelled countries".

The analysis revealed that most Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses (129 out of 137) show more similarity to that of specific countries.

"In cluster A, Indian samples show more similarity to the viruses found in Oceania, Kuwait and South Asian samples, while in the cluster B, Indian samples show more similarity to mainly European and few numbers of Middle East/South Asian samples," the study read.

Also read: No community transmission of Covid-19, say Centre's officials - Delhi govt

The findings indicated that majority of Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses have originated from Europe, Middle East, South Asia and Oceania regions. "A large majority of Indian viral isolates (n = 129), which were collected during March/April 2020, show more similarity with samples from Europe, Middle East, South Asia and Oceania regions," the experts noted. The remaining Indian isolates (n = 8) have grouped with other clusters which contained most samples from China and East Asia.

Thus, the study concluded the probable source of origin of Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses to be in countries from Europe and Oceania regions besides the Middle East and South Asian regions.

In another study, experts at the Harvard Medical School believe that coronavirus might have been spreading in China as early as August 2019.

The research used satellite imagery of hospital parking lots in Wuhan - where the disease was first identified in late 2019 - and data for symptom-related queries around "cough" and "diarrhoea" on various search engines.

"In August, we identify a unique increase in searches for diarrhoea which was neither seen in previous flu seasons or mirrored in the cough search data," the research stated.

Worldwide, the number of coronavirus cases have crossed the 7 million-mark with over 4 lakh people killed by the deadly contagion. In India, the Covid-19 tally has jumped to 266,598 - fifth highest in the world after the US, Brazil, Russia and the UK.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- The coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-induced pandemic has triggered a civilisational crisis with no immediate end in the sight. Many would reckon that India has done well to contain it. Yes, this is a crisis of enormous dimensions with extreme complexities. Lives are under threat, livelihoods are at stake, large reverse migration is underway, and the economy is in a tailspin with disruptions. This requires a multi-pronged response mechanism.

The Union government, along with the state governments, is working on these lines. A national economic relief package has been announced, with more in the offing. The economy is being opened up incrementally. State governments are addressing migration woes. People are getting used to the idea of their homes being their second workplace.

If there is one image of the national lockdown that has stayed with most of us, it is that of migrant labourers trudging to their respective home towns. Such episodes have been reported from Delhi, Mumbai, Surat, parts of Telangana, and elsewhere.

More than 90% of the workforce is in the unorganised sector. In the lockdown, it's the poorest and the marginalised who are hit the most. A United Nations University report says that 104 million more people could slip below the poverty line in India due to the crisis. An International Labour Organization report, on the other hand, says that around 400 million workers in the unorganised sector of India could sink further into poverty due to this.

When the poorest don't have enough for two square meals a day, it means that we, as a nation, have failed them. Look around and you will hear appalling stories of starvation deaths and malnourishment. All this will get exacerbated if the lockdown is extended.

It's generally believed that democracy, and a free Press, are the best guarantees against starvation.

So, where have we failed? What can be done to ensure that starvation and hunger deaths don't assume the form of a crisis in the uncertain times ahead?

When I moved a private member's resolution, advocating for a zero hunger Act in the Lok Sabha in 2006, I got overwhelming across-the-board support. A responsive political class, media, and civil society groups ensured that India got a National Food Security Act (NFSA) in 2013. It entitles 67% of the population (75% in rural India, and 50% in urban India) to five kg of food grains per person per month for priority households.

The Act covers over 810 million people. During the lockdown, the government has increased the monthly quota of subsidised food grains to seven kg per person along with the free distribution of five kg food grains under the PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojna for the next three months.

While the spread of the NFSA is welcome, more needs to be done. India ranks 72nd in a list of 113 countries in the Economist Intelligence Unit's 2019 Global Food Security Index, where availability, affordability, quality and safety of food are measured. Or, the Global Hunger Index of 2019, which ranks India at the 102nd position in a list of 117 countries.

As part of a long-term plan, India, like other countries, is working to end hunger, and eliminate malnutrition by 2030, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A 2019 Niti Aayog report says that Goa, Mizoram, Kerala, Chandigarh are among the states and Union territories that are doing well, but others are lagging behind.

As India comes to terms with a new post-Covid-19 normal, we should work vigorously towards a hunger-free, malnourishment-free India well before the deadline. This must be the top priority as we rejig our priorities. While the SDGs with 2030 as the deadline were launched in 2016, countries like Brazil launched a war on hunger way back in 2003, with its pioneering "Fome Zero" (Zero Hunger) aimed at providing everyone enough food, and the right kind of food, for nutritional needs and well-being.

We should use this crisis as an opportunity to undertake large-scale changes to be able to feed India, especially the most vulnerable sections, in the right manner.

The five kg food grain quantum under the NFSA should be raised to 10kg going forward. The government could consider introducing breakfast, in addition to midday meals, in schools, to ensure that children are healthy. It's time to make the NFSA coverage universal. The Food Corporation of India's godowns are filled to capacity with more than three times the buffer stock it is required to maintain. In other words, no one going to a public distribution system shop must be turned away because of the absence of a ration card. Some states have already acted on this.

A problem faced by migrant workers is that the ration cards from their places of origin are not valid in other states. The Union government is readying a "one nation, one ration card" scheme, and this needs to be prioritised. In the post-lockdown period, the issue has become particularly important, with large-scale reverse migration.

Another important problem pertains to the linking of Aadhaar cards to ration cards. In many rural areas, the identification infrastructure often malfunctions. The glitches in the verification process must not become an excuse to deny someone food grains. We also need to universalise direct transfers to those living on the fringes.

Let the Covid-19 crisis usher in policy changes that ensure that our poorest are well fed, their nourishment needs taken care of, and their dignity upheld. It is only then that India will be able to script an inclusive growth story.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- Confirmed Covid-19 cases shot up by 149 in India on Saturday morning, taking the total count to 873 as the country recorded its biggest jump in a 24-hour period, according to the Union health ministry data.

The data said 19 people have died in India, where a 21-day nationwide lockdown has been enforced to stop the fast-spreading SARS-Cov-2 virus, which causes the deadly infection. Maharashtra tops the list with 177 cases, followed by Kerala (165).

The health ministry's Friday morning data said there were 724 cases and 17 deaths in the country.

According to worldometer, a global case tracker which says it gives live statistics, India has 887 infections and 20 deaths as of Saturday morning.

The number of cases in India has spiked to over 800 from just 50 a little over two weeks ago. The first death was reported on March 11.

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) maintains that there is no community transmission in the country. Community transmission is that phase the outbreak when the source of an individual's infection can't be traced and isolated.

On Friday, Kerala reported 39 new cases, sparking fears of community transmission. Kasargod district reported 34 of the 39 cases, in an indication that the disease may have spread deep.

India has taken unprecedented steps to fight the disease - the latest being a complete lockdown and increased surveillance.

"When the disease has spread to 192 countries, it means screening at entry points will serve no purpose. India anyway is in a state of lockdown that will show benefits if people follow the dos and don'ts. Since the disease is here, what we need to do now is improve our case management and strengthen surveillance within the community. Our efforts now are concentrating on not letting it spread further," Lav Aggarwal, joint secretary in the Union ministry of health and family welfare, said on Friday.

Hospitals across the country have also started preparing for a possible surge in the number of cases.

In Delhi, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said on Friday the government is equipped to handle up to 100 new cases a day, and is working to ensure that it is prepared even if the numbers go up to 500- 1,000 new cases.

The All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi, is also keeping its 800-bed National Cancer Institute in Jhajjar, ready to accommodate a higher number of patients.

There are four main stages of the outbreak. Stage I is usually when cases are imported and are not of local origin. Stage II is when there is local transmission, which means a section of people testing positive have come in contact with a positive patient having a travel history. Stage III is community transmission. Stage IV is an epidemic, when there several clusters of the infection.

To prepare for stage III, the government has prohibited export of ventilators and asked two PSUs to manufacture 40,000 ventilators. The government is also ensuring adequate supply of personal protection equipment (PPE), N-95 masks and hand sanitizers, which are crucial in infection control.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 30 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

'Grateful nation': President Kovind tweets on Mahatma Gandhi's death anniversary

President Ram Nath Kovind paid homage to the father of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi, on his 73rd death anniversary on Saturday. He said that the nation was grateful to him and that everyone should embrace his ideals of peace, non-violence, simplicity, purity of means and humility. Read more

Raj Thackeray to visit Ayodhya Ram Mandir in March; Shiv Sena takes a veiled dig

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray will visit the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya in March, according to a senior party leader. The decision was taken in a party meeting held at Bandra in Mumbai. Read more

Mamata Banerjee asks TMC to hit campaign trail as Amit Shah heads to Bengal

Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee has asked top leaders of the party to hit the campaign trail for West Bengal assembly elections 2021 with full steam from February 1 and project the state government's work before the people instead of engaging in mere political rhetoric against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said party leaders, who attended the closed-door meeting at the chief minister's south Kolkata residence on Friday afternoon. Read more

WHO team visits Wuhan hospital that had early coronavirus patients

A World Health Organization team visited a hospital on Friday where China says the first COVID-19 patients were treated more than a year ago as part of the experts' long-awaited fact-finding mission on the origins of the coronavirus. Read more

Errors won't be swept under the carpet: India fielding coach Sridhar

The leg-side trap by India's bowling unit to choke the Australian batsmen-hatched in July last year as revealed by bowling coach Bharat Arun-worked wonders during India's 2-1 series win. Read more

Bridgerton is Netflix's 'biggest series ever', clocks 82 million households

Online streamer Netflix recently announced that the show Bridgerton is its "biggest series ever." Netflix on Thursday revealed that the series has been watched by 82 million households around the globe within the first 28 days of its release. The show's views have surpassed Netflix's own projections of 63 million households. Read more

Milind Soman's latest fitness post is about headstands, nature and resolutions

If there is one celebrity who doesn't miss out on an opportunity to talk about fitness and urge his fans to keep exercising, it is Milind Soman. The actor along with his wife Ankita Konwar, who is also a fitness freak, uses his social media accounts to talk about physical and mental fitness with his followers. Read more

'We want hedges too': 'Normal person' explains what is going on with the stock market in funny video

If you've been on the Internet recently or have heard the news, then you may know of the stock market's odd happenings. But do you genuinely understand what is happening with the stock market? You may have heard terms such as GameStop, hedge funds and WallStreetBets being thrown around. Read more

Watch| Does Indian captainship have shelf life?/Can you bat like Fawad Alam?

Hindustan Times' Senior Associate Editor, Rasesh Mandani poses two cricket questions of your interest, every week. In this video he wonders if there is shelf life to captainship in Indian cricket, and takes stock of how Virat Kohli is faring. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 14 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Covid-19 in UK: Number of Indian-origin victims rises to 665

New figures released on Thursday show that the number of people dying of coronavirus and categorised as 'Indian' rose to 665 in England as of May 12, while the UK-wide death toll rose to 33,614 with a cumulative number of positive cases of 233,151. Read more.

1,700 km cycle journey from Chennai underlines limitations of Bengal's plan to bring migrants home

On Thursday, Tamil Nadu-based writer and social activist Nityanand Jayaraman posted on Twitter a short video of a batch of migrant workers from Bengal starting for their home on bicycles, embarking on a nearly 1,700 km journey. Read more.

Vijay Mallya's extradition nears after refused recourse to UK Supreme Court

The extradition of businessman Vijay Mallya to face charges of major financial offences neared on Thursday after the high court of England and Wales refused him permission to appeal in the UK Supreme Court on the ground that his case does not involve a 'point of law of general public importance'. Read more.

'The best way to use MS will be to.' Former player on how India can get the maximum out of Dhoni

Former India fast bowler Venkatesh Prasad feels MS Dhoni is better suited to play up the order than as a finisher. The former India captain, who has not played since the World Cup, has enjoyed good numbers batting at No. 3 and 4, scoring 2351 runs from 46 combined innings, averaging 82.75 and 56.58 respectively. Read more.

Ramayan: Karanvir Bohra spots actor dancing during fight scene, quips 'we used to think what an epic war' like Game of Thrones

Television actor Karanvir Bohra has spotted a major gaffe in the 1987 series Ramayan. He shared a video from a war sequence, in which an extra seems to be engaged in a fight with an invisible opponent as he brandishes his sword in the air. Read more.

How to talk to your kids about the coronavirus

Many schools have been shut in many parts of the world to contain the spread of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). New data suggests that although children are less likely to get sick from COVID19, they still can spread the disease to other vulnerable groups. Read more.

DU to conduct final year exam for all UG, PG students from July 1, check details

Delhi University (DU) on Thursday said that the examinations for the final semester/term/year for all UG and PG students will be conducted from July 1, 2020, onwards. A notification regarding this decision has been uploaded on the varsity's official website. Read more.

Elephant calf charges at a tourist vehicle, then quickly retreats. Adorable video will break the cuteness barometer

Elephants are the gentle giants that most people love but do you know what is better than them? It's the baby elephants. Thanks to the Internet, the videos of these fuzzy-headed adorable creatures never fail to amuse and amaze people. Read more.

On The Record: Justice Abhay Thipsay (retd) on advising Nirav Modi's lawyers

A deposition by a former High Court judge in the Nirav Modi extradition case in the United Kingdom has caused a political storm. The Bharatiya Janata Party has called the involvement of Justice Abhay Thipsay (retired), a Congress member, an example of the grand old party trying to shield the fugitive diamantaire. Amid the war of words, Justice Thipsay spoke to Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury, to present his side of the story. Watch here.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 17 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi on late Tuesday night wished United States President-elect Joe Biden and congratulated him on his victory in the recently concluded Presidential polls, underlining increased focus on Indo-US ties.

"Spoke to US President-elect @JoeBiden on phone to congratulate him. We reiterated our firm commitment to the Indo-US strategic partnership and discussed our shared priorities and concerns - Covid-19 pandemic, climate change, and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific Region," PM Modi said in a tweet on Tuesday.

The prime minister also wished Indian-origin US Vice President-elect Kamala Harris on her election to the US White House and country's second highest office. "I also conveyed warm congratulations for VP-elect @KamalaHarris. Her success is a matter of great pride and inspiration for members of the vibrant Indian-American community, who are a tremendous source of strength for Indo-US relations."

Also read: Indo-US ties will pick up, Joe Biden no stranger to India, says S Jaishankar

PM Modi's call to Biden and Harris comes almost ten days after both the newly elected Democrat officials won in a tightly fought Presidential race with Republican nominee President Donald Trump.

Earlier in the day, external affairs minister S Jaishankar had indicated swift action in strengthening ties with the US administration and established old ties the country has with Biden. Jaishankar said that the President-elect Biden is "not a stranger to India or to the relationship" and India has dealt with him in his former roles as vice president in the Barack Obama administration.

The Indian government will face no problems in taking forward ties with the US under the Joe Biden administration because of the strong element of bipartisan support for the bilateral relationship, external affairs minister S Jaishankar had said.

"I am very confident that we will pick up where we left off (with the Donald Trump administration), we have done that over the last four administrations," Jaishankar said while participating in an online discussion organised by the think tanks Centre for International Governance Innovation and Gateway House.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 13 -- The Meghalaya Raj Bhavan on Sunday witnessed a chaotic day with as many as thirty employees, including the secretary to Governor Satya Pal Malik, testing positive for Covid-19

Governor Malik, however, tested negative while his wife is out of station.

This was confirmed by the state Director of Health Services (DHS) Dr. Aman War to HT over telephone "Its true that 30 employees of Raj Bhavan have tested positive for the virus and we are making sure that no one is left out of the tests," the DHS said, adding, "Measures are being taken to ensure that all protocols are put in place."

Besides the Secretary to the Governor, other senior officials include the Deputy Secretary, House Controller, Superintendent, Accountant, Hindi Stenographer and the attendant to Lady Governor.

Others who work in the main building include 3 room bearers, 2 table bearers, 2 room sweepers and a nurse. These people work in the main building and often come into contact with the Governor or visitors. The others are Grade 3 and 4 staff of the Raj Bhavan Secretariat which is located in the premises but away from the main building and some police personnel.

Speaking to HT over phone, Commissioner and Secretary of Health Sampath Kumar said the origin of the virus infiltrating Raj Bhavan is being ascertained while admitting candidly that it was quite a challenge.

"Many people visit Raj Bhavan and especially since the present Governor has just assumed office many come to greet him. In the process tea and snacks are served and in order to consume them one has to remove the mask which is potentially dangerous," Kumar said adding, "In such cases social distancing does not apply, it is merely physical distancing.

The Commissioner revealed, "The government is contemplating issuing necessary directions to not allow consumption of any eatables or beverages during meetings." He said if someone wishes to have tea or snacks or both, one can do so on their own separately.

When asked if the premises would be declared a containment zone considering the large number of positive cases, Kumar said, "The area is fully gated anyway but as far as the quarters are, we leave it to the wisdom and discretion of the Deputy Commissioner (DC).

HT contacted East Khasi Hills DC Isawanda Laloo, who has just assumed office on September 8 and she informed that all protocols have been put in place. "We have sealed off the main premises as well as the staff quarters on the rear side of Raj Bhavan across the road, Laloo said over phone adding, "Essential commodities will be delivered to all at their doorstep so they don't have to venture out. A police team overseen by the Superintendent of Police and a magistrate will ensure strict adherence to the administration's directions."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 5 -- Australia's advertising watchdog is investigating a camping advertisement which shows a man eating a bat sandwich. Australian camping retailer Boating Camping Fishing store (BCF) released an advert designed to encourage people to explore their own backyard while there remain several travel restrictions around the world. In the video, a man jokes that the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic was caused by someone eating a bat.

A spokesperson for the Advertising Standards Bureau told the BBC that the ad watchdog has received several complaints about the BCF's commercial. The spokesperson added that Ad Standards is in the process of assessing these complaints to see if they raise an issue.

A BCF spokesperson had earlier told Australian media that they understand the severity of the pandemic, adding that the camping commercial was a light-hearted marketing campaign. The YouTube video has garnered over 250,000 views so far but the bat sequence has been edited out for TV.

"Over the years BCF has established a tradition of irreverent campaigns in the spirit of good-natured fun," the spokesperson said. "They will have their detractors and we recognise that.

Also Read | China doubles down on Covid-19 narrative as WHO investigation looms

While the initial coronavirus outbreak was reported from a wildlife market in Wuhan, there has not been any definitive proof of how the virus originated. However, preliminary studies suggested that the bats could be the source since the coronavirus present in bats has a genome that is 96 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2.

Australia was one of the first countries to a demand an independent inquiry into the origin of the coronavirus outbreak, triggering a decline in its relationship with China. China punished Australian beef producers and barley farmers in apparent retaliation and asked Chinese students to reconsider studying Down Under.

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison maintained that the call for an inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak was reasonable and not meant to target any country. The call for a probe was followed by China launching another investigation into the alleged subsidies on Australian wine imports and, in November, Beijing imposed taxes on Australian wine of up to 212%. The commercial currently under scanner could further strain the bilateral relations.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 74 as on Thursday. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 26 -- On the occasion on India's 72nd Republic Day, search engine Goggle is celebrating the country's unity in diversity and the tryst of tradition with development in its doodle, which has been illustrated by Onkar Fondekar, a Mumbai-based artist.

The doddle with saffron and green being its predominant colour comprises figures representing different culture, profession. An elephant with a mahout on him, a cricketer, a film director with his eyes on the camera, a sitar player, a Bharatnatyam dancer, a dholak player, a man dressed in Rajasthani attire clicking selfie are the several elements of the doodle, while buildings displaying India's traditional architecture styles are in the background.

Amid the Covid-19 pandemic, India will be celebrating its 72nd Republic Day commemorating the day when its constitution came into effect.

Onkar Fondekar said his inspiration behind the doodle was the people of India, its culture, traditions, history and architecture.

"I felt fortunate and happy that I got the opportunity to portray India-my country-on a global platform like Google Doodle. At the same time, I knew there were so many things, so much diversity and such a wide canvas I could illustrate," he said.

"While Republic Day only dates back to 1949, many elements of the subcontinent's culture have been evolving for centuries. With origins that stretch back hundreds of years, musical instruments such as the dholak (a two-headed hand drum) and the sitar (a long-necked stringed instrument), both featured in the Doodle artwork, are just a few examples of India's rich heritage," Google wrote.

"From its distinctive architectural styles to the Bollywood film industry, India's cultural impact is felt across the world, and today, there is much to celebrate," it said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 28 -- Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Tuesday led the United Kingdom for a minute's silence to remember the hundreds of doctors, nurses, carers and other key workers who died of Covid-19, many of them of Indian origin and other non-white individuals.

As mass circulation tabloids and mainstream news media highlight the disproportionate number of deaths of non-white people, mostly immigrants and their descendants, there are indications that their contribution to British society is being more widely recognised.

A sombre looking Johnson - who had a brush with death after being hospitalised with virus infection - stood in silence at the cabinet table in Downing Street, flanked by chancellor Rishi Sunak and cabinet secretary Mark Sedwill.

It is a reflection of tens of thousands of Indian doctors and health care professionals arriving in the UK over recent decades and taking up key jobs in the National Health Service that the dead include several professionals from the 1.5 million strong Indian community.

Medical staff of Indian heritage who passed away include Jitendra Kumar Rathod, Manjeet Singh Riyat, Krishan Arora, Rajesh Kalraiya, Pooja Sharma, Jayesh Patel, Vivek Sharma, Kamlesh Kumar Masson, Amarante Dias, Sophie Fagan, Hamza Pacheeri and Amrik Bamotra.

Health secretary Matt Hancock on Monday announced a 60,000-pound compensation scheme for health workers who pass away after being infected by the virus. The Home Office has announced a free year-long extension of visa of Indian and other non-EU such workers.

Hancock said: "Nothing can make up for the tragic loss of a loved one during this pandemic. We owe a huge debt to those who die in service to our nation and are doing everything we can to protect them".

"Financial worries should be the last thing on the minds of their families so in recognition of these unprecedented circumstances we are expanding financial protection to NHS and social care workers delivering publicly funded care on the frontline".

Home secretary Priti Patel said the controversial immigration health surcharge, which is also applicable to doctors and other health professionals coming to the UK and is payable at the time of applying for the visa, is under review, following demands that it be scrapped.

The surcharge, which is due to be increased from &#163;400 to &#163;624 per year per person in an immigrant's family, has come in for much criticism from stake-holders, including organisations such as the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 20 -- Tesla and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk has announced that Juneteenth would henceforth be considered a US holiday at the two companies. This is an apparent reversal of a previous policy from the two companies at a time when other companies - from Twitter, Uber, Spotify to Nike - have also declared Juneteenth as an annual American holiday.

Juneteenth commemorates the end of slavery in the United States and is held on June 19th. It has received renewed focus in current times due to the killing of Floyd George, an American of African origin, at the hands of cops in Minnesota which triggered massive race-related debates and protests in the country.

There were some reports that several employees of Tesla were contemplating protests if Juneteenth was not declared a holiday by the company. Musk himself has had to face criticism for not commenting on the controversy related to Floyd's death or the larger question of racial equality.

This may have prompted Musk to take to Twitter to declare Juneteenth a paid holiday for employees in the US. "Juneteenth is henceforth considered a US holiday at Tesla & SpaceX," he tweeted.

Tesla is also learnt to have written an email to US employees. "Tesla fully supports Juneteenth for any US employee that wants to take the day off to celebrate, reflect or participate in events that are meaningful to you," the communication read, according to Electrek.

At a time when Musk is trying to get Tesla to ramp up production - especially of Model Y SUVs, after weeks of work suspension due to Covid-19 crisis, there is speculation that the company was unwilling to declare Juneteenth a holiday because it would impact the day's productivity. The official declaration now may put all controversies to rest

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 16 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other updates from Hindustan Times.

Parliament monsoon session: Former PM Manmohan Singh, 15 others to remain absent

Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is among the Rajya Sabha MPs who have sought the Upper House's permission to remain absent for a part of or the entire monsoon session. Read more

'No infiltration reported along Indo-China border during last six months': MHA in Rajya Sabha

The Union home ministry on Wednesday said in Parliament that no infiltration has been reported along the border with China in the last last six months. Read more

'Investigate Karan Johar's party video': Politician files complaint with NCB against Deepika Padukone, Vicky Kaushal and others

Former Shiromani Akali Dal MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa, perhaps encouraged with the current conversation around Bollywood's alleged drug abuse problem, has once again raked up Karan Johar's house party video. Read more

IPL 2020: Five penalty runs will stop teams from Mankading, says Muttiah Muralitharan

Without bowling, life is 'boring' for Muttiah Muralitharan. So at the slightest of excuses, cricket's greatest spinner is found doing what he does best: befuddling batsmen. His recent outing came at a Sunrisers Hyderabad (SRH) training session, because there were "not as many net bowlers." Read more

Study of cities reveals Delhi saved 3 days of commute time during Covid lockdown

In a study of how much time commuters in global cities saved between March and July, New Delhi has come out on top with 79 hours that would have otherwise been spent in getting from one location to another. Read more

Apple Watch 6, Watch SE, iPad Air, iPad 8th gen go official, check India prices here

Apple made a host of announcements late last evening through a virtual Apple Event. Unlike every other year, Apple did not announce a new iPhone lineup this September and unveiled four other devices instead - the Apple Watch Series 6, Apple Watch SE, the 8th generation iPad and a new iPad Air. Read more

Vishwakarma Puja 2020: Significance, Date, Timing and Muhurat

Vishwakarma Jayanti, also known as Vishwakarma Puja, marks the birth of the Hindu god, Vishwakarma, who is believed to be the creator of the world, and is referred to as the divine architect. Read more

Covid-19: India hits 5 million, cases yet to peak; Sputnik V trials to begin

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top stories you need to know. Sunetra talks about the number of Covid-19 cases in India so far; country's hotspots witnessing a rising curve; trials for Sputnik V to begin in india; scientist revives 'lab-origin theory'; rise of cases in the national capital. Watch

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The novel coronavirus has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and the US government's top infectious-disease specialist has said the pathogen is 10 times more deadly than the seasonal flu.

More than 126,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 4,624 have died, according to a Reuters tally.

In India, the number of confirmed COVID-19 positive cases went up to 73 as on Thursday morning. The government has suspended most visas including visa-free travel facility extended to Indian-origin foreigners from Friday to 15 April in an effort to stop instances of incoming travellers spreading the infection in the country.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 21 -- The two key lines of inquiry recommended in the World Health Organisation's preliminary report on the origin of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has caused surprise and disbelief among independent experts. A team of experts sent by the UN health agency returned from China's Wuhan earlier this month after a four-week trip to investigate the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.

According to a CNN report, the WHO panel is set to recommend further contract tracing of the first known Covid-19 patient, also known as "patient zero", and an immediate investigation into the supply chain of the Huanan seafood market. Peter Daszak, a member of the WHO team that visited Wuhan, reportedly said that the first known patient had no connection to the Huanan seafood market, a place initially believed to be connected to the early virus outbreak.

Maureen Miller, an epidemiologist at Columbia University, told CNN it was implausible that such rudimentary investigative work wasn't already done by Chinese scientists while looking for the origin of the virus month ago. "It's not realistic, given they have world-class scientists there, and the technology invested in over the last 20 years. They are sophisticated, they understand transmission pathways, and have been working on them for years," Miller was quoted by the US media network as saying.

The team also discovered several signs of a much wider outbreak in December 2019 than it was reported earlier. WHO expert Peter Ben Embarek, who led the team in Wuhan, had earlier said in an interview that the investigators are seeking access to hundreds of thousands of blood samples from the Chinese city that Beijing has not allowed them to examine.

The Chinese scientists presented the visiting WHO team with 174 Covid-19 cases detected from in and around Wuhan in December 2019, which, according to Embarek, suggested the virus could have infected more than 1,000 people in the Chinese city in that month, given the "vast majority are mild cases" that are not noticed by doctors.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 7 -- The coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic is bringing about a change in everything we know. In the travel sector, vaccine passports - a documents carrying the proof of vaccination of a person - will be the much talked about thing.

In this digital era, users will be able to access their passports on mobile phones as an app or as part of a digital wallet.

The Technical Group of Global Tourism Crisis Committee - a United Nations body - aims to take innovative actions to ensure safe cross border travel and restore international mobility.

The committee was created by the United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) to chalk out a coordinated plan of action for recovering the hard hit tourism industry. The cross sector body includes various UN key agencies. It met for the first time in Madrid in January 2021 to plan the restart of tourism.

Support for the standardization, digitalization and interoperability of testing protocols and certification systems, based on commonly agreed evidence and risk-assessment indicators for origin and destination country/territory is one of the key agenda that the committee had called for.

Based on these developments, here is the status of vaccine passports around the world:

Sweden plans to launch a digital coronavirus "vaccine passport" by summer, assuming there is an international standard in place for the document by then, the government said last Thursday.

Iceland is the first Schengen country to issue digital Covid-19 vaccine certificates. Certificates meeting the Chief Epidemiologist of Iceland's guidelines given by an EFA/EFTA state will be considered valid at the border of the country. Travellers with the certificate need not undergo screening and are also exempted from official border restrictions.

The government of Denmark had also planned to roll out vaccine certification but thousands of people have taken to streets protesting against the digital vaccination certificates as they claim the passport implies the obligation to be inoculated.

Britain has rejected the introduction of vaccine passports but people can seek proof from doctors' to travel, news agency Reuters quoted vaccine deployment minister Nadhim Zahawi as saying.

Also Read | You may need vaccine passport for travel next year: All you need to know about it

Singapore firms have also developed digital vaccine passports to verify travellers' Covid-19 test results as the borders reopen. These digital health passports allows hospitals and clinics to share healthcare data across borders using the blockchain technology, as reported by Channel News Asia.

Hungary is planning to launch an 'immunity passport' that can act as evidence that the traveller had been earlier infected by the coronavirus and thus has antibodies against the disease, CNN reported.

Thailand has also proposed to launch vaccine passports to avoid quarantines for the travellers who have been vaccinated, as per media reports. Thailand will also campaign for adoption of same system for easier travel within bloc without the need to quarantine.

Israel has unveiled a Green Booklet that will allow people who have been inoculated against the virus to travel and access public spaces/large social gatherings. The passport is available on mobile application and can also be printed out. The booklet will be issued after the administration of both the doses of the vaccine.

Australia too is in support of vaccine passports as a way of avoiding mandatory quarantine for both domestic and international travel, as per a local media report.

Coronavirus vaccine passports might become the currency for travel in future.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy.

Union home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled.

The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the six-storey building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups of people.

Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors."

Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe.

In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and also cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com