India, May 8 -- China supports a World Health Organisation (WHO)-led review into the coronavirus pandemic after it is declared over, the foreign ministry said on Thursday.

The review should be conducted in an "open, transparent and inclusive manner" under the leadership of WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said at the regular ministry briefing on Friday.

Hua's comments come in the backdrop of increasing global pressure to allow an international probe into the origins of the pandemic and the novel coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

China has dismissed US allegations that the virus came from a laboratory.

More than 3.8 million have been sickened in the Covid-19 pandemic and over 268000 have died.

The epidemic situation in China has improved dramatically with the government having lowered risk levels for the country on Thursday; daily cases are in low single digits.

Hua said the enquiry should be carried out an "appropriate time after the pandemic is over".

It should also be based on the protocols of the International Health Regulations, and be authorised by the World Health Assembly or Executive Committee - the WHO's dual governing bodies.

Countries including the US and Australia have called for an international probe into the origins of the pathogen and others like the UK and Germany have urged greater transparency from China.

Until now, China has rejected similar calls for an investigation, accusing the US of "politicising the issue".

US secretary of state Mike Pompeo has claimed that the US has evidence that the virus originated from a high-security lab in Wuhan.

"We have asked him several times: where is the evidence? Take it out if you have it," spokesperson Hua said at Friday's briefing.

"We have stated the facts many times, but Pompeo still repeatedly smears and attacks China on the issue. We are forced to expose the US according to public information and media reports," Hua said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 5 -- China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus?

The lethal virus emanated from China, leading to a paralysing pandemic whose costs are immeasurable. Is it unreasonable for the world to want to know how and why it happened?

Investigating the genesis of the pandemic is critical for another reason - this is not the first deadly disease to spread globally from China. A Chinese cover-up of the 2002-2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) outbreak triggered the world's first 21st-century pandemic. Getting to the bottom of how the latest pathogen flared up and spread is essential for designing rapid-response efforts to prevent a future outbreak from spiralling into yet another pandemic.

Even the World Health Organization (WHO) agrees. This is the organisation whose repeated deference to Beijing since December helped China to cover its tracks. Several countries now want an inquiry to focus on the roles of both China and WHO. The WHO representative in China has said the "origins of the virus are very important" to prevent "reoccurrence". Yet Beijing has shut out even WHO from its national Covid-19 investigations.

United States (US) President Donald Trump has offered China an incentive for cooperation by contrasting a mistake with wilful action: "If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake. But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences." Beijing, however, has shied away from answering even basic questions.

For example, why did China stop flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak, yet allowed international flights to operate from Wuhan, thus facilitating the global spread of the virus? Why did it clamp down recently on further research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus? It instituted a new policy mandating prior vetting after several Chinese research papers highlighted dangerous work on bat coronaviruses, with one study concluding that "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan".

Authorities shut a Shanghai laboratory a day after its publication of the coronavirus genome opened the global path to diagnostic tests. China refused to share any live virus sample with the world, "making it impossible to track the disease's evolution," to quote US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. The dangerous lab research in Wuhan may explain why China, instead of sharing any coronavirus sample, destroyed its lab samples.

Just think - if China was not guilty of any cover-up, wouldn't it be welcoming the growing international calls for an independent inquiry and offering to assist in such a probe? This would give China a chance to clear the air with the rest of the world. Instead, Beijing seems to be showcasing its guilt by belligerently rejecting the pleas for such an inquiry and threatening economic reprisals.

Australia is Exhibit A. The country is more economically tied with China than with its security patron, the US. Yet Australia has come under a blistering attack from China for proposing that WHO member-nations support an independent inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus. Australia said it will push for such an investigation at the WHO assembly when it convenes for its annual meeting on May 17. In response, the Chinese ambassador to Australia threatened punishment through Chinese boycotts of Australian wine, beef and tourism and education sectors.

Meanwhile, as the Group of Seven (G7) countries, India and others seek a review and reform of WHO, China's decision to give an additional $30 million to the agency appears aimed at frustrating such calls. International rules require countries to notify WHO of "a public health emergency of international concern within 24 hours of assessment". China's failure to do so has led to calls for introducing WHO inspectors with the power to enter a country to probe a disease outbreak in the manner of weapons inspectors.

Make no mistake: Money alone can neither aid China's strategy to deflect blame for the current crisis nor help defuse the increasing global backlash against it. Calls are growing louder across the world to hold China publicly accountable for the pandemic's mounting human and economic toll. The only way China can silence such calls and begin to repair the serious damage to its image is through an independent international inquiry.

If it blocks such a probe, China will pay enormous costs - not as reparations but by compelling other major economies to restructure their relationships with it, a process that could ultimately end its status as the global hub of vital supply chains. China's mercantilist expansionism has already led to new regulations in the European Union, Australia, Germany, Spain and Italy. But India's recent new rule mandating prior scrutiny of Chinese investment in any form is the first of its kind. Another major recent move is by Japan, which has earmarked $2.2 billion to help Japanese firms shift manufacturing out of China.

If China refuses to come clean, important countries are likely to start economically distancing themselves from it, through new tariffs, non-tariff barriers, relocation of manufacturing and other policy moves. Eventually, this could undermine the communist party's monopoly on power in China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 28 -- PUNE Astronomy aims at finding the origin of the Universe," said Neeraj Gupta, who spoke on "Science with Square Kilometre Array", during the Science day celebrations held online by the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA).

"The Square kilometre Array is the world's largest radio telescope. It requires all the intelligence and resources from all countries across the globe. It will be built in two places in Australia and South Africa. All the radio astronomers are a part of this," said Gupta.

He further added that radio astronomy is the emission that comes from celestial objects like the sun, stars, and clouds, among other objects.

"Radio astronomy studies celestial objects at radio wavelength. The radiations that we study come to us due to different events. It is like we map one object through different ways to understand its origin, age and composition. Scientists have won the Nobel Prize by contributing on various interesting aspects of the subject," added Gupta.

In another session on the platform of Indian Institute of Science, Education and Research (IISER), Pune, Dr SG Srivatsan, associate dean of research and development at IISER Pune, spoke about "Making smart probes for the detection of Covid-19".

"If we develop diagnostics kits in India, the cost of testing kits will be much, much lower and its reach will also be more as compared to others. The Centre for cellular and molecular biology, Bengaluru, has recently launched a project of Indigenous diagnostics called Index. This project is funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, USA. IISER is also part of the project," said Srivatsan

He added that IISER is dealing with the chemistry aspect of the project.

"Index aims at the supply chain of Indian companies to make reagents and enzymes for diagnostic kits for Covid-19. We help companies maintain a high standard of diagnostic kit development so that problems can be avoided. Problems like false negatives and false positives can be completely avoided," said Srivatsan.

Along with this, the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), and National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR-NCL) also conducted their Science Day programs online.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 1 -- India on Thursday responded to a World Health Organization (WHO) report on the origins of the Coronavirus disease by calling for a "comprehensive and expert-led mechanism" to speedily investigate the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Without naming China, India noted that WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had raised the issue of "delays and difficulties in accessing raw data" for the report, and sought "more timely and comprehensive data sharing" for future investigations.

WHO and China released the long-awaited report on the origins of Covid-19 on Tuesday, listing four hypotheses in order of probability. The report said the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 most probably jumped from bats to humans via an intermediary animal. It also said it was "extremely unlikely" that the virus had been leaked from a laboratory.

"We share the need for a comprehensive and expert-led mechanism that would expeditiously investigate the origin of Covid-19 in cooperation with all stakeholders," external affairs ministry spokesperson Arindam Bagchi said.

"It is pertinent to note that the director-general of the WHO has separately raised the issue of delays and difficulties in accessing raw data for the team conducting the study. We fully support the director general's expectation that future collaborative studies will include more timely and comprehensive data sharing," he said.

India also welcomes the WHO chief's readiness to deploy additional missions, Bagchi said.

Ghebreyesus, who has for long been accused of being soft on China, has called for further investigation of the theory that Covid-19 began from a laboratory leak and also rebuked Beijing for sitting on crucial data. China has consistently rejected the hypothesis that the virus leaked from a lab.

"Although the team has concluded that a laboratory leak is the least likely hypothesis, this requires further investigation, potentially with additional missions involving specialist experts, which I am ready to deploy," the director-general told WHO's 194 member states during a briefing on the report.

"I do not believe that this assessment was extensive enough...Further data and studies will be needed to reach more robust conclusions," he added.

The US and 13 other countries have raised concerns about the report in a joint statement, saying the WHO team was "significantly delayed and lacked access to complete, original data and samples". These countries have also backed an "independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence" of the origins of the pandemic.

Bagchi said the WHO report is an "important first step" in establishing the origins of the pandemic as it has stressed the "need for next-phase studies across the region". He said, "The report also stresses the need for further data and studies to reach robust conclusions."

He added, "We join other stakeholders in voicing their expectations that follow up to the WHO report or further studies, including on an understanding of the earliest human cases and clusters by the WHO on this critical issue, will receive the fullest cooperation of all concerned."

India will continue to work with WHO to strengthen capacity and improve global health security so that the current report and further studies will provide inputs for developing protocols and building a knowledge base and expertise that facilitate genomic surveillance to track virus mutations and proactively respond to the next global pandemic, Bagchi said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 19 -- A new study by US scientists has sought to dispel speculation that the novel coronavirus had been created in a laboratory and leaked from a bio-warfare facility, triggering the pandemic the world is struggling to contain, concluding instead that Covid-19 indeed had natural origins.

Based on publicly available genome sequence data of the virus released earlier by Chinese scientists, researchers at the Department of Immunology and Microbiology at the Scripps Research Institute found that the virus could not be a "laboratory construct" or "purposefully manipulated."

The study, published in Nature Medicine journal on March 17, proposed two natural scenarios through which the virus, also known as SARS-CoV-2, may have originated. It flies against unconfirmed reports, blogs and discussions on Twitter and other social media that the virus was a bio-weapon. The novel coronavirus has left at least 7,529 people dead.

Scientists analysed the spike protein - the sharp point on the outside of the virus that it uses to penetrate the outer walls of human and animal cells. They found that the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein (a hook like structure that grips host cells) had evolved to effectively target the ACE2 receptors, responsible for regulating blood pressure in humans.

The SARS -CoV-2 spike protein was so effective at binding the human cells, in fact, that the scientists concluded it was the result of natural selection and not the product of genetic engineering, according to ScienceDaily, a website on science and research news. Scientists also found that the molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2 was similar to those of bats and pangolins.

"By comparing the available genome sequence data for known coronavirus strains, we can firmly determine that SARS-CoV-2 originated through natural processes," said Kristian Andersen, associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research and corresponding author on the paper in ScienceDaily.

The two scenarios suggested by the authors of the study are that the virus may have evolved through natural selection of an intermediate host animal and then transferred to humans from that animal. There are no documented cases of direct bat-human transmission. The other scenario suggested a non-pathogenic (an organism that does not cause disease) version jumped from an animal host on to humans and then gradually transformed into a pathogenic state within humans.

Co-author Andrew Rambaut of the University of Edinburgh said it was difficult to ascertain at this point which of the scenarios was most likely.

"Even before this study within the scientific community it was clear that the virus was not designed on purpose. This is simply because the genetic sequence and molecular structure of Coronaviruses in earlier outbreaks like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) was very different," said Shashank Tripathi, assistant professor and Wellcome Trust India Alliance intermediate fellow, Microbiology & Cell Biology Department, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

Tripathi, commenting on the issue in his individual capacity, added: "The structure of SARS-CoV-2 is too far apart from those and that it was not designed or replicated. The closest match of the virus structure is in fact those found in horseshoe bats and pangolins."

"Having said that we need to know what kind of research was going on in the Wuhan Institute of Virology with respect to Coronaviruses. China needs to be forthcoming on that," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion curated for you. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

India begins controlled trials of plasma therapy

Trials using the antibody-rich blood of patients cured of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) have begun, with doctors turning to a pool of 1,600 people in India who have recovered from the infection to test their antibodies as a potential cure for those fighting the disease. Read more

Bengal BJP MP booked under Disaster Management Act, another alleges 'house arrest'

The police in Bankura district of West Bengal has booked Bankura's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Subhas Sarkar under different sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Disaster Management Act (DMA), 2005, for allegedly spreading false alarms. Read more

Odisha tops forest fire incidents in the country for a week

With daytime temperatures breaching over 40 degrees Celsius in around a dozen places in the state since last week, Odisha has topped the list of states in the country concerning forest fires in the last one week. Read more

After WHO row, US is probing China lab link

US President Donald Trump's administration is urging an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic, saying that the US doesn't rule out that it came from a laboratory researching bats in Wuhan. Read more

'Hope cricket resumes as soon as possible'

The Covid-19 pandemic has made us face a difficult time. Especially as an athlete, because we are used to a busy life-we're always training, travelling and playing matches. Read more

Sussanne Khan's sister Farah Khan Ali tests negative for Covid-19 after staff member tested positive

Jewellery designer Farah Khan Ali has tested negative for the coronavirus. She got the tests done after an in-house staff member had tested positive for the virus earlier this week. Read more

Google, SpaceX to NASA: Top companies, government agencies that banned Zoom

As quickly as Zoom's popularity rose, so did its security woes. Ever since Zoom's skeleton of privacy and security issues were out, the company has been trying to fix its mistakes. Read more

Online dating's new lockdown norms: Are the rules changing?

The first date is so exciting: hair smoothed down, skin glowing, big smiles as both sides see each other and settle down. before the laptop. Sadly, that's what it's come to, in lockdown. Video rendezvous, virtual romances, and endless social distancing. Read more

Watch| Coronavirus: 106-year-old beats disease, cheered by hospital staff in UK

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 26 -- China on Monday said the issue of supplying Covid-19 vaccines to countries that need the jabs should not be marred by "malign competition" or "rivalry" but its tightly controlled state media is simultaneously running a smear campaign against both Indian and western vaccines.

Not only are Chinese official media outlets questioning the efficacy of western vaccines and safety records, but the Chinese foreign ministry is also - like its diplomats did last year - plugging conspiracy theories about the origin of the coronavirus.

A statement from foreign ministry spokesperson to state media recently implied the coronavirus could have emerged from a laboratory at the Fort Detrick Army Medical Command in the US state of Maryland.

"If America respects the truth, then please open up Fort Detrick and make public more information about the 200 or more bio-labs outside of the US, and please allow the WHO expert group to go to the US to investigate the origins," foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying told The Global Times.

Hua's statement comes in the backdrop of a World Health Organization (WHO) team currently stationed in China to investigate the origins of the coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019.

The article and Hua's statement were well-timed. The hashtag "American's Ft. Detrick", started by the Communist Youth League, had been viewed more than a billion times on China's Twitter-like Weibo platform.

The WHO team's presence in China is particularly sensitive for China as it continues attempts to deflect criticism about the authorities' slow response to the Covid-19 outbreak at the beginning.

A flurry of articles in Chinese state media in the past weeks have also promoted Chinese vaccines while criticising western and Indian ones.

India's efforts to make and supply vaccines to neighbouring countries have not been spared by Chinese media.

The Global Times has published stories critical of the vaccines made in India and whether India has the capacity to supply the shots globally.

A recent article in the nationalist tabloid not only raised questions about India's capacity to manufacture vaccines after the fire at the Serum Institute, but also claimed that Indians in China were "embracing" Chinese vaccines.

Last week, Reuters news agency calculated that Global Times, the official newspaper of China's ruling Communist Party, "had published more than ten reports in the past week critical of vaccines and inoculation schemes in the West".

About half of those reports referred to reported deaths of some frail, elderly patients in Norway after being inoculated with the Covid-19 vaccine developed by Pfizer and BioNTech, the Reuters report said.

The Global Times ran a report quoting Chinese experts as saying Australia should not use western vaccines and opt for Chinese ones.

The state-run China Daily newspaper on Monday ran a report extolling China's vaccines and the country's efforts to supply doses to developing countries.

"While western countries invest enormous capital in developing vaccines to fight the increasing number of confirmed Covid-19 cases, China is fulfilling its promise to make vaccines a global public good," the article said.

There have been questions about the lack of clinical data related to Chinese vaccines.

Business and political news website, Caixin, quoted a leading Chinese vaccine expert as saying that China's needs to share more data on the vaccines -- a rare instance of a Chinese media outlet taking a critical look at the developing story on vaccines.

"Ding Sheng, dean of Tsinghua University's School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and director of the Global Health Drug Discovery Institute (GHDDI), called for the original clinical trial data from Chinese experimental vaccines to be made public so that experts can better assess their efficacy and eliminate lingering safety concerns which have emerged in China and abroad," the website reported.

"The clinical data (of our vaccines) need to be further disclosed," Ding said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 1 -- Identifying Brexit and the Covid-19 pandemic as two issues that defined his tenure as president of the Royal Society, Nobel laureate Venki Ramakrishnan, who left the role after five years on Monday, said the UK was "poorly prepared" to deal with the coronavirus pandemic.

Ramakrishnan, who won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2009, was the first Indian-origin scientist elected president of the society in 2015. The society is a fellowship of many of the world's most eminent scientists and is the oldest scientific academy in continuous existence. The new president is statistician Adrian Smith.

Delivering the anniversary day address 2020, Ramakrishnan, 68, dwelt on various issues, focusing on the impact of Brexit on science and the ways in which the UK government dealt with the pandemic.

He said, "It is not surprising that in this rapidly evolving situation, there were missteps and mistakes. Despite a pandemic being the No. 1 item on the national risk register, we were poorly prepared. We did not take the virus seriously enough, early enough."

"It does not strike me as a coincidence that in January and perhaps even part of February, we were distracted by Brexit and our main focus was on plans for a post-EU Britain. We did not have the PPE needed; we were slow to go into lockdown; we spread infection from our hospitals to our care homes; we did not have the procedures in place to stem infections in hospitals; our understanding of who was being impacted the most was hindered by a failure to gather and understand data - that left some groups more exposed; we had insufficient testing capacity; and we likely went into a second lockdown too late as well, despite scientific advice to the contrary," he added.

Ramakrishnan, who will return to his research role in the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, is a member of the UK government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies that is key to decisions on dealing with the pandemic. He also led groups in Royal Society on issues related to Covid-19.

On the impact of Brexit on the UK's position in science, he said it was vital that London retains highly-skilled scientists working and ensures that talented people from around the world still choose to come and contribute to the country's globally competitive science. The establishment of the global talent visa has been a significant step, he added.

Recalling that he thought of himself as an "unlikely choice" when he was elected president of the society in 2015, he noted the turn of history that eventually led to an Indian-origin scientist leading it.

"When I was approached, I must confess I thought of myself as an unlikely choice and made that clear. Ironically, the first fellows to come into contact with India were colonisers like Robert Clive and Warren Hastings, or colonial administrators like Thomas Macaulay and Richard Temple. They certainly did not regard Indians as their equals in any way, and would frankly have been astonished that one day, someone born in India would go on to become a fellow, let alone a president of the Society.

"I came to Britain relatively late in life, and spent much of the time since in the confines of the LMB in Cambridge working on ribosomes. I had neither the large networks of someone who grew up here, nor indeed any familiarity with the British establishment."

"So it was particularly broad-minded and generous, and perhaps a bit foolish of you to have entrusted me with this position. I was very touched that you did so, and in turn, I have given it my best in what has been an exceptionally challenging and turbulent five years. Perhaps being a somewhat naive outsider who tried to see both sides of issues may actually have helped make the case to people of divergent political persuasions," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 22 -- The government allowed private laboratories to test for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Saturday as the number of patients soared by 79, its sharpest daily spike yet, to cross 300 and triggered concerns that the disease was entering a deadly third phase of the outbreak.

The Union ministry of health and welfare order opening up testing for Covid-19 to private laboratories - until now, only government facilities were permitted - came after days of appeal by experts to widen testing in order to accurately understand the extent of the outbreak.

The order, signed by health secretary Preeti Sudan, didn't expand the conditions for testing. Only those in contact with a previously confirmed patient, health workers showing symptoms of Covid-19 and patients hospitalised with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness can be tested.

The maximum cost of the test cannot exceed ~4,500 - this includes ~1,500 for a screening test and ~3,000 for a confirmation test. "The ICMR encourages free or subsidized testing in this hour of national public health emergency," the order read.

The facilities need at least biosafety level-2 certification, and are required to share real-time testing data with the government. The facilities will need to collect a government identity card to confirm the current address and phone number of a patient at the time of sample collection.

"Preferably home collection of samples may be done...this will help avoid the contact of people with the suspect case during local travel to the laboratory," the order read.

Testing can be done only after a prescription signed by a qualified physician who has followed criteria laid down by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's top medical research body.

Only laboratories certified by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration are eligible.

"The government has been working on engaging private players in its mission to fight the coronavirus disease outbreak since the beginning. It is one of the preparedness strategies to involve private players in cases numbers rise significantly that would need pooling of all available resources be it testing, isolation, management, etc," said a senior Union health ministry official, requesting anonymity.

The official refused to specify when private laboratories will start testing but added that it was up to the facilities. "The ICMR will start approving the laboratories as soon as the labs approach, assuring all the requirements have been fulfilled," the official added.

The health ministry order said all positive cases of Covid-19 will need to be transported to the National Institute of Virology in Pune, and all negative samples destroyed in a week. "Failure to comply with any of the above guidelines will result in legal action," the order read.

The order came on a day the number of Covid-19 cases in India spiked by the highest quantum since the first case was reported. Over the past 48 hours, the number of cases have jumped by 142, sparking fears of an exponential jump in cases next week.

Also on Saturday, a 41-year-old woman in Pune tested positive for Covid-19, becoming the second patient in India with no history of foreign travel or documented contact with previous cases and fuelling fears that the country had slipped into the deadly third phase of the infection when the contagion spreads rapidly.

At this stage of the outbreak, known as the community transmission phase, the origin of any individual patient's infection cannot be pinpointed to travel to a global hotspot of the disease, or documented contact with a previously infected person. This means that the virus is freely circulating in the community, making it tough for authorities to control its spread or enforce containment measures.

In countries worst-hit by the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19, such as China, Italy, Iran or South Korea, the number of infections and fatalities rose sharply once the country moved into the community transmission phase.

There are four stages of an outbreak. Stage I is when cases are imported by travellers from other countries, Stage II is when these travellers then pass on the infection locally to people living or working around them, Stage III is when community transmission happens and the health care workers are unable to trace the source of infections, and the last Stage IV is when the disease is widespread in a population.

India is currently in the Stage II of the outbreak, according to the health ministry. Four people have died of the disease in the country.

The case of the Pune woman, confirmed by the National Institute of Virology in Pune, came a day after the government admitted that it had yet not traced the origin of the infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who had tested positive in Chennai earlier this week.

The authorities are yet to find out how the Pune woman got the infection. "We are still investigating the case. She must have come in contact with someone who had foreign travel history," Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram said.

Late evening, authorities in West Bengal reported that a 57-year-old man, who had not travelled abroad and had no documented contact with a previous patient, had tested positive for Covid-19 - indicating that more cases of people with no obvious origin of infection were showing up across the country. The case was confirmed by two state government laboratories but not by the NIV, the national nodal authority, at the time of going to print.

On Friday, India expanded its testing protocol for Covid-19 patients. The revised strategy, after the third meeting of ICMR constituted task force on testing on Friday, also included asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case who should be tested between day 5 and day 14 of coming in contact with a laboratory positive case. "Direct and high-risk contact include those who live in the same household with a confirmed case and healthcare workers who examined a confirmed case without adequate protection as per WHO recommendation," the circular read.

The health ministry order came on a day the Empowered Committee for Covid-19 response met for the first time.

The meeting was co-chaired by Dr. Vinod Paul, Member NITI-Aayog and K. Vijay Raghavan, principal scientific advisor to the government .

The Committee was constituted to co-ordinate, amongst science agencies, scientists and regulatory bodies, and take speedy decisions on R&D to implementation related to the SARS-Cov-2 virus and the COVID-19 disease was held on March 21, 2020.

According to an official release, Indian research institutions and organizations are directed for speedy implementation of solutions related to COVID-19.

"National research labs (defined as labs of DBT/DST/CSIR/DRDO/DAE for this directive) are permitted to carry out clinical testing for COVID19 based on self-assessment and willingness to follow established protocols and all applicable reporting regulations as defined by the DHR/ICMR," it said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 14 -- Chinese virologist Dr Li-Meng Yan has claimed that the novel coronavirus was made in a government controlled laboratory in Wuhan and asserted that she has scientific proof to back the claim.

The virologist, who became the whistleblower against the Chinese government over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, was in December last year tasked with looking into a cluster of Sars-like cases coming out of mainland China. The top scientist working in Hong Kong claimed that she discovered a cover-up operation during her investigation and said that the Chinese government knew about the spread of the virus before publicly acknowledging it.

Dr Li-Meng, who specialised in virology and immunology at the Hong Kong School of Public Health, was allegedly forced to flee to the United States over safety concerns.

On September 11, she participated in an interview on British talk show "Loose Women" from a secret location and talked about her research on the coronavirus disease and the challenges she has been facing.

Dr Li-Meng said that she conducted two researches on the "new pneumonia" in China between December and early January and the second one in mid-January, and shared the results with her supervisor, who is a World Health Organisation (WHO) consultant. She expected her supervisor to do the "right thing on behalf of the Chinese government and WHO" but to her surprise she was told to "maintain silence or else she would be made to disappear", which the virologist said was common sense among the Chinese.

"No one responded, people are scared of the government and they are waiting to collaborate with the government and WHO to get more benefits to become safe but this is [was] something urgent," Dr Li-Meng said.

At the time of the Chinese New Year, big transportations take place from China to all over the world. So, she decided against keeping silent as "this is a high [highly] contentious dangerous virus. I mean, this is about human beings and global health."

Dr Li-Meng said that it was scary as she was facing threats but "I knew if I didn't tell the world the truth I would be regretful."

On January 17, she said she contacted a famous Chinese YouTuber in the US. The expose, which was in Chinese, explained that: (1) the Chinese government was just covering the Covid-19 virus, (2) human to human transmission of the disease already existed, (3) Sars-CoV-2 is a "high mutant virus" that will become an outbreak soon, and (4) the Wuhan seafood market and the intermediate hosts for the virus were just a "smokescreen."

And the final thing, the scientist said was that "this virus is not from nature. This is based on the China Military Institute that discovered and owned some bad (maybe it's bat, unable to hear properly) coronavirus named CC45 and ZXC41. Based on that, after lab modification becomes a novel virus."

Dr Li-Meng dismissed reports suggesting the virus originated in wet markets, claiming her intelligence is "from the CDCs in China, from local doctors, doctors and other people around China."

The virologist said she is working on a scientific report since January i.e. before leaving Hong Kong along with a small group of top scientists and will soon publish the findings. "We are going to publish it. There are two reports, the first one will come in several days and it will tell people about the scientific evidence," she said.

Throwing light on the unpublished research, she said, "The genome sequence is like our human fingerprint. So, based on this you can recognise and identify this thing. So, I used the evidence existing in the genome sequence of Sars-CoV-2 to tell people why this came from China, why they are the only one who made it."

She also said that anyone, even those without any knowledge of biology, can read it. "You can check, identify and verify it by yourself. It is the critical thing for us to know the origins of the virus. If not, it will be life threatening for everyone," she added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 17 -- The United States will airlift 200 mobile ventilators to help Indians combat Covid-19, people familiar with the developments said on Saturday, hours after US president Donald Trump made the announcement on Twitter.

Trump also said the two countries were cooperating to develop a vaccine for the disease that has claimed more than 310,000 lives globally and infected 4.6 million people.

"We stand with India and @narendramodi during this pandemic. We're also cooperating on vaccine development. Together we will beat the invisible enemy!" Trump tweeted.

Trump reiterated the point at his press conference later, referring to his India visit in February, the role played by Indian expatriates in the US and describing Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a "good friend of mine".

"We are working closely with India," he told reporters.

Modi thanked him in a tweet and highlighted the India-US relationship. "In such times, it's always important for nations to work together and do as much as possible to make our world healthier and free from Covid-19," he said.

Trump did not mention details of the ventilators but a senior Indian government official said the consignment may "arrive by the end of this month or latest, early June".

Each of these mobile ventilators is estimated to cost $ 13,000 (Rs 9.6 lakh at current exchange rates) without accounting for the transportation costs. In all, the ventilators will cost about $ 2.6 million (or Rs 192 million) plus freight charges.

The US move comes weeks after Modi acted on Trump's request to reverse a ban on the export of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug that was championed by the US President as a "game changer" in the fight against Covid-19.

Trump has often said the United States is the "king" of ventilators - a respiratory aid needed for severely ill hospitalized Covid-19 patients - as a result of an extraordinary push from his administration in response to early fears of an impending shortage. He has since said the United States has more ventilators than its needs and it will be willing to share them with allies and partners.

In a separate tweet hours later, the president's National Security Council followed up with a full-bore acknowledgement of the vaccine projects. "The US and India are working together to fight #COVID19 and find a vaccine," it said, adding, "the US-India Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership has never been stronger." There was no mention of the ventilators.

Three vaccine candidates are in various stages of development in separate bilateral projects involving two of India's leading pharmaceutical companies with robust portfolios of vaccines. Their US counterparts are research units of two universities and the third is a biotechnology company.

Diplomats in Washington and New Delhi said Trump's offer to send the ventilators and his public statements were an indicator of the deepening ties between the two countries and close contact between the two countries at different levels.

It also comes against the backdrop of growing congruence of views between the two countries on accountability and transparency on the origin of the coronavirus, reforms in the World Health Organisation (WHO) and even strategic issues such as terrorism and the situation in the Indo Pacific.

For weeks, Trump has criticised the WHO for allegedly allowing itself to be led by China's assessment of the virus when the disease was detected in central China's Wuhan city last year. There have also been allegations from Washington that the Sars-CoV-2 virus may not be natural and may have been created in a laboratory.

That the two sides are on the same page on China and WHO also came across at a seven-nation video conference initiated by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. There was broad agreement on the need to stress on transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease. The emphasis on transparency and accountability at this meeting attended by Foreign Minister S Jaishankar is seen to be aimed at China and the WHO that is due to hold its annual meet on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, July 19 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculationamongofficialsofthe Trump administration that the Covid-19 outbreak might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan.

Officials of the US embassy in China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the Wuhan facility, had raised concerns in the state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained techniciansandinvestigatorsneededto safelyoperatethis high-containment laboratory".

Though the lab in Wuhan couldstudySARS-likecoronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strainsthatcouldinfecthumans, officialswroteinthecable,whose release was secured by The Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

The cable, however, did not prove if the new coronavirus indeed came from the Wuhan facility."Idon'tseeanyevidence to support the idea that this was releaseddeliberatelyorinadvertently," IanLipkin,thedirectorof ColumbiaUniversity'sCenterfor InfectionandImmunity,toldThe Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable. "You can't just say someoneisguiltyofaccidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it." In recent days, the Trump administrationhasn'tpushedthe Wuhan lab origin theory much, but it has continued to blame Chinaforthepandemic.BothUS PresidentDonaldTrumpandsecretaryofstateMikePompeohave called the pathogen "Chinese virus" and "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new casesreportedinthelast24hours and 843 new deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit. ICUs are runningtofullcapacityinsomeof the worst affected counties, and, inarepeatofthegrimsituationin NewYorksomeweeksago,refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Americans debated mask mandates and the reopening of schoolsasthecountry'stopinfectious disease expert Anthony Fauci and Trump yet again sparred,thistimeovertheneedto use masks.

While Fauci urged political leadersto"beasforcefulaspossible in getting your citizenry to wear masks", Trump said he didn'tbelieveinissuinganationwide mask mandate.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 15 -- New Delhi

Two dogs who were reported to have contracted the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) recently likely got the infection from their owners, according to a new research paper that analysed cases in animals in Hong Kong.

"An analysis of viral genetic sequences from the dogs showed them to be identical to those in the infected people," an article on the findings in Nature said.

While the paper didn't study if animal-to-animal transmission could occur, the authors recommended that for precaution, pets belonging to Covid-19 patients be isolated and tested, as is already being done in Hong Kong.

The paper, published in Nature journal on Thursday, found that two of 15 dogs from households with confirmed human cases of Covid-19 in Hong Kong were found to be infected. These two were a 17-year-old neutered Pomeranian and a 2.5-year-old German Shepherd. They were tested using Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) kits and the virus was later isolated and sequenced.

Canine ACE-2 (an enzyme the Sars-CoV-2 virus uses to enter the body) is similar to the enzyme found in humans. Of 18 amino acids that are known to be involved in interaction between ACE-2 and the spike receptor binding domain of Sars-CoV-2 (which Sars-CoV-2 uses to bind to its host's cells), there are five that differ between humans and dogs, the study led by Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department of Hong Kong said.

"The evidence suggests that human-to-animal transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur. We do not have information on whether this virus can cause illness in dogs but no specific signs were seen in either of the infected dogs during the time they were shedding virus," the paper said. The Pomeranian died two days after release from isolation but very likely due to other underlying diseases. The German Shepherd was kept with a second cross-breed dog but the second dog didn't get infected.

"The limited implications of these findings are that there is now increasing evidence for human to animal transmission, especially to pet animals that are in close contact with infected humans. There is as yet no evidence for any subsequent animal to animal transmission," said Abi Tamim Vanak, Fellow, DBT India Alliance Program and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE).

"However, given that high viral loads were found in nasal swabs of infected animals, as well as in rectal swabs, there is a possibility of onward transmission to other animals, especially if an infected pet is free-ranging and regularly comes in to contact with other animals or humans. Again, this is only speculative, and it would require experimental challenge studies to determine if animal to animal transmission is a viable route of spread for this virus. If such evidence is found, then it will make the control of this disease much harder, because many regions of the world have fairly large populations of free-ranging domestic animals (e.g. India has ~60 million dogs), which do not receive even the most basic healthcare, such as anti-rabies vaccinations," he added.

The findings also have implications for future zoonotic transmission events. Dogs, other canids and felids can be sold in or found near wild-game animal markets like in Wuhan from where Sars-CoV-2 is understood to have transmitted to humans. These domestic animals should also be tested during investigations into the origin of the virus to determine if they play any role in spillover events, the authors concluded.

Earlier, a study by Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and National High Containment Laboratory for Animal Diseases Control and Prevention in China had suggested that cats are highly susceptible to contracting Sars-CoV-2 but dogs, ducks, chickens and pigs were not as susceptible. The study was based on lab experiments and not real-life cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Kishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu.

Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials? For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world. There is no second and third in the world on influenza, if you ask me. Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast. It will take at least three months to do animal trials to establish the safety properly. Then Phase 1 is only a one dose vaccine with 30 days' trial. Phase 2 we don't have to do because the same platform (nasal route) has already established the concentration required already in humans - so it can be minimised. Then for Phase 3, we need to have 1,000 people, and that is going to be another 45 days of trial in India. Human trial is going to be very short; the worry is only the animal trials as we want to establish the safety and efficacy, which is extremely critical.

Why a nasal vaccine?We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead, but if there is an animal problem then we may not even pursue the product further because the safety of people is most important.

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying, what is the capacity, when is the launch, what is the price etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups in India; what do we need for all these biological scientific companies to sustain themselves; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up.

We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country first or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do in vaccines? It is very tough. So what we did in this case is that we funded the animal trials at the University of Wisconsin. We need to build small islets of infrastructure in this country, which is what China did. They created infrastructure first, here we create institutes first.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- As the total number of Covid-19 cases in India rose to 151 (134 active) on Wednesday, experts once again called for more widespread testing, rumours swirled on WhatsApp, more events were called off and more public places closed, and a research paper published in Nature Medicine (on March 17), debunked the theory that the Sars-Cov-2 virus that causes the disease was man-made. Globally, the number of cases crossed 200,000 on Wednesday, at least doubling in two weeks.

The big question in India is whether community transmission has already happened. This refers to the infection of a person who has not travelled to a country where the infection is raging and has not had contact with an infected person, directly or indirectly. Some experts believe this has already happened in India. As Ramanan Laxminarayan, Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy, said: "I believe community transmission began in India two to three weeks ago, around the same time as other countries. India is not an exception in the way the virus behaves. We just haven't tested a representative sample that India's population of 1.4 billion warrants". This means, it is only the lack of widespread testing in India that is keeping the numbers low. It also means the focus has to shift from prevention to mitigation.

There's already been some talk of expanding the country's testing capacity, by involving more government and private laboratories, although there has been no formal announcement on this. At some point (and sooner than later), the government has to get its hands around the whole testing problem and figure out a way of testing in scale, rapidly and inexpensively. In an interview on Tuesday, Gagandeep Kang, director of the Translational Health Science and Technology Institute and a Fellow of the Royal Society said opening up testing to Indian companies, "good at reducing cost" will help develop inexpensive tests. As of Wednesday, there are 72 government laboratories testing. Another 49 are to be added to this by the end of the week, and the government has spoken to 51 private ones about having them conduct tests. The testing protocol, however, remains the same - overseas travel to a Covid-positive country; exposure to someone diagnosed with the disease; or being a health care worker caring for Covid-19 patients. All accompanied by symptoms.

Social distancing, self-quarantines, and forced quarantines should continue, though, and be more strictly enforced. On Wednesday, there were again reports of several instances of people breaking quarantines.

India has so far not put out best-case and worst-case scenarios in terms of infections and fatalities. The mathematical models to do this exist, as does the expertise, but the number of people who have been tested is still low (11,500 as of March 17) for any of these models to be run.

Already, however, it is clear that Covid-19 is also affecting India's economy, and the livelihoods of millions. According to the latest data available, around 93 million Indians are engaged so-called casual labour, and paid every day. Of this, only 3% are engaged in public works. Already, governments around the world have announced hundreds of billions of dollars in fiscal stimuli to keep the economy afloat. US President Donald Trump is talking of cheques in the mail. The Indian government knows the benefit of direct cash transfers. The emerging consensus is that it should announce a plan for the economy.

There should also be a plan to combat rumours. On Wednesday, rumours about parts of Delhi being locked down, and wholesale markets being closed, swirled on India's most popular messaging platform WhatsApp. The platform, owned by Facebook Inc., announced a $1 million grant to Poynter to come up with a global fact-checking network to combat rumours on coronavirus.

One such rumour, which grew into a conspiracy theory, was that the virus was man-made, created in a Chinese laboratory as a possible biological weapon. A paper by Kristian Andersen of the Scripps Research Institute (he is the corresponding author; there are several co-authors as well), titled "The proximal origin of Sars-Cov-2" and published on Tuesday in Nature Medicine debunked that to some extent. The researchers compared the genome sequence of this virus with other strains of coronavirus and found that it "originated through natural processes".

But the mitigation of its impact on the nation's health and economy will definitely require manual intervention.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- President Donald Trump on Thursday said the United States has intelligence that establishes a virology lab in Wuhan is the source of the pandemic and indicated new tariffs as his administration considers a range of punitive measures such as partly cancelling public debt and allowing victims to sue China.

"Yes I have," Trump told reporters when asked if he has seen intelligence that traces the epidemic's origin to the Wuhan lab with a high degree of confidence. He did not share any evidence and when asked how he felt confident it was the Wuhan lab, he demurred, saying, "I am not allowed to tell you that."

Earlier Thursday, office of the Director of National Intelligence, which heads the US intelligence community, said in the statement that though it concurs with the wider scientific community that the coronavirus was "not manmade or genetically modified", it was still examining "whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The source of the epidemic remains disputed. China has denied it started at the Wuhan lab and has blamed a local seafood market instead.

The United Sates has been investigating the origin of the epidemic in China, and the Wuhan lab has clearly not been ruled out, and the true magnitude of the crisis in China, which is widely suspected of suppressing the real numbers.

Questions are being raised about China's handling of the epidemic and calls for an impartial investigation into it have been growing worldwide, most recently by Australia.

The US intelligence community is conducting its own investigation as the office of the DNI stated Thursday. But it was not clear yet if the administration expected to revea more on the findings and how soon.

The president has turned up the rhetoric on China in recent days as his won administration's handling of the crisis has come under increasing criticism for not responding aggressively. He recently indicated he was not averse to making China pay for losses incurred by the United States.

When asked on Thursday about reports that he could cancel US debt obligations to China, Trump said he could "do it differently" and act in "probably a little bit more of a forthright manner".

"I could do the same thing but even for more money, just putting on tariffs," he said.

The new tariffs, if he does impose them, will be in addition to the 25% duty still in force on $370 billion worth of imports from China left over from the trade war between the two countries that ended in January with the signing of a limited Phase One deal.

The Washington Post reported Thursday that punitive measures under discussion partly cancelling public debt owed to China, which is the second largest holder of US public debt with around $1 trillion, and stripping China of sovereign immunity and allow American victims of the epidemic to sure China for damages.

Officials from across US federal government were expected to meet Thursday to map the course of action but the president is reported to be tilting towards punishing China, away from a more moderate response being advocated by his economic advisers. But he appears to have not made up his mind yet.

Republican lawmakers have also been been calling for punishing China. Senator Josh Hawley has moved a legislation to hold China "accountable" by designing a mechanism to make China pay compensation to all nations impacted by the epidemic and not just the united States.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 16 -- The United States will airlift 200 mobile ventilators, each estimated to cost about Rs 1 million, to help Indians combat Covid-19, people familiar with the developments told Hindustan Times.

"It has been indicated that the consignment will arrive by the end of this month or latest, early June," a government official said. Each of these mobile ventilators is estimated to cost $ 13,000 (Rs 9.6 lakh at current exchange rates) without accounting for the transportation costs. In all, the ventilators will cost about $ 2.6 million (or Rs 192 million) plus freight charges.

US President Donald Trump had announced the decision to send the ventilators on Twitter to underline close relations between the two countries. The gesture coincides with reports of India's 85,700 coronavirus cases surpassing the tally of China (82,933), the country where the outbreak began.

"We stand with India and @narendramodi during this pandemic. We're also cooperating on vaccine development. Together we will beat the invisible enemy!" President Trump said.

Trump reiterated the point at his Press conference moments later, referring to his India visit in February, the role played by Indian expatriates in the US and describing Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a "good friend of mine".

"We are working closely with India," he told reporters.

Trump also said the US and India were cooperating to develop a vaccine for coronavirus that has claimed over 307,000 lives and infected more than 4.5 million people globally since it emerged in China in December last year.

The US move comes weeks after Prime Minister Modi acted on Trump's request to reverse a ban on export of hydroxychloroquine, a malaria drug that was championed by the US President as a "game changer" in the fight against the coronavirus. Hydroxychloroquine, or HCQ, is being used in India as a prophylaxis for health workers at the frontline of the country's response to the epidemic.

Diplomats in Washington and New Delhi said Trump's offer to send the ventilators and his public statements were an indicator of the deepening ties between the two countries and close contact between the two countries at different levels.

It also comes against the backdrop of growing congruence of views between the two countries on accountability and transparency on the origin of the coronavirus, reforms in the World Health Organisation led by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and even strategic issues such as terrorism and the situatio in the Indo Pacific.

For weeks, Trump has roasted the WHO for allowing itself to be led by China's assessment of the virus when the disease was detected in central China's Wuhan city last year. There have also been accusations from Washington that the Sars-CoV-2 virus may not be natural and may have been created in a laboratory, a possibility that was echoed this week by PM Modi's cabinet colleague Nitin Gadkari in a media interview.

That the two sides are on the same page on China and WHO also came across at a seven-nation video conference initiated by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. There was broad agreement on the need to stress on transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has killed over 3 lakh people worldwide. The emphasis on transparency and accountability at this meeting attended by Foreign Minister S Jaishankar is seen to be aimed at China and the WHO that is due to hold its annual meet on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 1 -- For 10 months last year, at least five days a week, very rarely more, even more rarely less, I wrote a column on the coronavirus disease, Covid-19. It was mostly focused on science and data - the two things that I have maintained are needed to fight Covid-19 - although there were digressions into economics, the nature of work and play, literature, and music.

I stopped writing the column on January 1. It was the day India announced the launch of the vaccine - and it was, I believed (and still do), the beginning of the end. Sure, Covid-19 will be around for a long time; it may never be eradicated; but the vaccines render it powerless.

There's been a lot to write about since then, and there are times I have considered restarting the column. The mutant strains of the Sars-CoV-2 virus have really come into their own in recent months, and we learn about them with every passing day. India has made several avoidable missteps in its vaccination drive, just like it did with its testing protocols in the initial days of the pandemic. And the number of cases in the country appears to be on the rise, although it is still around a sixth of the peaks seen last year, and the fact that I have repeatedly got it wrong about a second wave (something I am delighted about because who would wish for one?) stops me from terming it as such.

There has been no let-up in the volume of scientific papers being published on the virus, its effects, and vaccines and other treatments, and I continue to read a lot more scientific literature than I did before the outbreak of the disease - December in China, and early March in India - when the first local cases were registered.

We knew little about coronaviruses (although they weren't unknown) before the pandemic. We would have known a lot less if not for Sars, which emerged in 2002-03, flared up, and then died out. Over the past year we have learnt more about the virus itself, details that point to a level of sophistication unseen in other viruses, and aimed at increasing its power to infect cells. This has resulted in a plausible theory about its bio-engineered origins in a laboratory somewhere in China, but it's just as plausible that the virus jumped from bats to humans through an intermediate species, picking up some weaponry along the way. Sars-CoV-2 isn't as lethal as some other viruses but it is highly infective, and the combination perhaps makes it among the most dangerous pathogens humans have faced. Someday (soon, maybe) we will understand the evolutionary journey of the virus, and, if our scars are healed by then, perhaps even marvel at it.

We have answers, at least partial ones to many questions - why the virus affects some more adversely than it does others? Why some people become superspreaders? Why the death toll in the US and the UK are high? And we do not have answers to others, including, for those of us in India, the mystery of the country's Covid-19 numbers, or, if a smaller mystery-within-a mystery is needed, the reason for Uttar Pradesh and Bihar's low Covid-19 infections and deaths. Or why, in general, states with good public health parameters have fared worse than those with poor ones.

Beyond the numbers, though, history will record events of 2020 (and 2021) along three dimensions: scientific, government, and individual.

The scientific response to Covid-19 has been staggering in its speed and ingenuity. All previous records for vaccine development have been broken, not once, not twice, not three times, but several times over. A clutch of repurposed drugs and some new ones are now available to treat Covid-19. Death and hospitalisation rates have progressively reduced (with some exceptions). Science is winning.

The response of governments has been mixed - not surprising because of the scale and the complexity of the problem and the speed with which the disease emerged, and not surprising because governments have traditionally had an uneasy relationship with science and data, the only two things that should have, in ideal circumstances, driven their response to the pandemic. The Swedish, firm believers in science, seemed to turn their back on it in a strategy that was initially praised, then criticised, then acclaimed again, and finally debunked. For the record, I insisted all along that it was the wrong approach (not out of prescience but the understanding that when it came to pandemics, science could never be wrong). Still, while there were missteps (and there continue to be), and governments could have performed better than they did, and taken smarter decisions, they could just as easily have done worse on both counts.

I just hope their experience with the pandemic has made governments realise what really matters (in this case, to repeat myself, science and data).

Meanwhile, people adapted - to no jobs or those that paid less than they did before the pandemic; to constantly wearing masks; to social distancing, isolation, and quarantines; to not dining out or travelling; to working from home (or not working from home); to studying from home; and to many other things that would have seemed strange just a year ago.

And so, scientists shone, governments faltered to varying degrees, and the rest of us, well, did what we do best - we coped.

P.S: The last column I wrote on Covid-19, Dispatch 238, appeared on January 2. My colleague Kunal Pradhan who edited most of the columns, and who had gotten into the practice, once I crossed 100 columns, of telling me which cricketer had scored as much as the day's column number, and why it mattered, was stumped. As it turns out, a few days later, on January 5, New Zealand's Kane Williamson made 238, and it turned out to be a record because 238, until then, had been the lowest score never to be made by a batsman (which basically meant all scores between, and including 0 and 237 had been made by at least one batsman). It's just that we didn't know it at the time.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 14 -- Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the World Health Organisation director general who has been blocking darts hurled at him over the global health agency's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, has landed himself at centre of another bout of shadow boxing between the United States and China over letting Taiwan attend next week's World Health Assembly as an observer.

The self-ruled island, which Beijing considers a wayward province awaiting reunification, has been excluded from WHO membership due to objections from China.

Taiwan attended the World Health Assembly as a non-voting observer from 2009 to 2016. But Beijing has blocked Taipei's representation at the event after a China skeptic, Tsai Ing-wen was elected president in 2016. She was re-elected this year and is due to begin her second term on 20 May, two days after the WHA's 18 May meet.

More than a dozen countries have proposed resolutions for the WHO to let Taiwan attend the World Health Assembly as an observer, arguing that the world needed to hear Taiwan that has been held up as a model in fighting the virus first detected in central China's Wuhan last year.

The disease has since then killed 2,97,000 people, infected over 4 million, grounded the world economy and set off a back and forth between the United States, China and WHO's Tedros.

Taiwan has had just about 400 cases and 7 deaths.

To be sure, this will not be the first time that an attempt has been made to restore Taiwan's observer status for the World Health Assembly.

Fourteen member states had proposed Taiwan's inclusion as an observer at WHO's last annual meet on 28-29 May 2019. The WHO had then cited "procedure followed in previous years" to let two of them speak in favour of the resolution and two against before the general assembly delivered its ruling.

Apart from China, Cuba had opposed Taiwan's inclusion. Eswatini in southern Africa and Honduras in central America had spoken in favour.

Diplomats in Geneva and Washington told Hindustan Times that the effort this time was to lobby for other countries to speak too. The chorus is growing, one of them said.

Already, fence-sitter Canada has backed Taiwan's claim to be allowed to participate at the WHA meet apart from other countries such as Australia, Japan, Germany, France, the UK, Australia, New Zealand and the US that is fronting this campaign.

A report in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's CBS News said Canada had, for the first time, even gone to the extent of issuing a verbal demarche to two senior WHO executives asking that Taiwan be admitted as an observer to the Monday meeting because its input would be "meaningful and important."

Chinese diplomats have been on an overdrive over the coronavirus diseases, initially to play down the havoc that the Sars-CoV-2 virus could wreck on the world. And later when the situation became manageable back home, to even jeer at countries that were struggling with containing its fallout if they underscored transparency and accountability from the WHO or Beijing.

Where it could, it has also penalised critics. Like when Australia supported the US call for a probe into the origin of the virus, Chinese authorities threatened to impose heavy duties on barley imports and went ahead to suspend beef imports from four Australian suppliers.

Indian hasn't taken a stand on Taiwan's inclusion yet. But one government official noted how Beijing, that wants the world to acknowledge its 'one China' principle, didn't demonstrate respect for India's sovereignty when it comes to Kashmir, or building the China Pakistan Economic Border through Indian territory occupied by Islamabad.

It is not clear if senior minister Nitin Gadkari's comment in an interview to NDTV that the virus that causes coronavirus disease was an off-the-cuff remark or an indicator that the government has an open mind on the origin of the disease. Gadkari told the news channel that the virus that causes Covid-19 wasn't a natural virus but created in a laboratory, echoing a charge that has been repeatedly made by Washington.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 18 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculation by senior officials of the Trump administration that the Covid-19 epidemic might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan, a Chinese city that became the epicenter of the outbreak last December.

Officials of the US embassy China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the lab, had raised concerns in this state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory".

And, though the lab could conduct study SARS-like coronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strains that could infect humans, officials wrote in the cable, whose release was secured by the Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

But the cable did not prove or disprove the lab origin theory of the outbreak. "I don't see any evidence to support the idea that this was released deliberately or inadvertently," Ian Lipkin, the director of Columbia University's Center for Infection and Immunity, told the Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable."You can't just say someone is guilty of accidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it."

The Trump administration, however, appeared to have made that determination already in an effort to deflect blame for the spiraling infections and fatalities in the United States. President Donald Trump said in May he had a "high degree of confidence" that it had indeed started from the Chinese lab. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo followed up claiming "enormous evidence".

But, also in May, the US intelligence community punctured that theory. The office of the director of National Intelligence said in a statement it was still investigating outbreak started through contacts with infected animals "or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The Trump administration has not pushed the lab theory much in recent days, but it has blamed China for the outbreak, broke off ties with the WHO accusing it of being complicit in China's cover-up of it responsibility for the outbreak. Trump and Pompeo have called the virus the "Chinese virus" and the "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new cases reported in the last 24 hours and 843 deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit in this second surge. ICUs are running to full capacity in some of their worst affected counties, and, in a repeated of the grim situation in New York some weeks ago, refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 9 -- A team of experts investigating the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan has identified two most likely scenarios that caused the transmission of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to the human population. World Health Organisation (WHO) expert Peter Ben Embarek on Tuesday told a press briefing that the team probed four hypotheses around the transmission of coronavirus to human population and narrowed down on two most likely scenarios, including the one involving intermediary host species.

"Our initial findings suggest that the introduction through an intermediary host species is the most likely pathway and one way that will require more studies and more specific targeted research," said Embarek.

During the initial days of Covid-19 outbreak, preliminary studies had suggested that the bats could be the source since the coronavirus present in bats has a genome that is 96 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2. An intermediary host species has been considered the most likely pathway for such viruses because the bat coronavirus cannot bind to receptors in human lung cells.

Embarek, the head of the WHO-led team in Wuhan, also highlighted the possibility of transmission through the trade of frozen products. The WHO's food safety scientist said that virus can survive in frozen environments but added that the possibility of cold chain transmission of coronavirus warrants further investigation.

"We know the virus can survive in conditions that are found in these cold, frozen environments, but we don't really understand if the virus can transmit to humans," he told the briefing that lasted nearly 170 minutes.

China has often pushed the hypothesis of cold chain transmission and repeatedly announced findings of coronavirus traces on imported food packaging. Embarek stressed that investigation into the second scenario would require a study to find out whether a frozen wild animal in a market setting could spread the virus under right conditions.

The WHO expert said that the third hypothesis of direct transmission from an animal reservoir to a human, also known as "direct zoonotic spillover", is a possible pathway and generating "recommendation for future studies." He dismissed the possibility of the laboratory-related incident as the least likely scenario. "Findings suggest that the laboratory hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus to the human population," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Kishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu.

Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials? For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world. There is no second and third in the world on influenza, if you ask me. Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast. It will take at least three months to do animal trials to establish the safety properly. Then Phase 1 is only a one dose vaccine with 30 days' trial. Phase 2 we don't have to do because the same platform (nasal route) has already established the concentration required already in humans - so it can be minimised. Then for Phase 3, we need to have 1,000 people, and that is going to be another 45 days of trial in India. Human trial is going to be very short; the worry is only the animal trials as we want to establish the safety and efficacy, which is extremely critical.

Why a nasal vaccine?We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead, but if there is an animal problem then we may not even pursue the product further because the safety of people is most important.

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying, what is the capacity, when is the launch, what is the price etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups in India; what do we need for all these biological scientific companies to sustain themselves; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up.

We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country first or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do in vaccines? It is very tough. So what we did in this case is that we funded the animal trials at the University of Wisconsin. We need to build small islets of infrastructure in this country, which is what China did. They created infrastructure first, here we create institutes first.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 18 -- The United States has released an internal diplomatic cable that had triggered speculation by senior officials of the Trump administration that the Covid-19 epidemic might have started because of an accident at a virology lab in Wuhan, a Chinese city that became the epicenter of the outbreak last December.

Officials of the US embassy China, who wrote this cable in January 2018 after a visit to the lab, had raised concerns in this state department cable about "serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory".

And, though the lab could conduct study SARS-like coronaviruses extracted from bats, it needed the permission of designated authority to research strains that could infect humans, officials wrote in the cable, whose release was secured by the Washington Post this week through a lawsuit.

But the cable did not prove or disprove the lab origin theory of the outbreak. "I don't see any evidence to support the idea that this was released deliberately or inadvertently," Ian Lipkin, the director of Columbia University's Center for Infection and Immunity, told the Washington Post after being being made aware of the content of the cable."You can't just say someone is guilty of accidentally releasing a virus. You have to prove it."

The Trump administration, however, appeared to have made that determination already in an effort to deflect blame for the spiraling infections and fatalities in the United States. President Donald Trump said in May he had a "high degree of confidence" that it had indeed started from the Chinese lab. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo followed up claiming "enormous evidence".

But, also in May, the US intelligence community punctured that theory. The office of the director of National Intelligence said in a statement it was still investigating outbreak started through contacts with infected animals "or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan".

The Trump administration has not pushed the lab theory much in recent days, but it has blamed China for the outbreak, broke off ties with the WHO accusing it of being complicit in China's cover-up of it responsibility for the outbreak. Trump and Pompeo have called the virus the "Chinese virus" and the "Wuhan virus".

Covid-19 infections, meantime, are soaring in the United States, with nearly 78,000 new cases reported in the last 24 hours and 843 deaths. Texas, Florida, Arizona and other southern states are the worst hit in this second surge. ICUs are running to full capacity in some of their worst affected counties, and, in a repeated of the grim situation in New York some weeks ago, refrigerated trucks are being used to store bodies because of overwhelmed morgues.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 7 -- Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech announced last week that it is working on developing a nasal drop vaccine for Covid-19. Animal testing has begun in the US in collaboration with virologists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and vaccine developer FluGen. Bharat Biotech's chairman and managing director Krishna Ella spoke to Rhythma Kaul about trials for the new vaccine, how the animal testing phase will be crucial, the delivery mechanism, and the challenges that vaccine manufacturers face in India.

Edited excerpts:

What is this vaccine against Covid-19 that you are developing?

We have got a total command over the pandemic vaccines; be it H1N1, Chikungunya, Zika,we have always chipped in when required. Our vaccine CoroFlu will build on the backbone of FluGen's flu vaccine candidate M2SR. Based on an invention by the University of Wisconsin-Madison virologists and FluGen co-founders Yoshihiro Kawaoka and Gabriele Neumann, M2SR is a self-limiting version of the influenza virus that induces an immune response against the flu. Kawaoka's lab will insert gene sequences from Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease Covid-19, into M2SR so that the new vaccine will also induce immunity against the coronavirus. The refinement of the CoroFlu vaccine concept, and testing in laboratory animal models at UW-Madison, is expected to take at least three months. Bharat Biotech in Hyderabad will then begin production scale-up for safety and efficacy testing in humans. CoroFlu could be in human clinical trials by July.

Why did you move to the US for trials?

For Covid-19, we thought we should have the best experts in the world. Kawaoka is the best person in the influenza programme in the world... Why the area of influenza is important is because both influenza and Covid-19 follow the same pattern of infection -- you cough, it goes through the nasal and mouth route into the lungs. For this sort of respiratory pathogen, the lungs are the target, which is why mucosal immunity is very important for this kind of pathogen.

The animal model trial is on. Our animal trials are going to be delayed because we have to establish safety and efficacy, but human trials will be very fast...very short.

Why a nasal vaccine?

We want to use the same route that this pathogen uses - the nasal route. The ideal vaccine in a pandemic should have an easy delivery mechanism that can reach easily villages; even an anganwadi worker should be able to give it to the villagers. Look at the polio vaccine, it's a great success because of the oral drop; it reached the last mile because of easy delivery of the vaccine. Similarly, nasal drop will work better. Also, the safety of the platform has been established in humans already. In the US, Phase 2 (human trials) trial of the influenza vaccine (company FluGen) has already completed. Safety of the platform is proven, so we can rely on the platform for use in human beings. So if the safety is proved in 3 months, we will go ahead...

If you reach the human trials level, what category will you be looking at recruiting in India?

While recruiting candidates later for human trials, our priority will be doctors and health care workers and police personnel, since they are at the forefront in India. It has to be in India because the country of origin has to approve the results. Phase 1 and phase 3 trials will be with them.

What are the challenges vaccine manufacturers face in India?

In a pandemic situation, everyone asks, when is the vaccine ready, why are you delaying,.. etc. What we should actually talk about is long-term fundamentals such as innovation in India, start-ups; are reagents easily available in 24 hours because speed is of utmost importance for any start-up. We rely heavily on foreign countries for raw material, and even small things at times are not available in India. The correct animal model (a special type of mice) required for testing is not available in India. It is available in the US, and they will give priority to their country or Europe next, so what kind of research can you do ....

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 15 -- Two dogs who were reported to have contracted the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) recently likely got the infection from their owners, according to a new research paper that analysed cases in animals in Hong Kong.

"An analysis of viral genetic sequences from the dogs showed them to be identical to those in the infected people," an article on the findings in Nature said.

While the paper didn't study if animal-to-animal transmission could occur, the authors recommended that for precaution, pets belonging to Covid-19 patients be isolated and tested, as is already being done in Hong Kong.

The paper, published in Nature journal on Thursday, found that two of 15 dogs from households with confirmed human cases of Covid-19 in Hong Kong were found to be infected. These two were a 17-year-old neutered Pomeranian and a 2.5-year-old German Shepherd. They were tested using Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) kits and the virus was later isolated and sequenced.

Canine ACE-2 (an enzyme the Sars-CoV-2 virus uses to enter the body) is similar to the enzyme found in humans. Of 18 amino acids that are known to be involved in interaction between ACE-2 and the spike receptor binding domain of Sars-CoV-2 (which Sars-CoV-2 uses to bind to its host's cells), there are five that differ between humans and dogs, the study led by Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department of Hong Kong said.

"The evidence suggests that human-to-animal transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur. We do not have information on whether this virus can cause illness in dogs but no specific signs were seen in either of the infected dogs during the time they were shedding virus," the paper said. The Pomeranian died two days after release from isolation but very likely due to other underlying diseases. The German Shepherd was kept with a second cross-breed dog but the second dog didn't get infected.

"The limited implications of these findings are that there is now increasing evidence for human to animal transmission, especially to pet animals that are in close contact with infected humans. There is as yet no evidence for any subsequent animal to animal transmission," said Abi Tamim Vanak, Fellow, DBT India Alliance Program and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE).

"However, given that high viral loads were found in nasal swabs of infected animals, as well as in rectal swabs, there is a possibility of onward transmission to other animals, especially if an infected pet is free-ranging and regularly comes in to contact with other animals or humans. Again, this is only speculative, and it would require experimental challenge studies to determine if animal to animal transmission is a viable route of spread for this virus. If such evidence is found, then it will make the control of this disease much harder, because many regions of the world have fairly large populations of free-ranging domestic animals (e.g. India has ~60 million dogs), which do not receive even the most basic healthcare, such as anti-rabies vaccinations," he added.

The findings also have implications for future zoonotic transmission events. Dogs, other canids and felids can be sold in or found near wild-game animal markets like in Wuhan from where Sars-CoV-2 is understood to have transmitted to humans. These domestic animals should also be tested during investigations into the origin of the virus to determine if they play any role in spillover events, the authors concluded.

Earlier, a study by Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and National High Containment Laboratory for Animal Diseases Control and Prevention in China had suggested that cats are highly susceptible to contracting Sars-CoV-2 but dogs, ducks, chickens and pigs were not as susceptible. The study was based on lab experiments and not real-life cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 6 -- China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus?

The lethal virus emanated from China, leading to a paralysing pandemic whose costs are immeasurable. Is it unreasonable for the world to want to know how and why it happened?

Investigating the genesis of the pandemic is critical for another reason - this is not the first deadly disease to spread globally from China. A Chinese cover-up of the 2002-2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) outbreak triggered the world's first 21st-century pandemic. Getting to the bottom of how the latest pathogen flared up and spread is essential for designing rapid-response efforts to prevent a future outbreak from spiralling into yet another pandemic.

Even the World Health Organization (WHO) agrees. This is the organisation whose repeated deference to Beijing since December helped China to cover its tracks. Several countries now want an inquiry to focus on the roles of both China and WHO. The WHO representative in China has said the "origins of the virus are very important" to prevent "reoccurrence". Yet Beijing has shut out even WHO from its national Covid-19 investigations.

United States (US) President Donald Trump has offered China an incentive for cooperation by contrasting a mistake with wilful action: "If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake. But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences." Beijing, however, has shied away from answering even basic questions.

For example, why did China stop flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak, yet allowed international flights to operate from Wuhan, thus facilitating the global spread of the virus? Why did it clamp down recently on further research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus? It instituted a new policy mandating prior vetting after several Chinese research papers highlighted dangerous work on bat coronaviruses, with one study concluding that "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan".

Authorities shut a Shanghai laboratory a day after its publication of the coronavirus genome opened the global path to diagnostic tests. China refused to share any live virus sample with the world, "making it impossible to track the disease's evolution," to quote US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. The dangerous lab research in Wuhan may explain why China, instead of sharing any coronavirus sample, destroyed its lab samples.

Just think - if China was not guilty of any cover-up, wouldn't it be welcoming the growing international calls for an independent inquiry and offering to assist in such a probe? This would give China a chance to clear the air with the rest of the world. Instead, Beijing seems to be showcasing its guilt by belligerently rejecting the pleas for such an inquiry and threatening economic reprisals.

Australia is Exhibit A. The country is more economically tied with China than with its security patron, the US. Yet Australia has come under a blistering attack from China for proposing that WHO member-nations support an independent inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus. Australia said it will push for such an investigation at the WHO assembly when it convenes for its annual meeting on May 17. In response, the Chinese ambassador to Australia threatened punishment through Chinese boycotts of Australian wine, beef and tourism and education sectors.

Meanwhile, as the Group of Seven (G7) countries, India and others seek a review and reform of WHO, China's decision to give an additional $30 million to the agency appears aimed at frustrating such calls. International rules require countries to notify WHO of "a public health emergency of international concern within 24 hours of assessment". China's failure to do so has led to calls for introducing WHO inspectors with the power to enter a country to probe a disease outbreak in the manner of weapons inspectors.

Make no mistake: Money alone can neither aid China's strategy to deflect blame for the current crisis nor help defuse the increasing global backlash against it. Calls are growing louder across the world to hold China publicly accountable for the pandemic's mounting human and economic toll. The only way China can silence such calls and begin to repair the serious damage to its image is through an independent international inquiry.

If it blocks such a probe, China will pay enormous costs - not as reparations but by compelling other major economies to restructure their relationships with it, a process that could ultimately end its status as the global hub of vital supply chains. China's mercantilist expansionism has already led to new regulations in the European Union, Australia, Germany, Spain and Italy. But India's recent new rule mandating prior scrutiny of Chinese investment in any form is the first of its kind. Another major recent move is by Japan, which has earmarked $2.2 billion to help Japanese firms shift manufacturing out of China.

If China refuses to come clean, important countries are likely to start economically distancing themselves from it, through new tariffs, non-tariff barriers, relocation of manufacturing and other policy moves. Eventually, this could undermine the communist party's monopoly on power in China.

Brahma Chellaney is a geostrategist

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday that all available evidence suggests the coronavirus originated in animals in China late last year and was not manipulated or produced in a laboratory.

US President Donald Trump said last week that his government was trying to determine whether the virus emanated from a lab in Wuhan, where the coronavirus emerged in December.

"All available evidence suggests the virus has an animal origin and is not manipulated or constructed in a lab or somewhere else," WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib told a Geneva news briefing. "It is probable, likely, that the virus is of animal origin."

It was not clear, Chaib added, how the virus had jumped the species barrier to humans but there had "certainly" been an intermediate animal host. "It most likely has its ecological reservoir in bats but how the virus came from bats to humans is still to be seen and discovered."

She did not respond to a request to elaborate on whether it was possible the virus may have inadvertently escaped from a lab. The Wuhan Institute of Virology has dismissed rumours both that it synthesised the virus or allowed it to escape.

Also on Tuesday, as global cases crossed 2.5 million, the WHO warned that lifting of lockdowns must be gradual, and if restrictions were to be relaxed too soon, there would be a resurgence of infections. Takeshi Kasai, WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, said, "At least until a vaccine, or a very effective treatment, is found, this process will need to become our new normal."

In Myanmar, a car used by the WHO to transport swab samples to be tested for the virus was attacked, killing the driver and wounding a passenger.

In Germany, Bavaria cancelled the Oktoberfest for the first time since WWII. The event takes place from September to October.

Spain unveiled a series of measures aimed at helping prostitutes and victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation survive the country's lockdown.

In the UK, as PM Boris Johnson said he would speak with US President Donald Trump and hold an audience with the queen this week, scientists at the University of Cambridge found a link between living in an area of England with high levels of air pollution and the severity of Covid-19. Researchers at the university's MRC Toxicology Unit analysed data on Covid-19 cases and deaths against the levels of three major air pollutants, collected between the years 2018 and 2019.

Meanwhile, watchdog Reporters Without Borders claimed China has "extensively" censored information on the outbreak, saying the impact of it has been experienced globally.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Sept. 16 -- The Sars-Cov-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, shows signs that are not usual for a naturally evolved pathogen, a group of researchers have contended, reigniting theories that the virus may have been developed in a lab - a notion that scientists and public health officials have rejected on several occasions.

The claim was made in a paper uploaded by Li-Meng Yan, who specialised in virology and immunology at the Hong Kong School of c before she moved to the United States where she is believed to be seeking refuge.

"SARS-CoV-2 shows biological characteristics that are inconsistent with a naturally occurring, zoonotic virus. In this report, we describe the genomic, structural, medical, and literature evidence, which, when considered together, strongly contradicts the natural origin theory," said the paper, which is yet to be peer-reviewed.

The natural origin theory was first reported by Nature Medicine in a paper on March 17, in which researchers said the virus had a 96% resemblance with a coronavirus found in bats, called the RaTG13. Yan and her colleagues contend that there are growing doubts over the natural existence of this bat coronavirus, and that the Sars-Cov-2 instead has strong overlaps with two other bat coronaviruses: the ZC45 and ZXC211.

"The evidence shows that SARS-CoV-2 should be a laboratory product created by using bat coronaviruses ZC45 and/or ZXC21 as a template and/or backbone," the report said.

The researchers add three hypotheses to support their contention that the virus could be a lab creation, calling it also "a demonstration of how SARS-CoV-2 could be conveniently created in a laboratory in a short period of time using available materials and well-documented techniques".

The first of these, the researchers say, is history of coronaviruses ZC45 and ZXC21, both of which were discovered by military laboratories - one in the Third Military Medical University (Chongqing, China) and the other in Research Institute for Medicine of Nanjing Command (Nanjing, China).

The second has to do with a component of the virus known as the receptor-binding motif (RBM) within the spike protein, the portion of the virus that hooks onto a target cell. The RBM "resembles that of SARS-CoV from the 2003 epidemic in a suspicious manner. Genomic evidence suggests that the RBM has been genetically manipulated," they said.

The third has to do with another feature of the spike protein called the furin cleavage, which, the team said has been established to "greatly enhance viral infectivity and cell tropism". "This cleavage site is completely absent in this particular class of coronaviruses found in nature. In addition, rare codons associated with this additional sequence suggest the strong possibility that this furin-cleavage site is not the product of natural evolution and could have been inserted into the SARS-CoV-2 genome artificially by techniques other than simple serial passage or multi-strain recombination events inside co-infected tissue cultures or animals," they said.

Scientists are yet to comment on these claims in a paper.

Yan, in an interview a British talk show earlier this week, alleged there was a cover-up of the virus's origins. "I decided to report this development to my supervisor, who is also a World Health Organization (WHO) consultant. There was no response from the WHO and my supervisor. Everyone warned me that do not cross the right line and keep silence or else I would be made to disappear," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 27 -- New viruses being discovered are only the "tip of the iceberg", said a leading virologist from a Chinese laboratory that's at the centre of conspiracy theories on the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic.

"The unknown viruses that we have discovered are actually just the tip of the iceberg," Shi Zhengli, deputy director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, told Chinese state TV, adding that it was important to carry out advance research on pathogens.

Shi is known as China's "bat woman" as she has worked on coronaviruses found in the flying mammals for years, notably inside abandoned mines in the province of Yunnan.

Shi has kept a low profile since the Covid-19 outbreak emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, only occasionally commenting on social media, including once to deny that she had defected from China after the epidemic spread.

The People's Daily reported that on February 2, Shi had reacted to a research article by Indian scientists implying the novel coronavirus possibly originated from the Wuhan Institute of Virology. "The 2019 novel coronavirus is a punishment by nature to humans' unsanitary life styles. I promise with my life that the virus has nothing to do with the lab," she said on the social media app WeChat.

In her short interview to state TV channel CGTN on Monday, Shi defended China's transparency in handling the outbreak and stressed the need for more research on viruses. "If we want to protect humans from viruses or avoid a second outbreak of new infectious diseases, we must go in advance to learn of these unknown viruses carried by wild animals in nature and then give early warnings," she said. "And we must be able to store some drugs and reagents for detection, prevention or treatment for future prevention and control.

Shi denied that her institute was the origin of the coronavirus. The institute, she said, shared available data with the world and that the WHO was well-informed about breakthroughs.

"Later, we, along with two other medical institutes in our country, submitted the whole genome sequence of the virus to the WHO on January 12, 2020," she said. "We also uploaded other sequences to a gene library called GISAID, which is used by governments and scientists around the world to identify pathogens, to develop vaccines and screen drugs."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 19 -- A new study by US scientists has sought to dispel speculation that the novel coronavirus had been created in a laboratory and leaked from a bio-warfare facility, triggering the pandemic the world is struggling to contain, concluding instead that Covid-19 indeed had natural origins.

Based on publicly available genome sequence data of the virus released earlier by Chinese scientists, researchers at the Department of Immunology and Microbiology at the Scripps Research Institute found that the virus could not be a "laboratory construct" or "purposefully manipulated."

The study, published in Nature Medicine journal on Tuesday, proposed two natural scenarios through which the virus, also known as SARS-CoV-2, may have originated. It flies against unconfirmed reports, blogs and discussions on Twitter and other social media that the virus was a bio-weapon. The novel coronavirus has left at least 7,529 peopledead.

Scientists analysed the spike protein - the sharp point on the outside of the virus that it uses to penetrate the outer walls of human and animal cells. They found that the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein (a hook like structure that grips host cells) had evolved to effectively target the ACE2 receptors, responsible for regulating blood pressure in humans.

The SARS -CoV-2 spike protein was so effective at binding the human cells, in fact, that the scientists concluded it was the result of natural selection and not the product of genetic engineering, according to ScienceDaily, a website on science and research news. Scientists also found that the molecular structure of SARS-CoV-2 was similar to those of bats and pangolins.

"By comparing the available genome sequence data for known coronavirus strains, we can firmly determine that SARS-CoV-2 originated through natural processes," said Kristian Andersen, associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research and corresponding author on the paper in ScienceDaily.

The two scenarios suggested by the authors of the study are that the virus may have evolved through natural selection of an intermediate host animal and then transferred to humans from that animal. There are no documented cases of direct bat-human transmission. The other scenario suggested a non-pathogenic (an organism that does not cause disease) version jumped from an animal host on to humans and then gradually transformed into a pathogenic state within humans.

Co-author Andrew Rambaut of the University of Edinburgh said it was difficult to ascertain at this point which of the scenarios was most likely. "Even before this study within the scientific community it was clear that the virus was not designed on purpose. This is simply because the genetic sequence and molecular structure of coronaviruses in earlier outbreaks like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) was very different," said Shashank Tripathi, assistant professor and Wellcome Trust India Alliance intermediate fellow, Microbiology & Cell Biology Department, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

Tripathi, commenting on the issue in his individual capacity, added: "The structure of SARS-CoV-2 is too far apart from those and that it was not designed or replicated. The closest match of the virus structure is in fact those found in horseshoe bats and pangolins."

"Having said that we need to know what kind of research was going on in the Wuhan Institute of Virology with respect to coronaviruses. China needs to be forthcoming on that," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last , of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Civid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analyses clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17.

Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study, dismissing conspiracy theories about the lab origin of the virus.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "The chances of similar outbreaks are lower if the virus infects humans and then evolve its highly pathogenic properties. The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat. "I believe the coming reality for the world will be one where we are always defending against this enemy. A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoys on Covid-19, told Hindustan Times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 21 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last, of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analysis clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17. Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "...The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat.

"...A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoy on Covid-19, said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 30 -- The long-awaited report on the origin of the coronavirus (Covid-19) will be released on Tuesday by the World Health Organization (WHO). Speaking at a news conference on Monday, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus confirmed receiving the full mission report over the weekend. "All hypotheses are on the table and warrant complete and further studies," he said during the briefing.

The report has been drafted by a team of international experts appointed by the WHO who visited China's Wuhan city earlier this year. The seafood market in Wuhan was the Covid-19 cluster of human cases in December 2019. Since then, the infection has now spread to almost all the countries killing more than 2.7 million people.

According to the preliminary information on the study, the researchers have found that Covid-19 most likely transmitted to humans via animals. However, the report offers no conclusive answers to the origin questions.

The report is being closely watched by scientists around the world as the findings can help them prevent future pandemics.

What are the findings?

The researchers have listed four possible scenarios through which Covid-19 could have transmitted to humans, various news agencies reported. The reasons are mentioned in order of likelihood and a possibility of Covid-19 transmission from bats through another animal tops the list.

Direct spread from bats to humans is listed as likely in the report, while the possibility of Covid-19 spreading through the packaging of "cold-chain" food products is "unlikely".

The report listed a possibility of the virus' leakage from the laboratory under the "extremely unlikely" category.

The team has proposed further research in every area except the lab leak hypothesis. It also said the role played by a seafood market where human cases were first identified was uncertain.

Doubts remain

The expert report has a troubled past. From delay in publication to China's resistance to giving access to diplomats, all of these hurdles have raised questions about whether the Chinese side was trying to skew its conclusions.

Emphasizing more information is required to ascertain the origin of Covid-19, Matthew Kavanagh of Georgetown University said, "It is clear that that the Chinese government has not provided all the data needed and, until they do, firmer conclusions will be difficult," news agency AP reported.

United States' Secretary of States, Anthony Blinken also raised concerns regarding the methodology and the process of the investigation. "We've got real concerns about the methodology and the process that went into that report, including the fact that the government in Beijing apparently helped to write it," Blinken was quoted as saying by CNN.

The top expert of infectious diseases, Anthony Fauci said he would like to read the report first then decide about its credibility. "I want to read the report first and then get a feel for what they really had access to - or did not have access to," AP quoted Fauci as saying.

"I'd also would like to inquire as to the extent in which the people who were on that group had access directly to the data that they would need to make a determination," he also said as per an AP report.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 20 -- Covid-19 is not the first, nor will it be the last , of high-impact, rapidly spreading pandemics to cause disruption and death on a large scale, upend economies, and roil society. Pandemics are emerging with higher frequency and becoming increasingly difficult to contain because of a convergence of several global ecological, political, economic and social trends, including population growth, urbanisation, economic integration, faster travel, migration and climate change, experts say.

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has already infected 2.4 million people and killed at least 165,000, is the second most devastating pandemic after the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed an estimated 50 million people in 11 months between 1918 and 1919. The Spanish flu also hit India hard, with the country recording its only dip in the decadal population growth rate between 1911 and 1921, when the population fell by 0.31%. This was the only decade since 1901 to date when the country's population did not increase, according to Census of India data.

"Epidemic-prone diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), Middle East respiratory syndrome (Mers), Ebola, Zika, plague, yellow fever and others, are harbingers of a new era of high-impact, potentially fast-spreading outbreaks that are more frequently detected and increasingly difficult to manage," said The World At Risk 2019 report by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB). The report was authored by 15 global scientists and public health leaders, including India's principal scientific advisor, Dr K VijayRaghavan.

The World Health Organization (WHO) tracked 1,483 epidemics in 172 countries between 2011 and 2018 and in 2019, warned that another H1N1 2009-10 influenza-like pandemic was inevitable. But instead of an influenza, what is causing havoc is a novel coronavirus, severe forms of which have had limited human-to-human transmission in the past.

The novelty of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Civid-19, and the secrecy China has maintained around it have fuelled persisting rumours about the virus being a bio-weapon that accidentally leaked from a lab in Wuhan city, where the outbreak started. Scientists, however, have used genetic material of Sars-Cov2 to establish its natural origin. "Our analyses clearly show that Sars-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct or a purposefully manipulated virus," according to an analysis published in the journal Nature Medicine on March 17.

Sars-CoV-2 is very closely related to Sars-CoV, but the overall genetic structure is distinct from the known coronaviruses and most closely resembles viruses found in bats and pangolins that had not been known to cause humans any harm. "If someone were seeking to engineer a new coronavirus as a pathogen, they would have constructed it from the backbone of a virus known to cause illness in human," said the Nature Medicine study, dismissing conspiracy theories about the lab origin of the virus.

So, what makes Sars-CoV-2 different? A study of the genetic template revealed that the spike (S) proteins that cover the virus and give it its characteristic crown-like appearance, have evolved to target a receptor on the outside of human cells called ACE2, which is a key regulator of blood pressure and immunity, among others, and is found on the outer surface of cells in human lungs, arteries, heart, kidney, and intestines.

What makes Sars-CoV-2 lethal is the ease with which it spreads and the severity of disease caused by it. There are seven coronaviruses that infect humans, of which Sars-Cov, Mers-CoV and Sars-CoV-2 can cause severe disease; the other four coronaviruses (HKU1, NL63, OC43 and 229E) cause mild cold-like symptoms.

Where did the virus come from? Coronaviruses jumped from civets in Sars and camels in Mers. In the case of Sars-CoV-2, it was most likely a bat, which transmitted the virus to an intermediate animal (most likely a pangolin), from where it spread to humans.

Understanding whether the viruses' pathogenic abilities (abilities to cause disease) evolved in animals before it started infecting humans, or occurred in humans after it jumped from its animal host, will help determine how frequently such pandemics will occur in the future. "The chances of similar outbreaks are lower if the virus infects humans and then evolve its highly pathogenic properties. The virus is not mutating fast, which offers hope for a vaccine," said Dr NK Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

There have been thousands of outbreaks in India over the past five years, ranging from annual ones like influenza (H1N1 and H3N2), acute encephalitis syndrome, chikungunya, dengue and measles, to rarer ones like Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur forest disease (monkey fever), nipah viral disease, scrub typhus, and zika virus disease, among others, according to the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under the ministry of health & family welfare.

The only way to contain health emergencies is to build infrastructure to test, contain and treat. "I believe the coming reality for the world will be one where we are always defending against this enemy. A kind of fire brigade is needed in place, and within that defence, then have the recovery of social interaction and economic activity but done in a way that keeps us all as safe as much as possible," Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization's special envoys on Covid-19, told Hindustan Times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" from the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan.

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December that year.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization (WHO) from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The number of Covid-19 cases in India rose above the 20,000-mark on Tuesday, but the rate at which this threshold was crossed - it took more than 8 days for the tally to double - raises hopes that the country may be able to avert the sort of devastation seen in some other parts of the world. But in a move that compromises efforts by many states to test aggressively in so-called containment zones, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) put on hold for two days antibody testing for Covid-19 using rapid testing kits, or RTKs, citing huge variations in the results.

Covid-19 cases in India double to 20,000 in 8 days

The coronavirus outbreak in India began in early March after people who flew in from abroad introduced the infection to others, and has grown largely in small clusters - except for the one linked to the religious group in Delhi that led to thousands of infections - after the government enforced what is the largest global shutdown in population terms.

ICMR puts rapid tests on hold to check faulty kits

ICMR said the reason it has asked states to stop using the rapid testing kits (RTKs) for two days is that samples which are positive in RT -PCR are showing too much variation when tested by RTKs in the range of 6% to 71%.

Companies warn of layoffs if no stimulus

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the lockdown in place to combat it could cause permanent damage to businesses and force many to lay off staff unless the government announces a substantive stimulus package immediately, respondents to a business impact survey conducted jointly by industry body Ficci and consultancy firm Dhruva Advisors, said.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

While our understanding of the virus and its effect on the human body will become better in time, it is safe to surmise that not everyone reacts to a Sars-CoV-2 infection the same way.

Mumbai bus conductor runs 21 km to report to work

Devidas Jaisingh Rathod is a conductor on a Maharashtra state bus that runs every day from Palghar, 21 km from his home. These days he is in charge of a bus that has an important job these days -- ferrying 25 doctors and nurses to KEM Hospital. He usually hitches a ride on trucks ferrying essentials that pass by Manor. They drop him off at Palghar. On Sunday, though, there were no trucks. So, he ran 21 km to report to work.

Patients admitted to hospitals in clusters to be tested for virus

All patients visiting hospitals in and around containment zones identified by the local authorities will be considered "suspected cases of Covid-19" and those getting admitted will undergo mandatory diagnostic tests for the coronavirus disease irrespective of symptoms, according to a central advisory on Tuesday.

Trump vows to 'temporarily suspend immigration' into US

President Donald Trump on Monday said he is temporarily suspending immigration to protect American jobs threatened by the dire economic consequences of the coronavirus outbreak. India has been the top country of origin for legal immigrants to the US in recent years, with over 126,000 in 2017.

WHO stands by China in coronavirus origin row

The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday that all available evidence suggests the coronavirus originated in animals in China late last year and was not manipulated or produced in a laboratory.

LS staffer, kin of Rashtrapati Bhavan worker test positive

The coronavirus disease (Covid-19) reached the apex of the Indian State - Rashtrapati Bhavan and Indian Parliament - on Tuesday as a special housekeeper of Lok Sabha - whose son works in Parliament too - and a daughter-in-law of a Rashtrapati Bhavan sanitation worker were tested positive.

Parliament to review protocol over video call meetings

The Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha will review rules and procedures to consider whether standing committee meetings can be held over video conference, a practice that has not taken place till now in order to maintain the secrecy of the proceedings. The rethink has been necessitated by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, which has led to the grounding of inter-city transport and the need for people to avoid gatherings as far as they can.

Goa has no local cases, outsiders are a concern: CM Pramod Sawant

While neighbouring Maharashtra struggles with the burden of a growing number of coronavirus disease cases, Goa is celebrating its status as a state with zero Covid-19 patients. In an interview with HT, chief minister Pramod Sawant talked about the Goa model of combating the virus.

Review teams visit Bengal as state, Centre lock horns

The West Bengal government removed restrictions on the movement of inter-ministerial central teams (IMCTs), sent to monitor the implementation of the lockdown, after the Union home ministry sent a strongly worded letter on Tuesday amid an intensifying political tussle between the Centre and the state over Covid-19.

Lockdowns may have only arrested first wave

The sweeping shutdowns across the world appear to have absorbed what may only be the first wave of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections, according to officials from the World Health Organization (WHO) and findings by researchers in France - one of the countries hardest hit by the pandemic.

ICMR says 69% patients didn't show Covid signs

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said on Tuesday that 69% of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) patients in India who were tested did not show symptoms of the infection, even as the Union health ministry said that the trend of cases worldwide showed about 80% of the patients had mild or very mild symptoms.

Covid-19: CISF to go for contactless frisking of passengers at airports, Delhi metro

The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) is preparing new standard operating procedures (SOPs) for operations at airports and the Delhi Metro after the lockdown that are expected to include contactless frisking and fewer passengers in each coach.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 17 -- The much-awaited Rapid Testing Kits, which use antibody-based blood tests for Covid-19, arrived in New Delhi on Thursday morning after missing their third deadline by a day, and will likely be used to test for the coronavirus disease in areas with no or few cases, according to the Indian Council of Medical Research. Meanwhile, expectations for a relief and stimulus package for individuals and businesses rose after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in a meeting with finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman, reviewed the Covid-19 impact on the Indian economy and the ongoing national lockdown aimed at limiting its spread.

Rapid kits finally arrive to test Covid-19 immunity

The much-awaited Rapid Testing Kits, or RTKs, which use antibody-based blood tests for Covid-19, arrived in New Delhi on Thursday after missing their third deadline by a day, and will likely be used to test for coronavirus disease in areas with no or few cases -- the health ministry's green zones -- according to an official at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).

PM Modi, FM Nirmala Sitharaman meet with stimulus in pipeline

Expectations for a relief and stimulus package for individuals and businesses rose after Prime Minister Narendra Modi reviewed on Thursday, in a meeting with finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman, the impact on the Indian economy of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the ongoing national lockdown aimed at limiting its spread. HT learns that chief economic adviser Krishnamurthy Subramanian is putting together the package.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

The trajectory of Covid-19 infections in India is very different from that in any other country. It's slower; there haven't been too many deaths; and, at least anecdotally, the proportion of patients requiring ventilator support is lower than that in many other countries. It isn't clear why. Nor is it clear that this trend will continue.

Firms rush to meet new PPE norms

The Bureau of Indian Standards' newly-released list of national specifications for coveralls or body-suits worn by Covid-19 healthcare workers has left some government approved manufacturers scrambling for material that would pass the new tests, even as government-approved laboratories rejected thousands of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits that were donated by China.

One-third of India lives in red zones, Tamil Nadu leads the list

The 170 districts identified as coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots across the country are home to about 37% of India's population, with Tamil Nadu accounting for the most "red zones" - 22 of its 37 districts - among the states, according to the government's data.

India begins controlled trials of plasma therapy

Trials using the antibody-rich blood of patients cured of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) have begun, with doctors turning to a pool of 1,600 people in India who have recovered from the infection to test their antibodies as a potential cure for those fighting the disease.

Airlines told to give full refund for tickets

The Centre on Thursday ordered domestic and foreign airlines to refund passengers in full for bookings on flights that have been suspended during the extended coronavirus disease (Covid-19) lockdown until May 3 .

Typing error makes man Covid-19 positive in UP's Amroha

Authorities on Tuesday rushed six ambulances to Nauganva in Uttar Pradesh's Amroha to quarantine eight members of a 68-year-old man's family and to track down those, who may have in contact with him, after he was wrongly declared Covid-19 positive because of a typographical error, officials said.

Virus spread will decelerate due to lockdown: Niti Aayog member

The rate of spread of Sars-Cov-2, the virus responsible for the coronavirus disease, has slowed sharply in the past month and will decelerate further as a result of the nationwide lockdown, according to Dr Vinod Paul, a member of the government policy think tank NITI Aayog, who heads the empowered group overseeing the Covid-19 medical emergency management plan.

Hydroxychloroquine to be supplied to 55 nations

The Indian government has so far approved the supply of the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine, either as commercial sales or as grants, to 55 countries as part of the efforts to fight the Covid-19 pandemic, people familiar with the development said on Thursday.

Covid crisis temporary brake, it will improve: Prakash Javadekar

The coronavirus crisis will be just a temporary "brake", information and broadcasting minister Prakash Javadekar, said, explaining that the government is trying to save lives even as it keeps an eye on the economy. From April 20, many sectors will open up, providing livelihoods to many, he added in an interview to Hindustan Times.

After WHO row, US is probing China lab link

US President Donald Trump's administration is urging an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic, saying that the US doesn't rule out that it came from a laboratory researching bats in Wuhan. China's foreign ministry hit back saying the World Health Organization (WHO) has said there is no evidence that the coronavirus was made in a lab.

Your voice may be able to tell if you have Covid

The rush to understand, predict and head off the Covid-19 outbreak has prompted technology researchers to deploy artificial intelligence to create tools that can determine whether people are infected by analysing the sound of their cough, the way they speak or even breathe.

Patients start infection spread before symptoms set in: Study

People with the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) start infecting others two to three days before they develop symptoms of fever and cough, according to a study from China which suggests effective outbreak containment must include contact tracing of people who have been exposed to positive cases two to three days before their symptoms first appeared.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 24 -- The Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB) in Delhi has been working with four states to set up "megalabs" that can sequence up to 3,000 viral genomes of the Sars-CoV-2 that causes the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). The states, which are expected to make separate announcements to the effect, weren't named.

Not only will genome sequencing be more accurate than the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test at detecting infection in clinical samples, but the data will also be used for routine surveillance of the virus and where it originates to help the government in devising more effective strategies to control its spread. RT-PCR is now considered the gold standard for diagnosis of the coronavirus disease.

"The megalabs will automate genome sequencing, allowing us to process a large number of samples - a couple of thousand - a day. This is being permanently used for routine surveillance in Kerala and has been able to give us very useful information. As we will be sequencing the complete genome, the results of the test will be more accurate than the RT-PCR test, which looks for certain identifying parts of the genome to say whether a person has the virus or not. It will also be immune to any mutation by the virus," said Dr Anurag Agarwal, director of the IGIB.

The entire sequencing process will not cost more than Rs 2,000 per sample and can be easily implemented by state governments, Dr. Agarwal said. In comparison, a patient pays Rs 2,400 for an RT-PCR test at a private laboratory in Delhi.

Kerala, where the machine used in the megalabs was first field-tested in August, is one of the four states that would be using genetic sequencing data for routine surveillance of Covid-19 cases. The state has already benefitted from genetic sequencing data from IGIB for one of is projects. An analysis of 200 samples from the state revealed that most of the infections in the state were brought in by domestic inter-state travellers rather than international ones, according to the researchers.

"Analysis of the genetic sequencing data collected by our clinical partner from three districts in northern Kerala shows that most of the infections in the state were brought in by domestic travellers, with three distinct clusters from infections imported from Odisha, Maharashtra, and Karnataka. This also validates the quarantine norms that the state followed with foreign travellers, preventing the importation of the disease from other countries," said Dr Sridhar Sivasubbu, head of business development at IGIB and a member of the Indian CoV2 Genomic and Genetic Epidemiology consortium.

He added, "The Kerala government has now committed to continuing the study in all 14 districts as part of regular surveillance using the megalab. We are working with three other states to set up similar labs. The constant surveillance will tell the government of the origin of clusters of infections, helping them in developing strategies to prevent it at the source."

The researchers found that 94.6% of the genomes sequenced in Kerala spread locally after three distinct introductions - the K1 group where a traveller from Maharashtra introduced it in mid-July; K2 from Odisha, introduced in the first week of March; and K3 from Karnataka, introduced in the beginning of April.

The researchers also found a variation in the S-gene - which encodes the defining spike protein the virus uses to enter human cells - associated with the higher infectivity of the virus. There were also five variants in areas of the genetic sequence that are used as probes for the RT-PCR test, which might result in reduced efficacy of the tests, according to the research paper that is currently on the pre-print server BioRxiv.

The routine surveillance using genetic sequencing of the virus will also help in detecting cases of re-infection. IGIB is the first institute in the country to have confirmed eight cases of re-infection - two in Noida, two in Delhi, and four in Mumbai.

"The cases of re-infection were detected in health-care workers through routine surveillance that allowed us to sequence genomes of the viruses during both the infections," said Dr Sivasubbu.

Dr Agarwal said: "We used to think re-infections were very rare, but we are seeing a few cases now. We were able to establish re-infection in at least eight cases where samples from both the infections were available, we could ensure that there was sufficient genetic differences in both the viruses, and where we were clearly able to show that neither of the samples were positive due to possible contamination. This makes us think that re-infection is not very rare {as thought earlier} but very uncommon."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 15 -- The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has said that it is critical to increase testing for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) as the number of cases in India is "rising exponentially", a development that comes even as the government awaits the arrival of rapid testing kits from China.

The rapid testing kits, which search for antibodies in blood samples, were first supposed to arrive on April 5. The expected date of delivery was later revised to April 10, and then to April 15. There was, however, no clarity if all kits ordered by India would arrive by Wednesday.

Rapid testing kits show if a person is or has previously been infected by the virus. Apart from being a fast way to identify the extent of infections in clusters, countries are looking to use these tests to determine who has immunity to the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19. Unlike the RT-PCR tests currently in use, which take at least five hours for a result, RTKs can give diagnoses in 25-30 minutes.

"Number of Covid-19 cases in India is rising exponentially... it is critical to increase the numbers of tests conducted by laboratories," said an ICMR document released on Monday, based on a study the premier medical research institution recently commissioned to check the feasibility of conducting pool testing in the country that can cover large sample sizes with limited resources.

Public health experts have raised concerns over the disease possibly entering the "community transmission" phase, when the infections spread indiscriminately and the origin of an individual's disease can't be traced. The government has, however, said that there is some "limited community transmission" in certain clusters. The ICMR document, however, suggests that the government is aware of the possibility of a surge in Covid-19 cases in India in the coming weeks and that preparations were being made for that likely scenario.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined four transmission scenarios for Covid-19 - no confirmed cases, sporadic cases, clusters of cases, and community transmission.

The number of Covid-19 cases in the country stood at 11,479 on Tuesday night, doubling over six days, with 1,035 fresh infections in the last 24 hours. At least 390 people have died of the disease in the country so far, with the global death toll crossing 120,000.

A government official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: "Exponential growth is worrying when numbers double in three days or less, as is happening in several countries. If we manage to keep the numbers from doubling in five or more days, as the lockdown has and will help us do, we will be on a good wicket."

Lav Agarwal, joint secretary in the Union health ministry, said in his daily health briefing on Wednesday: "There is no community transmission in India yet. There is nothing to hide if there was; in fact, it makes more sense to declare it so that people take extra precautions to prevent getting infected."

Experts in virology, however, differ. "This seems like a schizophrenic approach to the truth where you speak only what is pleasing to the listener, and don't say what you really believe in...," said Dr T Jacob John, former head of virology at the Christian Medical College, Vellore.

India ordered 500,000 kits from Chinese suppliers on March 30 and later raised a tender for 4.5 million more to be acquired in batches. In anticipation of the arrival of the kits first on April 5, India issued an advisory on starting rapid antibody testing on April 4, and revised the testing guidelines on April 9 to include rapid testing of all symptomatic individuals in hot spot areas with symptoms at least a week old.

The King George's Medical University, Lucknow, on Monday began testing of samples in pools from low-risk areas in the state as a surveillance mechanism. "The samples that we are getting to pool are all those lifted for the purpose of surveillance. It is not for diagnosing the disease as pooling samples for diagnoses is not advisable," said Dr Amita Jain, head of ICMR's virus research and diagnostic laboratory (VRDL) based in KGMU.

Due to shortage of kits, Andaman & Nicobar has already begun performing tests in pools.

ICMR, however, says there is no shortage of kits, and current stock can perform tests for at least six weeks.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 17 -- The United States State Department has released a fact sheet on the activity at Institute of Virology in China's Wuhan, the city where the outbreak was first reported late last year.

In the fact sheet, the state department has accused the Chinese government of "systematically preventing" a transparent and thorough investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic. It also said that the Communist Party of China devoted enormous resources to deceit and disinformation.

The fact sheet is divided in three parts - illnesses inside the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV), the research there and Secret military activity at the institute.

The fact sheet said that the US government has "reason to believe" that several researchers inside the Wuhan institute became sick in autumn of 2019, before the first identified case of the outbreak. "This," the state department said, "raises questions about the credibility of WIV senior researcher Shi Zhengli's public claim that there was 'zero infection' among the WIV's staff and students of SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-related viruses."

It also said that accidental infections in labs have caused several previous virus outbreaks in China.

The Communist Party in China prevented independent journalists, investigators, and global health authorities from interviewing researchers, which the fact sheet said is crucial for inquiry into the origin of the virus.

The state department document came out on a day when a team of international experts of the World Health Organisation (WHO) arrived in China to investigate the origins of Covid-19.

"WHO investigators must have access to the records of the WIV's work on bat and other coronaviruses before the Covid-19 outbreak. As part of a thorough inquiry, they must have a full accounting of why the WIV altered and then removed online records of its work with RaTG13 and other viruses," the state department said.

The fact sheet added that in 201the researchers at WIV were conducting experiment involving RaTG13, the bat coronavirus identified in January 2020 as its closest sample to Sars-CoV-2.

"Despite the WIV presenting itself as a civilian institution, the United States has determined that the WIV has collaborated on publications and secret projects with China's military. The WIV has engaged in classified research, including laboratory animal experiments, on behalf of the Chinese military since at least 2017," the state department said.

It also said that the United States will continue to do everything it can to support a credible and thorough investigation.

The WHO team, meanwhile, has started its work by holding virtual meetings with their Chinese hosts from a hotel in Wuhan, where the pandemic first emerged.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 12 -- The four World Health Organisation (WHO) scientific experts who travelled to China to probe the Covid-19 pandemic's origins said that contrary to conspiracy theories, there currently is no evidence that suggests the novel coronavirus 'leaked' from a Chinese laboratory in Wuhan.

Instead, the most likely explanation is that the pandemic may have been caused by unfettered wildlife trade in the country, the experts said.

Speaking at a virtual event hosted by the Chatham House think-tank, the experts said that they found a 'link' between the wet market in Wuhan, where people first fell ill, and neighbouring regions in South China where bats were found with viruses.

Dr Peter Daszak, zoologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a global nonprofit researching human, animal and environmental health, said, "There was a conduit from Wuhan to the provinces in South China, where the closest relative viruses [to the coronavirus] are found in bats." It is thus possible that the virus crossed into domesticated and farmed animals and arrived in Wuhan on account of wildlife trade, he said.

Dr Daszak was a part of the four-member expert team sent by WHO, along with Professor David Heymann, Professor Marion Koopmans, and Professor John Watson.

Koopmans, the Head of the Department of Viroscience at Erasmus University Medical Center in Rotterdam, said that as part of their investigation, the team had also visited the three laboratories closest to the Huanan market in Wuhan and scrutinised their protocols and research.

"We concluded that it's extremely unlikely there was a lab incident," she said."

Incidentally, the three aforementioned laboratories, including the much talked about Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, have been the focus of several conspiracy theories and unfounded speculations on the origins of the virus, partly fueled by internet forums and imageboards playing the market for rumours.

The incident was also heavily politicised in the US by the erstwhile Trump administration, which defunded the National Institutes of Health also blacklisted critical coronavirus research, which was going on in collaboration with the Wuhan labs.

Addressing the issue of navigating this 'special politics' over the unfounded coronavirus origin speculations, Dr Daszak said that the scientific process related to the investigation offers a way to deal with this political intrigue.

"This scientific process here -- which involves looking at data, analysing it, coming to conclusions about what it means, and making it public -- is extremely important because it allows you to do the work irrespective of the politics. There is a purity to this process, and in other scientists reacting to it. I find solace in that," he said.

The United Nations' health agency worked for months to send an international team to Wuhan to help determine how the novel coronavirus first jumped from animals to humans. But in a tense geopolitical climate, the highly sensitive mission only landed on the ground this past January -- more than a year after the first cases were detected in the Chinese city in late 2019. The independent experts, who spent four weeks in Wuhan visiting sites linked to early cases, wrapped up their mission last month without conclusive findings.

The team, which has stressed this was just a first stage in the process, is expected to publish a report with their full findings next week.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- A former top public health official who was part of the team that led the Trump administration's response to Covid-19 has said he believes the deadly pathogen "escaped" the Chinese virology lab in Wuhan

Robert R Redfield, who headed the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Trump administration, made this explosive claim as a "point of view", without citing any evidence, and also went on to say that he believes the virus transmitted to humans in September-October 2019, way before the first cases were detected in December.

Redfield made these claims in an interview to CNN for a programme that airs later on Friday. "If I was to guess, this virus started transmitting somewhere in September, October in Wuhan," Redfield said.

"I am of the point of view that I still think the most likely etiology of this pathogen in Wuhan was from a laboratory, you know, (it) escaped," Redfield went on to say, but acknowledged problems with that claim in the same breath.

"Other people don't believe that, that's fine; science will eventually figure it out," the former CDC chief went on to say, adding, "it's not unusual for respiratory pathogens that are being worked on in a laboratory to infect a laboratory worker".

There have been reports that some lab workers at the Wuhan laboratory had fallen sick in the fall of 2019, but not clear from what.

A team of experts appointed by the World Health Organization from around the world is in final stages of preparing a report on its investigation into the origin of the pandemic.

A Chinese member on this group, Feng Zijian, was part of a team of Chinese officials who briefed diplomats in Beijing on the WHO investigation in Beijing on Friday, Associated Press (AP) has reported and said the Chinese may have done this to get out their view on the report before it is released.

This expert said that the WHO team looked at four ways the virus could have got out, according to AP: a bat carrying the pathogen infected a human; a bat infected an intermediate mammal that spread it to a human; shipments of cold or frozen food; and finally, a laboratory that researches viruses in Wuhan.

The expert further said at the briefing for diplomats, according to AP, WHO experts favoured "one of the two animal routes or the cold chain was most likely how it was transmitted".

The lab-leak theory was viewed as extremely unlikely.

The first cases of Covid-19 were reported in late December 2019 in Wuhan, China, which is home to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. WHO had said in a report in March 2020 that a large proportion of the initial cases had a direct link to the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market in Wuhan City, where seafood, wild, and farmed animal species were sold. WHO had found that many of the initial patients were stall owners, market employees, and/or regular visitors to the market.

But many experts believe the virus came from the Wuhan lab. "I am a virologist; I have spent my life in virology. I do not believe this somehow came from a bat to a human," Redfield said in the CNN interview.

"And at that moment in time, the virus that came to the human became one of the most infectious viruses that we know and humanity, for human-to-human transmission."

Normally when a pathogen goes from animals to humans, he said, "It takes a while for it to figure out how to become more and more efficient in human-to-human transmission. I just don't think this makes biological sense."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
NEW DELHI, Sept. 17 -- How seriously does one take Dr Li-Meng Yan? And how seriously does one take the paper Unusual Features of the Sars-CoV2 GenomeSuggesting Sophisticated Laboratory Modification Rather Than Natural Evolution and Delineation of its Probable Synthetic Route, published by her and co-authors, under the aegis of the Rule of Law Society and the Rule of Law Foundation, New York, on September 14? As the title suggests, the paper claims the coronavirus was man-made, in a laboratory.

The paper was uploaded on open-source research repository Zenodo, run by CERN, and was reported by Hindustan Times on Wednesday (bit.ly/33uFyy4). It wasn't as widely reported as Dr Yan's comments in Loose Women, a segment of a TV show hosted by a UK TV channel, on which she pretty much said the same thing, albeit without any of the scientific arguments -- unsubstantiated ones -- presented in the paper.

Here's what that paper claimed:

One, ZC45, a bat virus, or a closely related variant or mutant, bears a striking similarity with Sars-CoV2, as shown by genome sequencing, with a 94%-100% similarity of key viral proteins.

The spike protein of Sars-CoV2 is essentially a trimer (essentially three parts) each of which has an S1 and S2 part with a furin cleavage site at the boundary between the two. Other research has already established that the human cellular enzyme furin cleaves, or breaks, the S1 and S2 unit at the cleavage site, and that the S1 unit then attaches to the ACE receptor, another protein found on the surface of most human cells. This binding then facilitates the entry of the viral protein into human cells. The virus' ability to bind with the receptor, and the presence of the cleavage site that responds to a cannon human enzyme, are the reasons Covid-19 is as infective as it is.

Both the furin cleavage site, and the binding ability of the spike protein with the ACE2 receptor aren't natural, the paper argued.

In their preface to this scientific hypothesis, the authors also claim that the process of creating such a virus in a laboratory could take only six months. They ask for further research and investigation into the origin of the virus. Even if their hypothesis is subsequently proven erroneous, this is a recommendation that no can argue with - the origin of the virus needs to be investigated, not so much to assign blame (although there will be some that too), but to prepare for the next virus and the next pandemic.

Dr Yan, currently in the US, where she fled to in late April, is a virologist who used to work at the University of Hong Kong School of Public Health, and who has for long claimed that China knew of the virus and the fact that human-to-human transmission of the infection was happening, long before it let on. Her claims on the virus being man-made are more recent.

Interestingly, a March paper in Nature titled The Proximal Origin of Sars-Cov2, authored by Kristian G Andersen of California's Scripps Research Institute, argued, again picking on the same two distinctive features of Sars-CoV2, that the virus was natural. The viral protein showed a high "affinity" to bind with the receptor, they said, but this interaction wasn't "ideal" or "optimal". In plain English this meant that if anyone had set out to engineer the virus, they would have picked the "ideal" binding relation, not just another optimal one. The paper also said that there were other coronaviruses that had similar "cleavage sites" and that this wasn't unique to Sars-CoV2.

However, the two papers differ in one significant aspect. The one published in Nature said "the genetic data irrefutably show that Sars-CoV2 is not derived from any previously used virus backbone". Dr Yan's said (again, without substantiation that) a " genomic sequence analysis reveals that ZC45, or a closely related bat coronavirus, should be the backbone used for the creation of Sars-CoV2".

Dr Yan's claims are also being seen through a political lens, with scientists in the US pointing out that the two non-profits that published the paper were linked to Steve Bannon, former Trump adviser and former executive chairman of the far-right Breitbart News, casting aspersions on the study's findings.

Clearly, only further research and investigation can shed light on the origin of the virus which has thus far infected 29,927,685 and killed 942,564 around the world. India ended Wednesday with 5,115,846 cases and 83,230 deaths.

But as Vivek Wadhwa, a columnist for this paper, a top technology thinker, and distinguished fellow at Harvard Law School's Labor and Worklife Program, said in a recent article in Foreign Policy: "If genetic engineering wasn't behind this pandemic, it could very well unleash the next one." That's because, "genetic engineering - with all its potential for good and bad - has become democratised", Wadhwa wrote.

"Thanks to a technological revolution in genetic engineering, all the tools needed to create a virus have become so cheap, simple, and readily available that any rogue scientist or college-age biohacker can use them."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 28 -- A Nasa professor is reportedly controlling the Mars Perseverance rover from a one-bedroom flat above a hair salon in South London. According to a Daily Mail report, the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic has forced Sanjeev Gupta, an Indian-origin British geologist, to work from home while Perseverance rover is getting ready for exploring the Martian surface after safely landing in the Jezero Crater.

The mission control is at Nasa's jet propulsion laboratory (JPL) in Southern California, where the Perseverance rover was built. "I should be at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, in a series of offices each one about three times bigger than this lounge, full of hundreds of scientists and engineers with their heads buried in laptops surrounded by large screens," Gupta told the British daily.

The 55-year-old geology expert at the Imperial College of London has been a part of Nasa's Mars exploration program for a long time. He was a participating scientist and long term science planner on Nasa's Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover mission for exploring Gale Crater. Gupta has co-authored a study on the existence of an ancient lakebed in Gale Crater which was published in Science journal in 2015.

Jezero crater has also been determined as an ancient lakebed that dried up as the climate of the planet changed. Perseverance rover will be used to explore the rocks and return samples through future missions. Gupta and his colleagues will start directing the rover to various spots to drill the required samples.

The team is currently working round the clock, prompting the professor to rent an apartment in Lewisham so his family can enjoy undisturbed sleep in the nearby home, reported the Daily Mail. His flat has five computers and two other screens for Zoom-style meetings with fellow scientists.

Meanwhile, the Perseverance rover has been sending back photographs of the landing site to mission control and Nasa recently released the first 360-degree panorama taken by Mastcam-Z, a dual-camera system equipped with a zoom function.

The Mastcam-Z sent 142 individual images after rotating its mast 360 degrees on the third Martian day of the mission and the US space agency stitched them together to create the instrument's first 360-degree panorama.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- The government is yet to establish the source of infection of a 20-year-old Delhi resident who tested positive for coronavirus in Tamil Nadu on Wednesday, sending alarm bells ringing and raising questions if this is India's first case of community transmission of the deadly contagion.

The man had travelled by train from Delhi to Chennai - it was not immediately clear when - and authorities said they have not found any history of travel abroad or any contact with any other positive case of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19.

"We have come to know he has had no travel history, but contact tracing is not a simple process. It has to be thoroughly investigated," said Dr RR Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country's apex biomedical research body.

The Union health ministry reiterated that there was no evidence of community transmission - a phase of the outbreak where the origin of the infection cannot be traced to foreign travel or contact with another positive case - in the country, and that this particular case was still being investigated.

"The initial part of the investigation is to document what the patient tells you and then look for people he may have come into contact with indirectly. Sometimes there is a contact but the person doesn't realise," said Gangakhedkar.

"All these things need proper investigation before a conclusion is drawn."

ICMR is expanding the scope of its sentinel surveillance that is meant to track signs of community transmission.

"From 51 sites currently we have decided to lift samples of severe acute respiratory infections from 100 sites," he added.

In countries such as Italy or South Korea, the number of Covid-19 cases and related fatalities surged once community transmission of the disease began, making it difficult for governments to contain the rapid spread of the infection.

While the government is keeping private hospitals and laboratories on standby for a surge in cases that are likely to happen given the contagious nature of the disease, the 121 government laboratories so far are not testing to its full capacity.

"The government labs are so far using only about 10% of their capacity, but the private labs are being involved so as to stay prepared for any eventuality," he said.

As of Friday, 112,000 people across the country were under watch for either having travelled from abroad or having come into contact with a laboratory positive case.

Close to 7,000 people have been identified as contacts of positive cases, and are being closely observed.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 20 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infecting human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has, until Tuesday, killed over 318,000 people and sickened more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated "...SARSCoV2 [the virus that causes Covid-19] is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

The four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus's "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

The research is plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin,Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University, told HT.

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with COVID is we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow in the past been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

Not everyone, like Ebright,is fully convinced.

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper. "It is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence... or whether COVID-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infect human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has until Tuesday killed over 3.18 lakh people and infected more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ". SARSCoV2 is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

A team of four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus' "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

Also read: 4,970 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours push India's tally past 1 lakh-mark

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and is now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

An independent expert spoke to HT and said the research was plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin.

China has consistently cited international research to deny that the virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology. The central Chinese city of Wuhan is where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

Also read: Covid-19 response, China's offer of help - All about day 1 of WHO session

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with Covid-19 is that we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow, in the past, been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky, a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh - both are bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India - and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia. Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human are not rare and have been regularly witnessed in diseases like Ebola, bird flu, MERS etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far, no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.

However, the evidence for that kind of an incident in a lab is thin in the paper, Ebright added.

"However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were researching bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross-contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether Covid-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- New viruses being discovered are only the "tip of the iceberg", according to a leading Wuhan-based virologist at the centre of Covid-19-related conspiracy theories because of her research on coronaviruses found in bats.

"The unknown viruses that we have discovered are actually just the tip of the iceberg," Shi Zhengli, deputy director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, said in an interview to Chinese state television on Monday. She added it was important to carry out advanced research on pathogens.

Shi is known as China's "bat woman", as she has worked on coronaviruses found in the flying mammals for years, most notably inside abandoned mines in the southwestern province of Yunnan.

She has kept a low profile since the Covid-19 outbreak in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, only occasionally commenting on social media, including once to deny that she had defected from China after the pandemic rapidly spread.

According to the Communist Party of China's mouthpiece, the People's Daily's English website, Shi had reacted on February 2to a research article by Indian scientists implying the novel coronavirus possibly originated from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

"The 2019 novel coronavirus is a punishment by nature to humans' unsanitary life styles. I promise with my life that the virus has nothing to do with the lab," she said on social media app WeChat.

In a short interview with state television channel CGTN on Monday, Shi defended China's transparency in handling the outbreak and emphasised the need for more research on viruses.

"If we want to protect humans from viruses or avoid a second outbreak of new infectious diseases, we must go in advance to learn of these unknown viruses carried by wild animals in nature and then give early warnings," she said.

"And we must be able to store some drugs and reagents for detection, prevention or treatment for future prevention and control," Shi added.

Like other leading Chinese scientists involved in epidemic control in China, Shi denied her institute was the origin of the novel coronavirus. Shi said her institute shared its data with the world and the WHO was well informed about breakthroughs.

"Later, we, along with two other medical institutes in our country, submitted the whole genome sequence of the virus to WHO on January 12, 2020," she said.

"At the same time, we also uploaded other sequences to a gene library called GISAID, which is used by governments and scientists around the world to identify pathogens, to develop vaccines and screen drugs."

Earlier this month, Shi denied rumours of "defecting to the West", saying on WeChat: "Everything is all right for my family and me, dear friends!"

Posting nine recent photos, Shi added: "No matter how difficult things are, it (defecting) shall never happen. We've done nothing wrong. With strong belief in science, we will see the day when the clouds disperse and the sun shines."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- What is known about the coronavirus pandemic is that it originated in China and in a matter of months spread across the globe killing lakhs of people and infecting millions.

While the contagion has brought more than half of the planet to a grinding halt, scientists are busy tracing Covid-19's path to the human body.

There are many theories doing the rounds when it comes to the origin of the novel coronavirus. Some even believe it was a result of a failed lab experiment. A study conducted by the Pew Research Centre suggests that most Americans believe that Covid-19 was lab-grown. Nearly three in ten Americans or a quarter of the American population, as many as 29% of those surveyed, believe that novel coronavirus was grown in a lab, the survey indicated. 43% of Americans believe that the virus came about naturally.

The more scientific and believable theories rest on the premise that links the virus to its zoonotic traces, connecting it to bats.

China's world-famous Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, which is a live animal market, was the place where a man was first reported to have got the infection from an animal. How did the infection reach Wuhan's seafood market is still debatable.

The identity of the animal source of coronavirus remains a key and urgent question.

Coronavirus is being increasingly linked to bats as the obscure animals have traditionally been found to have links with outbreaks in countries like Uganda and Bangladesh. Bats are believed to be the natural hosts of the SARS, MERS and the Ebola virus.

In the case of SARS and MERS, the virus came from bats but was transmitted to humans via other animals.

The 2002 Sars outbreak got to humans from bats through cat-like civets. MERS-CoV spread from bats to camels to humans.

Some of the recently conducted studies point at scaly, ant-eating pangolins to be the intermediary animal between bats and humans in the case of Covid-19.

Researchers in Guangzhou, China believe pangolins could be the probable animal source of the coronavirus outbreak.

However, it is reported that pangolins were not listed on the inventory of items sold in Wuhan, the sale of the mammal is illegal.

As per a research paper published in the Journal of Medical Virology, two researchers from the South China Agricultural University in Guangzhou identified pangolins as the potential source of the Covid-19 virus. The researchers made their theory public in February 2020.

The experts based their findings on "genetic comparison of coronaviruses taken from pangolins and from humans infected during the recent outbreak," the research published in the Journal of Medical Virology read.

"By analyzing more than 1 000 metagenomic samples and using molecular biology testing, they found that the positive rate of ? coronavirus in pangolins was 70% and that the genome sequence of an isolated virus strain was 99% similar to that of the SARS-CoV-2 virus".

The study, therefore, called for further investigation into the role of pangolins in transmitting coronavirus to humans.

Earlier this week, the Indian Council of Medical Research also stated the possibility of pangolins acting as the intermediary animal between bats and humans.

"We also conducted surveillance, in which we found that there are two types of bats, and they carried coronavirus which was not capable of affecting humans. It's rare, maybe once in 1,000 years that it gets transmitted from bats to humans," Indian Council of Medical Research's (CMR) Gangakhedkar said during the press conference.

"As per research in China, it was found that coronavirus might have originated due to mutation in bats. Bats might have transmitted it to pangolins, from pangolins it got transmitted to humans," Gangakhedkar added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 3 -- A team of experts from the World Health Organization (WHO) visited China's most advanced virus research lab in Wuhan on Wednesday as part of their ongoing probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic, reports from the central Chinese city said.

Scientists at the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) research on some of the deadliest pathogens found in the world including the bat-hosted coronavirus.

One theory - so far unproven and consistently rejected by China - says that the initial outbreak in Wuhan may have been triggered by an accidental virus leak from the bio-safety lab.

Questions also remain about a possible spillover - or a zoonotic event - where the virus could have jumped from an animal host to humans.

"I am looking forward to a very productive day, meeting the key people here and asking all the important questions that need to be asked," team member Peter Daszak, who is the president of the EcoHealth Alliance, said from his car as it drove into the institute, a Reuters report from Wuhan said.

Peter Ben Embarek, a scientist leading the WHO team, told the tabloid Global Times that the international experts will meet Shi Zhengli, a leading Chinese virologist.

Shi has been dubbed as China's "bat woman" because of her intensive research on bats and the viruses they host.

In a social media post on Tuesday, Daszak said the WHO experts met "with key staff in charge of livestock surveillance in Hubei Province", and toured lab facilities and held in-depth discussions on Tuesday when the team visited an animal health facility.

On Sunday, the WHO team went to the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, which was linked to the first cases of Covid-19 in late 2019, described by Daszak in a tweet as a "critical" stop.

Meanwhile, China on Wednesday reported the fewest number of new Covid-19 cases for a single day in more than a month, the national health commission (NHC) said.

A total of 25 cases were reported in the mainland on February 2, the NHC said, of which 15 were locally transmitted infections.

The total number of Covid-19 cases reported in mainland China now stands at 89,619, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 30 -- The United States will end its relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO) over the world body's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, US President Donald Trump said on Friday.

Trump's decision to sever ties with the Geneva-based body also comes amid growing tensions between the US and China over the coronavirus pandemic.

The virus first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year and has killed more than 3.64 people worldwide and affected over 5.9 million.

"Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and will be redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent public health needs," Trump said at a news briefing.

Also read| 'World needs answers': Donald Trump renews attack on China over Covid-19 pandemic

Trump had sent a list of reforms that the United States wanted the world body to carry out.

"The only way forward for the organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China," he had written in a four-page letter to WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus last week.

He had given the WHO, which the US joined in 1948, 30 days to respond.

Here's what he wrote in that letter:

On April 14, 2020, I suspended United States contributions to the World Health Organization pending an investigation by my Administration of the organization's failed response to the COVID-19 outbreak.

This review has confirmed many of the serious concerns I raised last month and identified others that the World Health Organization should have addressed, especially the World Health Organization's alarming lack of independence from the People's Republic of China. Based on this review, we now know the following:

* The World Health Organization consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019 or even earlier, including reports from the Lancet medical journal. The World Health Organization failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself.

* By no later than December 30, 2019, the World Health Organization office in Beijing knew that there was a "major public health" concern in Wuhan. Between December 26 and December 30, China's media highlighted evidence of a new virus emerging from Wuhan, based on patient data sent to multiple Chinese genomics companies. Additionally, during this period, Dr. Zhang Jixian, a doctor from Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, told China's health authorities that a new coronavirus was causing a novel disease that was, at the time, afflicting approximately 180 patients.

* By the next day, Taiwanese authorities had communicated information to the World Health Organization indicating human-to-human transmission of a new virus. Yet the World Health Organization chose not to share any of this critical information with the rest of the world, probably for political reasons.

* The International Health Regulations require countries to report the risk of a health emergency within 24 hours. But China did not inform the World Health Organization of Wuhan's several cases of pneumonia, of unknown origin, until December 31, 2019, even though it likely had knowledge of these cases days or weeks earlier.

* According to Dr. Zhang Yongzhen of the Shanghai Public Health Clinic Center, he told Chinese authorities on January 5, 2020, that he had sequenced the genome of the virus. There was no publication of this information until six days later, on January 11, 2020, when Dr. Zhang self-posted it online. The next day, Chinese authorities closed his lab for "rectification." As even the World Health Organization acknowledged, Dr. Zhang's posting was a great act of "transparency." But the World Health Organization has been conspicuously silent both with respect to the closure of Dr. Zhang's lab and his assertion that he had notified Chinese authorities of his breakthrough six days earlier.

* The World Health Organization has repeatedly made claims about the coronavirus that were either grossly inaccurate or misleading.

- On January 14, 2020, the World Health Organization gratuitously reaffirmed China's now-debunked claim that the coronavirus could not be transmitted between humans, stating: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) identified in Wuhan, China." This assertion was in direct conflict with censored reports from Wuhan.

- On January 21, 2020, President Xi Jinping of China reportedly pressured you not to declare the coronavirus outbreak an emergency. You gave in to this pressure the next day and told the world that the coronavirus did not pose a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Just over one week later, on January 30, 2020, overwhelming evidence to the contrary forced you to reverse course.

- On January 28, 2020, after meeting with President Xi in Beijing, you praised the Chinese government for its "transparency" with respect to the coronavirus, announcing that China had set a "new standard for outbreak control" and "bought the world time." You did not mention that China had, by then, silenced or punished several doctors for speaking out about the virus and restricted Chinese institutions from publishing information about it.

* Even after you belatedly declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30, 2020, you failed to press China for the timely admittance of a World Health Organization team of international medical experts. As a result, this critical team did not arrive in China until two weeks later, on February 16, 2020. And even then, the team was not allowed to visit Wuhan until the final days of their visit. Remarkably, the World Health Organization was silent when China denied the two American members of the team access to Wuhan entirely.

* You also strongly praised China's strict domestic travel restrictions, but were inexplicably against my closing of the United States border, or the ban, with respect to people coming from China. I put the ban in place regardless of your wishes. Your political gamesmanship on this issue was deadly, as other governments, relying on your comments, delayed imposing life-saving restrictions on travel to and from China.

Incredibly, on February 3, 2020, you reinforced your position, opining that because China was doing such a great job protecting the world from the virus, travel restrictions were "causing more harm than good." Yet by then the world knew that, before locking down Wuhan, Chinese authorities had allowed more than five million people to leave the city and that many of these people were bound for international destinations all over the world.

* As of February 3, 2020, China was strongly pressuring countries to lift or forestall travel restrictions. This pressure campaign was bolstered by your incorrect statements on that day telling the world that the spread of the virus outside of China was "minimal and slow" and that "the chances of getting this going to anywhere outside China [were] very low."

* On March 3, 2020, the World Health Organization cited official Chinese data to downplay the very serious risk of asymptomatic spread, telling the world that "COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently as influenza" and that unlike influenza this disease was not primarily driven by "people who are infected but not yet sick." China's evidence, the World Health Organization told the world, "showed that only one percent of reported cases do not have symptoms, and most of those cases develop symptoms within two days." Many experts, however, citing data from Japan, South Korea, and elsewhere, vigorously questioned these assertions. It is now clear that China's assertions, repeated to the world by the World Health Organization, were wildly inaccurate.

* By the time you finally declared the virus a pandemic on March 11, 2020, it had killed more than 4,000 people and infected more than 100,000 people in at least 114 countries around the world.

* On April 11, 2020, several African Ambassadors wrote to the Chinese Foreign Ministry about the discriminatory treatment of Africans related to the pandemic in Guangzhou and other cities in China. You were aware that Chinese authorities were carrying out a campaign of forced quarantines, evictions, and refusal of services against the nationals of these countries. You have not commented on China's racially discriminatory actions. You have, however, baselessly labeled as racist Taiwan's well-founded complaints about your mishandling of this pandemic.

* Throughout this crisis, the World Health Organization has been curiously insistent on praising China for its alleged "transparency." You have consistently joined in these tributes, notwithstanding that China has been anything but transparent. In early January, for example, China ordered samples of the virus to be destroyed, depriving the world of critical information. Even now, China continues to undermine the International Health Regulations by refusing to share accurate and timely data, viral samples and isolates, and by withholding vital information about the virus and its origins. And, to this day, China continues to deny international access to their scientists and relevant facilities, all while casting blame widely and recklessly and censoring its own experts.

* The World Health Organization has failed to publicly call on China to allow for an independent investigation into the origins of the virus, despite the recent endorsement for doing so by its own Emergency Committee. The World Health Organization's failure to do so has prompted World Health Organization member states to adopt the "COVID-19 Response" Resolution at this year's World Health Assembly, which echoes the call by the United States and so many others for an impartial, independent, and comprehensive review of how the World Health Organization handled the crisis. The resolution also calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, which is necessary for the world to understand how best to counter the disease.

Perhaps worse than all these failings is that we know that the World Health Organization could have done so much better. Just a few years ago, under the direction of a different Director-General, the World Health Organization showed the world how much it has to offer. In 2003, in response to the outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in China, Director-General Harlem Brundtland boldly declared the World Health Organization's first emergency travel advisory in 55 years, recommending against travel to and from the disease epicenter in southern China. She also did not hesitate to criticize China for endangering global health by attempting to cover up the outbreak through its usual playbook of arresting whistleblowers and censoring media. Many lives could have been saved had you followed Dr. Brundtland's example.

It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China. My Administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organization. But action is needed quickly. We do not have time to waste. That is why it is my duty, as President of the United States, to inform you that, if the World Health Organization does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership in the organization. I cannot allow American taxpayer dollars to continue to finance an organization that, in its present state, is so clearly not serving America's interests.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- The rise in zoonotic diseases like the coronavirus disease, or Covid 19 is linked to the loss of biodiversity and forests, public health experts and scientists have said. Zoonotic diseases are those that spread from animals to humans.

There is a consensus among scientists that a rise in zoonotic diseases--Nipah, Ebola, Avian Influenza, Zika, Coronavirus to name a few in recent decades - is driven by biodiversity loss and climate change.

In a press briefing held in New York by the Global Alliance of Indigenous Peoples on Friday, indigenous leaders said the Covid 19 outbreak was a result of loss of native forests and habitat.

"The coronavirus is now telling the world what we have been saying for thousands of years-that if we do not help protect biodiversity and nature, then we will face this and worse future threats," said Levi Sucre Romero, a BriBri indigenous person from Costa Rica who is the Coordinator of the Mesoamerican Alliance of Peoples and Forests.

Scientific studies have already flagged this link. The Intergovernmental Science Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (Similar to Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) in their report last year said that zoonotic diseases are significant threats to human health, with vector-borne diseases accounting for approximately 17 % of all infectious diseases and causing an estimated 700,000 deaths globally per year.

"Emerging infectious diseases in wildlife, domestic animals, plants or people can be exacerbated by human activities such as land clearing and habitat fragmentation," the report said. It also highlighted that around 25% of species in the animal and plant groups were under threat, suggesting that around one million species are already confronting extinction.

The World Health Organization has said there is now evidence of the link between the 2019-nCoV and other similar known coronaviruses (CoV) circulating in bats, and more specifically those of the Rhinolophus bat sub-species.

But the route of transmission to humans is still unclear. The most likely hypothesis is that an intermediary host animal played a role in the transmission of this disease.

According to a 2010 study in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases, about 60% of emerging human pathogens are zoonotic. Of these pathogens, over 71% have wildlife origins.

"There is no doubt that zoonotic diseases are on the rise. One of the reasons for their rise, among many others, is that animals are coming in contact with human habitation. Chikungunya, for example, also came through an intermediate host. More interactions are happening between animals and humans, which may not have been the case earlier. Some emerging zoonotic diseases include Bacterial Anthrax, Brucella, Leptospira, Salmonella, Kyasunar forest disease, Avian influenza, Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic fever, Nipah, Corona among others," said Dr Shobha Broor, former head of department of microbiology at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.

"Now we know that COVID 19 may not have come from snakes. Even from evolutionary perspective, pangolins and bats are more closely related to us than snakes. There is a definite link of forest loss, climate change and these zoonotic diseases. In Karnataka for the past few years, there are reports of the Kyasanur forest disease particularly from Shimoga. There is agreement that it has got to do with habitat loss. Also, cattle enter forest areas transferring infections to wildlife and vice versa," said Kartik Sunagar, assistant professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab at Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science.

"Many mammals, like bats and rodents, harbour virsues and bacteria that can spillover from wildlife populations into humans. Sometimes these spillover events can cause outbreaks, like the one we are experiencing now. Meta-analyses of spillover events across the world suggest that they are more likely to occur when the number of mammal species in an area is high, such as in tropical, biodiverse environments. But other important drivers of spillover are land conversion (e.g. forest clearing for agriculture or developmental activities) and human population density. In parts of India, all three of these are high: we have high biodiversity, high land conversion and high human population density. We must better understand the dynamics of spillover in such situations," said Uma Ramakrishnan, Associate Professor, Senior Fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- President Donald Trump has promised a "conclusive" report on the US investigation into Chinas handling of the coronavirus outbreak and he once against revised projections for US toll, which he said, could now hit 100,000.

"We're going to be giving a very strong report as to exactly what we think happened. And I think it will be very conclusive," Trump said a "virtual town hall" hosted Sunday by Fox News. "My opinion is they made a mistake. They tried to cover it, they tried to put it out., just like a fire."

The US has disputed the Chinese version of the origin of Covid-19 - from a meats and fresh produce market in Wuhan - and alleged it started instead at a virology lab in the same city. And it has also accused Beijing of delaying alerting the rest of the world and of suppressing the true extent of its epidemic.

Secretary of state Mike Pompeo has said the US has "enormous evidence" of the outbreak began at the Wuhan lab. He has not shared any evidence, and neither has any US official thus far, despite continued and rising rhetoric against China, with threats of punitive measures, including making China pay for it.

China has dismissed these allegations and called them last Thursday an effort by the Trump administration to "shift their own responsibility for the poor handling of the epidemic".

The Trump administration has indeed faced questions about its response to the epidemic, essentially for squandering time gained by the earlyFebruary ban on travelers from China. The president has pushed back and insisted he was, in fact, ahead of the curve, citing the same travel restrictions.

At the Fox New town hall, the president sought to shift the blame somewhat on to Anthony Fauci, a top epidemiologist and member of the president's task force on the outbreak - "everybody, even Tony Fauci, was saying it's going to pass, not going to be a big deal".

It did not. And the United States has borne the brunt of the pandemic with 1.15 million confirmed and reported infections till Monday morning, a third of the cases worldwide; and 67,710 fatalities, close to a quarter or the global toll. The US numbers went up in the last 24 hours 25,501 infections and 1,313 deaths.

President Trump said the town hall he fears the fatalities will go up further, revising upwards his earlier assessments. "We're going to lose anywhere from 75-, 80- to 100,000 people," Trump said. "That's a horrible thing. We shouldn't lose one person over this. This should've been stopped in China."

The president had last week that the toll will "hopefully" wind up under 100,000, changing his earlier assessments of 240,000 way back in March before issuing lockdown guidelines to 60,000 and 70,000 in recent days and weeks, as he has sought to frame the reducing numbers as an achievement.

Without the mitigation measures ordered by him the numbers would have been far higher, he has argued.

Even at 100,000, his new projection, is way in excess of the 72,433 Covid-19 deaths projected by the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), whose modeling and numbers have been cited often by the Whit House. The IHME projected number if for August, at the current levels of mitigation.

With many states rolling back restrictions and reopening some businesses, with the very public backing of the president, experts fear a resurgence, specially those that ignore the federal reopening guidelines and and end up "leapfrogging" conditions laid down for graduating from one phase to another.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infecting human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has, until Tuesday, killed over 318,000 people and sickened more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ".SARSCoV2 [the virus that causes Covid-19] is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

The four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus's "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

The research is plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin,Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University, told HT.

China has consistently denied, and cited international research, to deny that he virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology, located in the central Chinese city where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with COVID is we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow in the past been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh, who are both bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India, and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia, Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human, are not rare and have been regularly witnessed with Ebola, bird flu, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Ebright,is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were doing research on bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether COVID-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 30 -- A group of 14 countries including the US, Britain, Japan, Australia and Canada have expressed "shared concerns" with a WHO-backed study on the origins of the Covid-19 outbreak in China and said they supported a "independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence" of the pandemic.

They also said the report was "significantly delayed" and added that it "lacked access to complete, original data and samples", pointing to a lack of cooperation and transparency from China, with naming it.

They did not, however, directly reject the report and said they remained committed to working with the World Health Organization.

"Together, we support a transparent and independent analysis and evaluation, free from interference and undue influence, of the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic," the 14 countries said in a joint statement.

The countries are Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, South Korea, Slovenia, Britain and the US.

"In this regard, we join in expressing shared concerns regarding the recent WHO-convened study in China, while at the same time reinforcing the importance of working together towards the development and use of a swift, effective, transparent, science-based and independent process for international evaluations of such outbreaks of unknown origin in the future," they added.

The report released earlier on Tuesday suggests the deadly virus jumped from bats to other animals to humans. Interestingly, it discounts as "extremely unlikely" the possibility that the coronavirus escaped from a lab - a theory that many experts believe, including Robert Redfield, former US head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Noting the WHO's mission to advance global health security, the 14 countries expressed full support for its staff and experts, saying that "with such an important mandate, it is equally essential that we voice our shared concerns that the international expert study on the source of the Sars-CoV-2 virus was significantly delayed and lacked access to complete, original data and samples".

They added that "there must now be a renewed commitment by the WHO and all member states to access, transparency and timeliness".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 12 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US. The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two smaller state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey, both focused on domestic audiences.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

The reference to 2016 was alleged Russian operations that is believed to have boosted the political campaign of US president Donald Trump, a matter that is presently under investigation. Similar campaigns have been seen in Ukraine where Moscow has been locked in a territorial fight since 2014.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington/New Delhi, May 27 -- US President Donald Trump on Wednesday waded into the tense border standoff between India and China, saying he was "ready, willing and able to mediate" between the two Asian neighbours, a statement that could irk Beijing more than New Delhi.

Shortly before Trump made his offer through a tweet, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at a press conference in Beijing that the situation on the China-India border was "generally stable and controllable." The sides were communicating through both their front-line military units and their respective embassies to "properly resolve relevant issues through dialogue and consultation," Zhao said.

China is committed to abiding by agreements signed by the sides and to "maintaining peace and stability in the border area between China and India", he said.

China's ambassador to India, Sun Weidong, made a pitch for putting ties back on an even keel. Without referring to the border standoff, Sun told a webinar that the two sides "pose no threat to each other" and should "never let the differences shadow the overall. bilateral cooperation". At the same time, he added, they should seek "understanding through communication and constantly resolve differences".

There was no official reaction to both developments from Indian officials, but people familiar with developments acknowledged that the two sides were in contact through diplomatic channels in both New Delhi and Beijing to address the situation.

The Indian side has already made it clear that it won't allow any unilateral alteration of the status quo along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) even as it works towards a peaceful resolution of the worst stand-off since the 73-day face-off between border troops at Doklam in 2017.

Trump, who has in the past repeatedly offered to mediate between India and Pakistan on the issue of Kashmir and been rebuffed by New Delhi, said he had informed India and China of his offer. However, this couldn't be independently confirmed.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute. Thank you!" he tweeted.

The US has been closely tracking the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and Trump's remarks came a week after his administration's outgoing pointperson for South Asia, Alice Wells, strongly backed the Indian position in the standoff and said such disputes are a "reminder of the threat posed by China".

The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical", Wells told reporters on May 20. "And so whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had said.

Chinese envoy Sun Weidong, while fielding questions during the webinar organised by the Confederation of Young Leaders (CYL), underscored the importance of developing bilateral relations and deepening understanding of the "important consensus reached" by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping.

Without any reference whatsoever to the standoff, Sun said: "We should adhere to the basic judgment that China and India are each other's opportunities and pose no threat to each other. We need to see each other's development in a correct way and enhance strategic mutual trust.

"We should correctly view our differences and never let the differences shadow the overall situation of bilateral cooperation. At the same time, we should gradually seek understanding through communication and constantly resolve differences."

The "'Dragon and Elephant dancing together' is the only right choice for China and India" as it serves the fundamental interests of both countries, which should also strengthen cooperation in investment, production and other fields, Sun said.

Sun referred to the responses of both countries to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and said China "will continue to provide assistance to India within our capacity" to fight the pandemic. He also said the two sides will try to celebrate the 70th anniversary of diplomatic relations in various ways despite the pandemic.

Meanwhile, the Indian Army's top brass discussed security issues, including the border row with China in eastern Ladakh, where thousands of Indian and Chinese soldiers are locked in a standoff at multiple points, officials said.

Soldiers from both sides are eyeball-to-eyeball at four locations along the LAC and several rounds of talks between local military commanders have failed to break the deadlock.

The situation in eastern Ladakh was discussed in detail at the three-day army commanders' conference that began on Wednesday. "The apex level leadership of Indian Army will brainstorm on current emerging security and administrative challenges and chart the future course for the army," an army spokesperson said on Tuesday.

Trump's offer to mediate came against the backdrop of steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the US over the Covid-19 outbreak, which followed months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over alleged theft of intellectual property.

People closely involved with India-US discussions said Trump's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful hawks in his administration.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely, much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students," said a person familiar with these matters on condition of anonymity. "China believes it belongs to a more senior class, the argument goes, and will not take kindly to being monitored with India by a higher authority."

India is likely to reject Trump's offer, as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter of policy, which has bipartisan endorsement from all political parties.

Trump and his Republican allies have attacked China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak in a bid to hold it responsible for its spread in the US. Trump has also called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak and American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan.

About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a study conducted by Pew Research Center in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration (January 2017)," the research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 13 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US... The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month, we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- The novel coronavirus is ideally suited to infect human cells rather than animal ones, a new study by researchers in Australia claims, raising questions about the origin of the virus, which has until Tuesday killed over 3.18 lakh people and infected more than 4.8 million globally.

Using an "in silico" or computer simulation method, the researchers found that the data generated indicated ". SARSCoV2 is uniquely adapted to infect humans, raising questions as to whether it arose in nature by a rare chance event or whether its origins lie elsewhere".

A team of four researchers, including two trained in India, tested the binding affinity of Covid-19 virus' "spike protein" to humans and several animals including pangolins.

Also read: 4,970 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours push India's tally past 1 lakh-mark

"Notably, SARSCoV2 spike protein had the highest overall binding energy for human ACE2 (a receptor on cells), greater than all the other tested species including bat, the postulated source of the virus. This indicates that SARSCoV2 is a highly adapted human pathogen," the study found.

The study is yet to be peer-reviewed and is now available on the prestigious US-based Cornell University's pre-print server.

An independent expert spoke to HT and said the research was plausible but the evidence put out to support it was thin.

China has consistently cited international research to deny that the virus originated in a high-security biology lab in Wuhan Institute of Virology. The central Chinese city of Wuhan is where the Covid-19 disease broke out late last year.

Also read: Covid-19 response, China's offer of help - All about day 1 of WHO session

The four researchers of the paper, however, were surprised at the rapid rate at which the virus adapted to humans.

"Normally a virus will bind tightly to the cells of its normal host species and less tightly to cells of species it has not infected before. The surprise with Covid-19 is that we found that it bound tightest to human cells than any other species we tested. This is either a massive coincidence or Covid-19 has somehow, in the past, been adapted for human cells. One way in which this can happen is via culture with human cells in a lab," lead researcher Nikolai Petrovsky, a clinician and vaccinologist, told HT over email.

The other researchers involved are Sakshi Piplani and Puneet Singh - both are bioinformatics scientist originally trained in India - and David Winkler, a professor of biochemistry and genetics.

Piplani and Petrovsky are affiliated to the Flinders University in Australia. Singh is with Vaxine Pty and Winkler is affiliated to the La Trobe University.

"Yes, this virus looks and behaves as if it is perfectly adapted to humans. That is a surprise for a virus that has apparently just entered humans for the first time," Petrovsky said.

He added that zoonotic events, where pathogens jump from animal to human are not rare and have been regularly witnessed in diseases like Ebola, bird flu, MERS etc.

"What is rare is to not find any animal source of the virus. For example, for MERS it was rapidly identified to be coming from camels, SARS from bats via civet cats, Ebola from bats via monkeys. So far, no animal source has been found for Covid-19 - this may still be found, but its absence allows other possibilities to be considered."

Not everyone, like Richard H Ebright, from the department of chemistry and chemical biology at the US's Rutgers University is fully convinced.

"The conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is consistent with the scenario of lab 'gain-of-function' research followed by a lab accident," Ebright told HT over email.

"Gain-of-function" is a scientific research term, which means accelerating research that improves the ability of a pathogen to cause disease.

However, the evidence for that kind of an incident in a lab is thin in the paper, Ebright added.

"However, the evidence for the conclusion of the paper that the virus was 'pre-adapted for human transmission' is thin," he said.

Petrovsky said their study shows the need to carry out more research into the origins of the coronavirus.

"Of course, we know there were institutes in Wuhan that were researching bat and pangolin coronaviruses to which Covid-19 is most closely related, with genetic elements from both. It is certainly possible that if both viruses ended up in a cell culture together, which is not unheard of in a lab due to cross-contamination, then a new variant virus could be created just as it does in an animal that is infected by two viruses at the same time," he said.

"Both scenarios are equally possible, hence the need to do further investigation to see if either of these is the most likely explanation."

The need for further investigation is also emphasised in the research paper.

"Given the seriousness of the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, it is imperative that all efforts be made to identify the original source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus."

The researchers added: "In particular, it will be important to establish whether Covid-19 is due to a completely natural chance occurrence where a presumed bat virus was transmitted to humans via an intermediate animal host or whether Covid-19 has alternative origins. This information will be of paramount importance to help prevent any similar human coronavirus outbreak in the future."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- The first US fatalities from the novel coronavirus took place weeks before previously known, according to autopsy results released Tuesday of two individuals in Santa Clara, California who had died on February 6 and February 17, way ahead of the February 29 death in Washington state considered the first .

"Each one of those deaths is probably the tip of an iceberg of unknown size," Sara Cody, the chief medical officer of Santa Clara county, told the New York Times. "It feels quite significant."

These new fatalities change the US timeline by a quite a bit, specially as President Donald Trump has come under mounting for not doing enough in the month of February after restricting the entry of travelers from China, which he has tended to portray as the high-point of his administration's response.

The deadly pathogen would tear through the United States shortly and catapult it to the top of the casualty list for infections and fatalities. The toll went up by 2,751 in the last 24 hours to 45,075 and by 39,460 is to 825,306 confirmed cases. Deaths in New York state, the American epicenter of the epidemic, were up to 19,118 and 14,887 in New York city.

These number may not reflect it, but the country is past the peak in terms of new cases, and some states have begun spooling back the restrictions alarming critics, but not the White House which has looked on indulgently, in line with the president's backing of lockdown protestors.

The president has also stoked anger against China with increasing attack on its role, alleging it may have misled the world on the origins of the epidemic, which Americans are saying could have started from a virology lab in Wuhan, the city that became the epicenter of the Chinese outbreak; and the then the exact magnitude of its crisis.

Missouri state on Tuesday filed a lawsuit in a federal court alleged gross mismanagement of the crisis by China and sought damages. "Chinese authorities deceived the public, suppressed crucial information, arrested whistleblowers, denied human-to-human transmission in the face of mounting evidence, destroyed critical medical research, permitted millions of people to be exposed to the virus, and even hoarded personal protective equipment-thus causing a global pandemic that was unnecessary and preventable," said the first of its kind lawsuit filed by the state's Republican attorney general Eric Schmitt.

Beijing dismissed the lawsuit as "malicious". China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman Geng Shuang told reporters., "These so-called lawsuits are purely malicious abuses."

"Such abuses are not conducive to epidemic prevention and control in the United States, and also run counter to the current international anti-epidemic cooperation," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 12 -- Twitter announced on Friday that it deleted over 170,000 accounts linked to the Chinese government that pushed false narratives pertaining to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, in what is one of the most prominent disinformation campaigns attributed to a nation-state to have been taken down in recent years.

Coordinated disinformation campaigns such as these have been used as a propaganda strategy by several countries to manipulate public opinion on social media platforms such Facebook and Twitter, and experts say the implications could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The latest network targeted people speaking Chinese languages and pushed pro-Beijing narratives, and, according to Twitter, displayed the same behaviour as a network taken down in August, 2019. At the time, Twitter attributed the network to the Chinese government, citing unblocked IP addresses that only those linked to the administration could have used. Access to Twitter is otherwise blocked in China.

"They were tweeting predominantly in Chinese languages and spreading geopolitical narratives favourable to the Communist Party of China, while continuing to push deceptive narratives about the political dynamics in Hong Kong," Twitter wrote in an analysis on its blog.

According to the post, the accounts included a "highly engaged core" of 23,750 accounts that was boosted by a further 150,000 "amplifier" accounts. Both were largely limited to an echo chamber of their own, the company added.

Open-source researchers have flagged the re-emergence of the so-called Spamouflage network with links to China in recent months. One such detection was in early May after the targeting of exiled businessman Guo Wengui, who criticised the Chinese government's handling of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic.

"Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," said Benjamin Strick, an open source investigator with the BBC, in an interview over instant messaging on Twitter with HT.

Strick first detailed the workings of the Chinese network in a post on digital investigations website Bellingcat on May 5. "The same cluster (of accounts that targeted Guo) amplified specific posts on Covid-19 targeting the US. The posts seen include links between vaping and Covid-19 and biosecurity incidents in the US with the tags #coronavirus and #TruthAboutCovid," the report said.

"Understanding how the network operates is quite important in order to identify it. Last month we found that there were a number of central accounts that posted a pro-Chinese government content such as infographics or slogans in Chinese, but then to give those posts a 'trending' status, or to make them appear as legitimate, thousands of accounts with either Chinese, English or Eastern European names would 'like' and 'retweet' the content," Strick explained in his comments to HT.

In some cases, the accounts would have dozen-odd followers but, he added, some "posts would have well over 1,000 retweets and likes, all from these fake amplifier accounts".

"It's pretty amazing to see a network of this scale, but it's even more shocking to think that it's state-backed, and that it keeps re-emerging and targeting different narratives. It's a great step by Twitter to publish the data on these accounts," he said.

Twitter also removed two smaller state-backed operations which it attributed to Russia and Turkey, both focused on domestic audiences.

Digital information researchers said such operations can have a particularly harmful effect in the middle of a pandemic. "The pandemic has brought information chaos on platforms when lack of information is being exploited to fit needs. For instance, adversaries are using disinformation to blame each other since the origin of the virus is unclear. What's more worrying is the rise of conspiracy theories around the issue," said Kanishk Karan, research associate at Atlantic Council's DFR Lab, a research group exploring disinformation and fake news.

"The health of conversation around a pandemic is very important to monitor, since they can erode trust in public health efforts. Unlike the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, which was aimed at a country's democratic process, this aims at breaking the global trust towards the US," Karan added.

The reference to 2016 was alleged Russian operations that is believed to have boosted the political campaign of US president Donald Trump, a matter that is presently under investigation. Similar campaigns have been seen in Ukraine where Moscow has been locked in a territorial fight since 2014.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 3 -- The Uttarakhand government has further relaxed norms under Unlock 2.0 for people entering from other states, especially for very important persons (VIPs) from the central and state government, judiciary and legislative members who have been exempted from quarantine.

The state government released the guidelines for Unlock 2.0 for inter-state movement for official and other purposes on Thursday.

"Ministers of Government of India, ministers of state government, chief justice and other judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, other judicial officers of district and subordinate judiciary of the state, advocate general, chief standing counsel and other government advocates in the High Court of Uttarakhand, member of parliament and member of the legislative assembly of the Uttarakhand, all officer of the government of India, state government, PSUs, Central or state government organisations, along with their support staff shall be exempted from being quarantined," the guidelines said.

It said these individuals will ensure compliance of all norms of safety and social distancing as per guidelines of the central government.

Inbound passengers from other states will not need permission for such movement though but will have to register themselves on http://smartcitydehradun.uk.gov.in.

The registration documents shall be verified at border check posts. Passengers entering the state from non-high load Covid-19 infected cities shall be home quarantined for 14 days.

Passengers from high load Covid-19 infected cities, irrespective of the mode of travel, will have to undergo a period of seven-days of institutional quarantine and home quarantine each. They will have the option of choosing a government (non-payment basis) quarantine centre or paid quarantine facility.

Pregnant ladies, seriously-ill people, senior citizens above the age of 65 years or those accompanied by children below 10 years of age shall be exempted from institutional quarantine and permitted to stay in home quarantine for 14 days.

Giving further relaxations to people the government said all inbound asymptomatic persons travelling for a short visit of up to seven days in the state for "exceptional and compelling reasons such as a death in the family, serious illness, visiting parents, or any other reason of personal distress, as assessed by the district nodal officer in coordination with health authorities shall be exempted from being quarantined, but will be allowed to move outside their homes."

Such passengers will have to mention the address during the registration process and district administration will verify the movement of such persons.

The guidelines further mention that the Indian Army, Indian Navy, Indian Air Force and para-military forces "shall make their own arrangement" for institutional quarantine for officers, personnel and family members visiting for high load Covid-19 infected cities.

All asymptomatic passengers travelling by flight and transiting through high-load Covid-19 cities where the origin is not from such a city will have to undergo 14-days of home quarantine.

Asymptomatic persons travelling to the state for maximum three-days will be exempted from being quarantined. No permission is required for inter-district movement, but registration on the web portal is mandatory, according to the fresh guidelines.

For tourism purposes, all asymptomatic persons travelling from other countries will have to undergo a period of seven-days of institutional quarantine along with seven-days of home quarantine. In the case of "exceptional and compelling circumstances", home quarantine may be permitted for 14-days to asymptomatic persons.

All hotels, bed and breakfast, homestay and hospitality services shall be allowed to open in the state except for those in containment zones. Hotel management should ensure that bookings for people from other states are made for a minimum of seven days.

However, there would be no restrictions regarding the minimum period of stay for persons who undergo RT-PCR test from a lab authorised by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) with a negative report, 72-hours before arriving at the concerned hotel or hospitality service.

Action will be taken against violators under relevant sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC), Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act. Those who do not undergo the test will have to give a self-declaration that they will not visit any public places.

Hotels outside containment zones will also be allowed to serve liquor only as room service and not in the bars.

Suryakant Dhasmana, vice-president of Congress' Uttarakhand unit, said Covid-19 disease does not differentiate based on status, caste, creed, religion of people.

"Prime ministers and health ministers of major countries also got infected by Covid-19, and here there are exemptions for VIPs. On one hand, our Prime Minister says that the VIP culture has been done within the country, and on the other, we have such rules." he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 13 -- Coronavirus cases across the globe are inching toward the 2 million-mark while more than one lakh people have lost their lives to the deadly contagion worldwide.

What started in the Chinese city of Wuhan has now spread across the globe, infecting hundreds and thousands across various continents, bringing some of the biggest economies to a halt.

There's very little known about the virus or its origin. There are no proven vaccines or medication against the same. A study conducted by the Pew Research Centre suggests that most Americans believe that Covid-19 was lab-grown.

Nearly three in ten Americans or a quarter of the American population, as many as 29% of those surveyed, believe that novel coronavirus was grown in a lab, the survey indicated.

43% of Americans believe that the virus came about naturally.

The findings were obtained after conducting a survey between March 10 to 16.

According to Johns Hopkins University, the United States recorded 1,514 coronavirus fatalities over the past 24 hours. However, the number of fatalities was lower than the previous day's toll of 1,920.

The outbreak has now claimed at least 22,020 lives in the US, the most of any country.

US President Donald Trump has lashed out at leading American newspaper The New York Times (NYT), accusing it of carrying fake report on his administration's Covid-19 response.

"The @nytimes story is a Fake, just like the "paper" itself. I was criticized for moving too fast when I issued the China Ban, long before most others wanted to do so. @SecAzar told me nothing until later, and Peter Navarro memo was same as Ban (see his statements). Fake News!" he tweeted on Monday morning.

In India, 620 new Covid-19 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. The overall coronavirus tally breached the 9,000-mark with 9,152 total cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- President Donal Trump on Wednesday said he has offered to arbitrate the India-China border dispute in what is being seen as move that will irk Beijing more than New Delhi, given the steadily rising hostility and antipathy towards China in the United States over the Covid-19 outbreak, which comes on top of months of differences over trade and mounting irritation over theft of intellectual property.

"We have informed both India and China that the United States is ready, willing and able to mediate or arbitrate their now raging border dispute," Trump wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning.

The United States has been closely watching the latest flare-up on the India-China border, and had sided with India in its first official response. The flare-ups were a "reminder that Chinese aggression is not always just rhetorical".," Alice Wells, the top US diplomat for South and Central Asia had told reporters last week.

"Whether it's in the South China Sea or whether it's along the border with India, we continue to see provocations and disturbing behaviour by China that raises questions about how China seeks to use its growing power," she had added.

There were no followup pronouncements from the US since, till the morning tweet from the president, with his offer to mediate. No official explanation was forthcoming of the president's new offer and it was not clear if either India and China had asked the American leader to intervene. A response is awaited from the White House to a request for more information.

But people closely involved with India-US discussions and developments said the president's tweet conformed to continuing hardening of his antipathy for China, driven by powerful China hawks in the administration,.

"It's a move to poke the Chinese, surely," said a person familiar with these matters, "much like a class teacher calling two squabbling students." China believes it belongs to a more senior class, argument goes, and will not take kindly to being "monitored" with India by a higher authority.

"Think how Indians feel when someone offers to arbitrate their dispute with Pakistan," it was said.

India will reject the president's offer as it has rejected all third-party mediation in any of its international disputes as a matter a policy, which has widespread bipartisan endorsement from all political parties. It had earlier rejected President Trump's offer to mediate the dispute with Pakistan within minutes of it being made, at the urging of Prime Minister Imran Khan."

President Trump and his Republican allies have been attacking China relentlessly over the Covid-19 outbreak, in a bid to hold it responsible also for its spread in America, which is now the epicenter of the pandemic with the most cases and fatalities.

Trump has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak - American officials have suggested the virus might have leaked from a virology lab in Wuhan - and China's handling of it, including the exact magnitude of the devastation their, accusing Beijing of covering it up.

On Tuesday the president told reporters to expect the announcement of an "interesting" action against China, regarding developments in Hong Kong, where protests have broken out against Beijing's attempt to criminalize disrespect to the national flag. He did not specify.

"We're doing something now. I think you'll find it very interesting, but I won't be talking about it today," he said responding to a question if he was contemplating sanctions.

In recent weeks, the Trump administration has severely restricted US stay of Chinese journalists deemed working for state-run outfits and announced alerts for its pharmaceutical companies and research institutions working on Covid-19 vaccine and therapeutics about Chinese attempts to steal their work through cyber-hacking.

Close Trump allies on Capital Hill have been calling for restricting Chinese students only to certain course in institutions of higher studies. "It's a scandal to me that we have trained so many of the Chinese communists," Senator Tom Cotton said recently. "If Chinese students want to come here and learn Shakespeare and the Federalist Papers-that's what they need to learn from America; they don't need to learn quantum computing and artificial intelligence from America."

About About two-thirds of Americans - 66% - have an unfavourable view of China, according to a new study by the Pew Research Center, conducted in March. "This is the most negative rating for the country since the Center began asking the question in 2005 and is up nearly 20 percentage points since the start of the Trump administration. (January 2017)," research body said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Sept. 23 -- Although China may not have deliberately created Covid-19, it is possible that its release was the result of a lab accident at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which has been doing "gain-of-function" research on bat coronaviruses. Such research modifies a virus to make it deadlier or more transmissible - specifically, transmissible between species. We may never know the truth of the virus's origin. But, the Covid-19 pandemic has shown the Chinese government what is possible: To decimate global economies without inviting a significant economic or geopolitical toll itself. So there are new dangers.

Gene editing has now made it possible to engineer viruses whose effects range from Covid-19 to the bubonic plague. And the danger comes not only from governments: Rogue scientists and bio-hackers have access to the same tools. This is why India must take the lead in developing bio-defences. In my book, The Driver in the Driverless Car, I warned about the dangers of gene editing, forecasting that, in an era of bio-ethicists and bio-hackers, we will have to make difficult choices about whether to restrict the synthetic-biology technologies making the manufacture of these viruses possible. The danger is acute, the book explains, because in the near future, we will routinely have our genetic material analysed. With Artificial Intelligence (AI) and genomic data, scientists will decipher the complex relationships between DNA and biological processes and find treatments for diseases. Later in this decade, we will be able to download and "print" at home medicines, tissues, and bacteria custom-designed to suit our DNA and keep us healthy.

As we are seeing with the development of vaccines for the Sars-CoV-2 virus, accelerated research and development is possible. In the past, the creation and testing of vaccine candidates against pathogens have taken decades. Now, we are on track to do it within months. There are several companies using genomic blueprints made of DNA or ribonucleic acid (RNA) to teach the body how to defend itself from Covid-19. By injecting these into human cells, they cause them to produce virus antigens - which the immune system reacts to. The Moderna Therapeutics and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine candidates, now in phase-three clinical trials, were developed in weeks; it is conceivable that the same could be done in hours once the technologies are perfected.

In the updated Indian edition of The Driver in the Driverless Car, I included details of a cancer-cure plan that I presented to Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi at Kevadia, Gujarat, last October, a plan predicated on India's readiness to embrace advancing technologies. With these, India has the potential not only to provide its people with the most-advanced medical care but also to cure cancer itself. It can lead the world in research and innovation and lay the foundation for a trillion-dollar medical industry. I proposed that in order to achieve this, India launch the largest clinical trial in world history and use technologies such as genomics, synthetic biology, sensors, 3D printing, and AI to analyse data and develop treatments. Not only will this provide direct benefit to cancer patients; the discoveries will lead to the creation of hundreds of start-ups in India and fuel innovation in the medical sciences. This is the type of initiative that India must launch in preparation for the next pandemic.

India could also accelerate the process of testing vaccines - which has become the slowest part of the development cycle. In testing cancer drugs, for example, labs all over the world are creating three-dimensional cell cultures, "patient-derived organoids", from a tumour biopsy. The leading company in this field, SEngine Precision Medicine, is able to test more than 100 cancer drugs on organoids, using the tumours rather than human subjects as guinea pigs. Researchers at Harvard's Wyss Institute announced in January that they had developed the first human "organ-on-a-chip" model of the lung that accurately recapitulates human physiology and pathophysiology at organ sophistication. Massachusetts Institute of Technology engineers have been developing a microfluidic platform that connects engineered tissues from up to 10 organs, allowing the replication of human-organ interactions for weeks at a time and measurement of the effects of drugs on different body parts. Many more such systems are in development that could accelerate testing and treatment; and these are the missing component of bio-defence testing.

All of these technologies can be designed and developed in India, with an investment comparable to the cost of the Mangalyaan and Chandrayaan-2 missions. In my conversation with him, I found PM Modi to be brilliant in understanding technologies and their potential. He was excited about having India take the global leader in medical research, and asked his chief scientific adviser, K Vijay Raghavan, to present him with a proposal to implement it by February. Then Covid-19 happened and all efforts were put on hold. It is time for India to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat by the coronavirus - and to implement the grand plans to build its bio-defences and benefit the world by curing disease.

Vivek Wadhwa is a distinguished fellow at the Labor and Worklife Program of Harvard Law School and the author of The Driver in the Driverless Car: How Our Technology Choices Will Create the Future The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 2 -- Dr Maheshwar Prasad Chaurasia always wanted to write a novel. In May, he attended a webinar on how to write and publish a book. At the workshop, his writing instructor suggested that he start his journey as an author with a non-fictional work. He decided to write a book on Delhi's fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic.

Dr Chaurasia was qualified to do so -as additional superintendent at Delhi's government's Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital, he was part of the core team that set up the city's first quarantine centres, isolation wards and testing facilities in the initial months of the pandemic.

"Those were the early days of the pandemic and we did not know much about the virus. Doctors and officials went sleepless for days as they fought the pandemic. People were in a panic and were asking so many questions. My book is about how the doctors and the administration fought the pandemic in its initial months," says Chaurasia , whose book -- Just Switch Off Corona -- was released last month.

Chaurasia is not the only writer to have been inspired by the pandemic. Hundreds of books with titles such as Corona: A Checkmate; Murder in the Time of Corona; The Corona Wars; Corona Kiss; The Pandemic Plot; My Pandemic Experience, have been published in the past couple of months. Interestingly, a majority of these books -- poetry, fiction, non-fiction in English, Hindi, Tamil and many other Indian languages -- are by first- time writers and have been brought out by self- publishing companies.

The writers of these books include doctors, information technology (IT) professionals, teachers, most of whom seem to have drawn from their own experiences and understanding of the pandemic.

Dr Kumar Shyam, who lives in Hapur, a town in the National Capital Region, about 70 km from Delhi, last month published The Pandemic Plot, a novel that he says draws from the conspiracy theories surrounding the origin and nature of the coronavirus. The book that moves from Wuhan in China to Italy is the story of an international medical team comprising scientists from many countries, including India, who go on a mission to find the answers to some of the trickiest questions about the origin and spread of the virus.

His slim page-turner about this global quest ends with the conclusion that researchers at a Wuhan lab get infected and die and the virus spreads into the rest of the world.

"The governments and health systems around the world did not know what had hit them and there are so many conspiracy theories surrounding the origin and spread of the virus. l thought all of this made for a novel. I used many real incidents to connect the dots, " says Dr Shyam, a general surgeon, who owns a 100-bed hospital in Hapur."Being a doctor helped me write about virology with authenticity," says the doctor, who wrote the book every night in his personal library that boasts 3,000 books.

Rahul Bhardwaj, managing director at Yash Publications, which published The Pandemic Plot, says the book is a hit, having sold over 3,000 copies in hardback and paperback since its release last month.

"We have got 30 proposals for books on Corona and have already published three. Four more will be published next month," Bhardwaj adds.

Notion Press, one of the country's biggest self- publishing companies has brought out as many as 40 titles on the coronavirus, both fiction and non-fiction in English, Hindi and Tamil. Some of the titles published by it include Born in Lockdown, Pandemic Spell, Murder in the Time of Corona, Why and How China developed the Coronavirus.

Interestingly, Naveen Valsakumar, co-founder and CEO of Notion Press, says that one of the reasons why there are so many coronavirus-related books on his company's platform is that a lot of the writers are young and tech-savvy, who studied Google Trends and realised that there was a lot of curiosity about the pandemic.

"So, they decided to write books based on those trending searches. We made it clear to all writers that we will not publish any book offering unvalidated medical advice on Corona. For many people, writing about the pandemic has been a cathartic experience," says Valsakumar.

Love and romance are among the most popular genres among those writing on the coronavirus. Sample some of the titles in the category: Corona Kiss, Cupid Covid; Love in the Time of Corona Virus, A Second Chance with Love in Corona. In fact, there are dozens of books titled Love in the Time of Corona. A lot of these stories involve young doctors whose lives are torn apart as they fight the virus.

"Lockdown had a deep impact on relationships and that is the subject of my two Corona books" says Kawalpreet Kaur, a 26-year-old teacher. Her first book, Love in the Time of Corona Virus, and its sequel, The Dark 21 Days, feature the stories of two youngsters who battle not just caste, and but also Covid-19 in a hospital in Italy.

Sayed Arshad, founder of Blue Rose Publishers says the reason why most books have been published by self- publishing companies is their ability to bring out a book fast, something many of the writers want. "Normally it takes about seven months to bring out a book, most self- publishing companies take three weeks flat," he said.

After English, the maximum number of books on the coronavirus are in Hindi, and with some curious tiles: Namaste Corona ; Corona se Atmagyan (Enlightenment through Corona); Akash Me Corona Ghana Hai (The Sky is eclipsed by dense Corona); Corona Ek Safar (Corona, a journey). Rounak Rai, an art teacher and author of Corona se Atmagyan, a collection of 33 poems accompanied by his drawings, says he wrote the book during the lockdown.

"Corona brought out the best and the worst in human beings. My book captures the pain, the suffering and what this pandemic taught us about ourselves and about others," said Rai.

"But one of the unintended benefits of the pandemic is the fact that it encouraged people to look within and become writers," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, May 5 -- US President Donald Trump has promised to present a "conclusive" report on the US investigation into China's handling of the Covid-19 outbreak and the actual origin of the coronavirus.

"We're going to be giving a very strong report as to exactly what we think happened. And I think it will be very conclusive," the US president said.

"My opinion is that they (China) made a mistake. They tried to cover it, they tried to put it out, just like a fire," Trump added.

The US has disputed the Chinese government's version of the origin of the virus - from a wet market in Wuhan - and alleged that it came from a virology lab in that city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 19 -- US President Donald Trump on Tuesday took to Twitter and shared the three-page long letter that he has written to World Health Organisation (WHO) chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. In his tweet, Trump said that the letter is "self-explanatory".

Time and again, the US president has accused the global health body for supporting China during the coronavirus pandemic.

"The WHO failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself," Trump's letter read.

Trump said that the WHO "consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December" and concluded his letter by saying that "the only way forward for the WHO is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China."

Here's the full transcript of the Trump's letter to the WHO chief:

Dear Dr. Tedros:

On April 14, 2020, I suspended United States contributions to the World Health Organization pending an investigation by my Administration of the organization's failed response to the COVID-19 outbreak. This review has confirmed many of the serious concerns I raised last month and identified others that the World Health Organization should have addressed, especially the World Health Organization's alarming lack of independence from the People's Republic of China. Based on this review, we now know the following:

*The World Health Organization consistently ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019 or even earlier, including reports from the Lancet medical journal. The World Health Organization failed to independently investigate credible reports that conflicted directly with the Chinese government's official accounts, even those that came from sources within Wuhan itself.

* By no later than December 30, 2019, the World Health Organization office in Beijing knew that there was a "major public health" concern in Wuhan. Between December 26 and December 30, China's media highlighted evidence of a new virus emerging from Wuhan, based on patient data sent to multiple Chinese genomics companies. Additionally, during this period, Dr. Zhang Jixian, a doctor from Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, told China's health authorities that a new coronavirus was causing a novel disease that was, at the time, afflicting approximately 180 patients.

* By the next day, Taiwanese authorities had communicated information to the World Health Organization indicating human-to-human transmission of a new virus. Yet the World Health Organization chose not to share any of this critical information with the rest of the world, probably for political reasons.

* The International Health Regulations require countries to report the risk of a health emergency within 24 hours. But China did not inform the World Health Organization of Wuhan's several cases of pneumonia, of unknown origin, until December 31, 2019, even though it likely had knowledge of these cases days or weeks earlier.

* According to Dr. Zhang Yongzhen of the Shanghai Public Health Clinic Center, he told Chinese authorities on January 5, 2020, that he had sequenced the genome of the virus. There was no publication of this information until six days later, on January 11, 2020, when Dr. Zhang self-posted it online. The next day, Chinese authorities closed his lab for "rectification." As even the World Health Organization acknowledged, Dr. Zhang's posting was a great act of "transparency." But the World Health Organization has been conspicuously silent both with respect to the closure of Dr. Zhang's lab and his assertion that he had notified Chinese authorities of his breakthrough six days earlier.

* The World Health Organization has repeatedly made claims about the coronavirus that were either grossly inaccurate or misleading.

- On January 14, 2020, the World Health Organization gratuitously reaffirmed China's now-debunked claim that the coronavirus could not be transmitted between humans, stating: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) identified in Wuhan, China." This assertion was in direct conflict with censored reports from Wuhan.

- On January 21, 2020, President Xi Jinping of China reportedly pressured you not to declare the coronavirus outbreak an emergency. You gave in to this pressure the next day and told the world that the coronavirus did not pose a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Just over one week later, on January 30, 2020, overwhelming evidence to the contrary forced you to reverse course.

- On January 28, 2020, after meeting with President Xi in Beijing, you praised the Chinese government for its "transparency" with respect to the coronavirus, announcing that China had set a "new standard for outbreak control" and "bought the world time." You did not mention that China had, by then, silenced or punished several doctors for speaking out about the virus and restricted Chinese institutions from publishing information about it.

* Even after you belatedly declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30, 2020, you failed to press China for the timely admittance of a World Health Organization team of international medical experts. As a result, this critical team did not arrive in China until two weeks later, on February 16, 2020. And even then, the team was not allowed to visit Wuhan until the final days of their visit. Remarkably, the World Health Organization was silent when China denied the two American members of the team access to Wuhan entirely.

* You also strongly praised China's strict domestic travel restrictions, but were inexplicably against my closing of the United States border, or the ban, with respect to people coming from China. I put the ban in place regardless of your wishes. Your political gamesmanship on this issue was deadly, as other governments, relying on your comments, delayed imposing life-saving restrictions on travel to and from China. Incredibly, on February 3, 2020, you reinforced your position, opining that because China was doing such a great job protecting the world from the virus, travel restrictions were "causing more harm than good." Yet by then the world knew that, before locking down Wuhan, Chinese authorities had allowed more than five million people to leave the city and that many of these people were bound for international destinations all over the world.

* As of February 3, 2020, China was strongly pressuring countries to lift or forestall travel restrictions. This pressure campaign was bolstered by your incorrect statements on that day telling the world that the spread of the virus outside of China was "minimal and slow" and that "the chances of getting this going to anywhere outside China [were] very low."

* On March 3, 2020, the World Health Organization cited official Chinese data to downplay the very serious risk of asymptomatic spread, telling the world that "COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently as influenza" and that unlike influenza this disease was not primarily driven by "people who are infected but not yet sick." China's evidence, the World Health Organization told the world, "showed that only one percent of reported cases do not have symptoms, and most of those cases develop symptoms within two days." Many experts, however, citing data from Japan, South Korea, and elsewhere, vigorously questioned these assertions. It is now clear that China's assertions, repeated to the world by the World Health Organization, were wildly inaccurate.

* By the time you finally declared the virus a pandemic on March 11, 2020, it had killed more than 4,000 people and infected more than 100,000 people in at least 114 countries around the world.

* On April 11, 2020, several African Ambassadors wrote to the Chinese Foreign Ministry about the discriminatory treatment of Africans related to the pandemic in Guangzhou and other cities in China. You were aware that Chinese authorities were carrying out a campaign of forced quarantines, evictions, and refusal of services against the nationals of these countries. You have not commented on China's racially discriminatory actions. You have, however, baselessly labeled as racist Taiwan's well-founded complaints about your mishandling of this pandemic.

* Throughout this crisis, the World Health Organization has been curiously insistent on praising China for its alleged "transparency." You have consistently joined in these tributes, notwithstanding that China has been anything but transparent. In early January, for example, China ordered samples of the virus to be destroyed, depriving the world of critical information. Even now, China continues to undermine the International Health Regulations by refusing to share accurate and timely data, viral samples and isolates, and by withholding vital information about the virus and its origins. And, to this day, China continues to deny international access to their scientists and relevant facilities, all while casting blame widely and recklessly and censoring its own experts.

* The World Health Organization has failed to publicly call on China to allow for an independent investigation into the origins of the virus, despite the recent endorsement for doing so by its own Emergency Committee. The World Health Organization's failure to do so has prompted World Health Organization member states to adopt the "COVID-19 Response" Resolution at this year's World Health Assembly, which echoes the call by the United States and so many others for an impartial, independent, and comprehensive review of how the World Health Organization handled the crisis. The resolution also calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, which is necessary for the world to understand how best to counter the disease.

Perhaps worse than all these failings is that we know that the World Health Organization could have done so much better. Just a few years ago, under the direction of a different Director-General, the World Health Organization showed the world how much it has to offer. In 2003, in response to the outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in China, Director-General Harlem Brundtland boldly declared the World Health Organization's first emergency travel advisory in 55 years, recommending against travel to and from the disease epicenter in southern China. She also did not hesitate to criticize China for endangering global health by attempting to cover up the outbreak through its usual playbook of arresting whistleblowers and censoring media. Many lives could have been saved had you followed Dr. Brundtland's example.

It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world. The only way forward for the World Health Organization is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China. My Administration has already started discussions with you on how to reform the organization. But action is needed quickly. We do not have time to waste. That is why it is my duty, as President of the United States, to inform you that, if the World Health Organization does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership in the organization. I cannot allow American taxpayer dollars to continue to finance an organization that, in its present state, is so clearly not serving America's interests.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 16 -- The retraction of influential studies published in two of the world's leading scientific journals last week was a rude reminder of the perils of moving at warp speed to find a treatment or cure for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has infected eight million and killed 430,000 in less than six months of the World Health Organisation (WHO)being informed by China about a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in Wuhan on December 31, 2019.

By January 30, it had infected 7,818 people, of which 82 were in 18 other countries, which forced a seemingly reluctant WHO to declare the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), as it was then called, a public health emergency of international concern. Scientists from across the world stepped up to defuse the emerging health threat with every tool that they had. Never before have so many scientists, researchers and clinicians from across specialties focused on a single disease or used such a wide variety of innovative techniques and platforms for vaccine and drug development. Never before have regulatory processes been fast-tracked at such scale for emergency use of drug and vaccine trials.

"The need for speed should not throw caution to the wind. Dubious data sources and poorly designed clinical trials of experimental drugs and vaccines have raised more concerns than solutions," said Sujatha Rao, a former health secretary of the ministry of health and family welfare.

Need for speed

As on June 12, the US National Library of Medicine Registry of ClinicalTrials.gov had 2,122 registered studies on the disease, with hundreds more registered in national registries.

"When publication is going at a high speed, you don't always notice the traffic signals. There are three things happening now. People are publishing through a rapid review process, studies are being published in pre-prints, people are writing blogs where they can write anything and interpret anything they call data. In the usual (scientific journal) publication cycle, nothing gets published in three or four days. From submission to publication, it normally takes at least three to four weeks and often more than six weeks. If I get an article for review from The Lancet, which I frequently do, I get a minimum of 10 days," said Dr K Srinath Reddy, president, Public Health Foundation of India.

Pre-print publication is a practice borrowed from other sciences, such as physics and Math, where researchers put their papers on a website and invite comments from the scientist community, based on which they modify and correct their analysis before publication.

What works for theoretical sciences, however, doesn't work as well for medical research, which has immediate implications on health and life. "Rapid reviews are causing problems because the reviewers are chosen in haste and they don't have adequate time to look at the data properly and they are under pressure to respond quickly," said Reddy.

Peer review is important to ensure quality of scientific communications, incorporating inputs of other experts. "While pre-publication peer-review is the standard, there are good examples of post-publication review as well. Validation by other researchers is perhaps the most important, especially when the findings are unexpected or controversial," said Dr Anurag Agrawal, director of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology.

Review, reform

But this very validation process spectacularly failed in the case of the two retracted studies in The Lancet and The New England Journal of Medicine. The Lancet paper raised safety concerns about the experimental use of the anti-malarial drugs for treatment and led to WHO suspending the hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine arm of its multi-country trial, much to the dismay of India, which is the world's largest producer of these affordable generic drugs that have been used to treat malaria for close to a century. "The key concern for us was that the data was questionable that made analysis unreliable and any results misleading. If not for the name of the journal, the paper would have not have been taken as seriously," said Agrawal.

While journals have established validation processes, such papers can slip between the cracks because of several reasons, including the authors belonging to reputable institutions like Harvard University, or the reviewers having confirmation bias, where they agree with the study's conclusion even before they begin scrutinising how the result has been arrived at.

For a disease barely six months old, generating high-quality data quickly and efficiently is a challenge, which makes review and scrutiny all the more critical. "It's the job of a journal's editorial team to do an independent review and ensure it doesn't get shoddy when it is inundated with research studies," said Dr Jacob T John, former head of the department of virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu.

Retractions are not rare, but they are growing. In 2019, there were 1,433 retractions from scientific journals, according to Retraction Watch, which has been tracking retractions for a decade. In 1997, the number was 44.

Trial by error

Vaccine development, on average, takes 10.71 years from the preclinical phase, and has a success rate of 6%, according to a study in the journal, PLOS One. Some remain elusive despite decades of massive investment, as we have seen in the case of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus that causes the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS.

Work on a Covid-19 vaccine began on January 11, within a day of China sharing the genome of the new coronavirus that came to be called Sars-CoV-2. By June 12, there were 10 experimental vaccines in advanced stages of clinical trials and 115 in pre-clinical evaluation stages, according to WHO.

Scientists are working across emerging technology platforms that have never been used for vaccine development before. Moderna's mRNA-1273, which entered into clinical trials just 66 days after Sars-CoV-2 was first sequenced in China, showcases the potential for DNA- and RNA-based vaccines that use the messenger RNA (mRNA) platform to elicit an immune response against the virus.

"If it is approved, it will be the first messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine against any disease in the world. We don't fully know the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines as yet. However, there is high quality science and pre-clinical evidence for this fast and flexible platform for vaccine development. We will have to wait and see," said Agrawal.

Vaccine development includes at least three human trials to test their safety, dosage and the strength and duration of the protection they offer, followed by production, licensure, deployment of vaccines and plans for post-marketing surveillance. Many of these trials have been collapsed and merged to have a vaccine ready for use within the next six to eight months.

"With Covid-19, the goal from the beginning has been to develop, test and manufacture a vaccine on a scale of hundreds of millions of doses within 12 to 18 months, so an unprecedented approach has been adopted. With promising preliminary preclinical and phase 1 data available, meticulously planned trials are needed to separate the contenders from pretenders. Since approvals are expected for an emergency use vaccine, developers start mass manufacturing as soon as they complete phase 2 trials, and in doing so, risk the failure of phase 3. In such cases, consortiums and countries fund for risk reduction and provide market commitments," said Dr N K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research. This is where new technology lab-based platforms help. RNA- and DNA-based vaccines are faster and cheaper to produce than synthetic vaccines as they involve synthetic production of the genetic material, and not the virus. "The production is lab-based, so it can be quickly standardised and scaled up," said Ganguly.

Getting a large enough sample size across age groups is essential as the results in one population might not translate to the other.

"Whether it is vaccines or drug development, what is crucial is independent scientific validation to ensure the vaccines and drugs are safe and effective because getting it wrong would mean playing with lives," said Ganguly.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Srinagar, March 7 -- Over 15 lakh (1.5 million) tulips are expected to bloom at the end of this month in Kashmir's Tulip Garden, one of the largest in Asia, and will mesmerize thousands of tourists and locals.

The bloom usually lasts up to a maximum of four weeks but the efforts in making the garden reach this stage is a long, painstaking and cumbersome process involving the blood and sweat of some 120 gardeners, labourers, among other workers.

For a few weeks of visual aesthetics for the visitors in the months of March-April, the gardeners and labourers toil yearlong, braving the vagaries of weather and indulging in constant hard work.

"The tulip flowers last for a maximum of one month but the process continues for the whole year and involves a very cumbersome activity. The garden is the result of sweat and blood of our employees and workers," said Sofi Inam-ur-Rehman, assistant floriculture officer and in-charge of the Tulip Garden.

This year, an additional two lakh bulbs have been added to the 30-hectare terracing garden at Siraj Bagh in Srinagar than last year when the bloom of 13 lakh (1.3 million) tulips had quietly withered away without catching an eye of any visitor due to the Covid-19 lockdown.

This year, te bloom is expected to happen in the last week of March as the temperature-sensitive flowers need mercury to stay above 15 degrees at a stretch.

"The opening of the garden is weather dependent. The temperatures in March have gone down from above-normal in February. There is also a prediction of rains from March 07. The garden won't open before March 20," said in-charge deputy director of the floriculture department, Shayiq Rasool.

Usually, the blooming begins by late March. The average life of a tulip flower is 20 days and can stretch to a maximum of 25 with overall bloom getting extended by adding late-blooming varieties of tulips.

The flowers start to fall by late April. "During the bloom, the work gets doubled because we have to take care of the flowers as well as deal with the enthusiastic visitors," said Abdul Rehman, 55, who has been working as a gardener in Tulip Garden for the past five years.

He said that they have to observe the plants as the foliage of the tulip bulbs is allowed to dry up for May and up to June 15. He said that the rigorous work starts a the beginning of July when the summer heat is at its peak.

"In July, August and September, we have to painstakingly remove the bulbs with proper caution to store them in cold stores with proper grading," Rehman said. "Mind you, these are not a few hundred or thousand bulbs but over a million and a half," he said.

The temperature in the cold sheds is maintained at around 15 to 18 degrees.

Rehman said that there is a depreciation of tulip bulbs year after year and the officials have to import more tulip bulbs every year. "Around 30 per cent bulbs get damaged or diseased during and after the extraction process and have to be replaced by new bulbs," he said.

Sofi said that they import the bulbs every year from Holland.

"This year we bought 4.6 lakh tulip bulbs from Holland which is the world's biggest flower bulb market," Sofi said.

A tulip bulb may cost anywhere between Rs.12 and 24. "The rates depend on the condition of the international market which works on euro rates," he said.

The picturesque garden, one of the biggest tulip gardens in Asia and located on the foothills of the Zabarwan range and the banks of majestic Dal Lake, has over 63 varieties of red, yellow, pink, white, purple, blue, yellow and multi-color - early blooming, mid blooming and late blooming - tulip bulbs this year.

"The colours are to cherish. It is an array of hues. Besides the usual ones, we also have crimson and brick red, maroon and apricot colour. The early and late blooming varieties have been added to extend the total blooming period," he said.

In addition to tulips, the garden also has hyacinths, daffodils and spring-flowering shrubs. "We also have ornamental trees like apricots and almonds which coincide with tulip blooming. This has been done to enhance the beauty of the garden," he said.

The garden has been divided into 36 plots with 16-18 beds in each plot. There are three parks also inside the garden where the visitors can sit and visualize themselves in a sea of colours, dominated by the Zabarwan Mountains. Various small ornamental trees including the tulip tree decorate the sides of the numerous paths of the garden.

In October, soil preparation is done by using tractors. The beds are also prepared during the period with proper channels for draining of water as well as for beautification.

"By November 15, the sowing of tulip bulbs starts. It takes around a month by which time the winter sets in," said Mohammad Ayoub Lone, another gardener who has been here for the past 16 years.

"By February 20, when the snow has already melted, we start to loosen the soil and remove unwanted grass. The spray is done as the flowers start to grow," he said.

Kashmir's connection with tulips traces back its origin hundreds of years when the flowers were grown on muddy rooftops of houses. Gradually, they were grown in kitchen gardens and flower beds till in 2005-06 the then state government decided to convert Siraj Bagh into a regal Tulip Garden in keeping with Kashmir's historical ties with tulips.

On the foothills of Zabarwan range, the Tulip Garden was opened in 2007 on sloping ground with multiple terraces, overlooking the scenic Botanical Garden.

In 2019, the garden attracted 2.58 lakh visitors, including many local Kashmiris and 1.9 lakh in 2018 as the annual Tulip Festival gained popularity.

Tourism nosedived in Kashmir in 2019 as the central government revoked the special status under Article 370 of the erstwhile state and split the region into two Union territories on August 5 and put it under restrictions. The lockdown implemented in March 2020 owing to the Covid-19 pandemic further exacerbated the situation.

Shayiq Rasool, the deputy director, said that the garden has become a landmark for tourism and indirectly benefits thousands of people in the sector.

"Our annual budget for the garden is around one crore rupees and in return, it gives us a lot of bookings for the hotels, houseboats and transport sector. We have to look at its trickle-down benefits," he said.

Meanwhile, gardener M Ayoub Lone is eagerly waiting for the mesmerizing bloom.

"The beauty is not actually of the garden but of the hard work I and my colleagues have put in to make it bloom. When it does we want to be here, day and night," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 16 -- The retraction of influential studies published in two of the world's leading scientific journals last week was a rude reminder of the perils of moving at warp speed to find a treatment or cure for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), which has infected eight million and killed 430,000 in less than six months of the World Health Organisation (WHO)being informed by China about a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in Wuhan on December 31, 2019.

By January 30, it had infected 7,818 people, of which 82 were in 18 other countries , which forced a seemingly reluctant WHO to declare the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), as it was then called, a public health emergency of international concern. Scientists from across the world stepped up to defuse the emerging health threat with every tool that they had. Never before have so many scientists, researchers and clinicians from across specialties focused on a single disease or used such a wide variety of innovative techniques and platforms for vaccine and drug development. Never before have regulatory processes been fast-tracked at such scale for emergency use of drug and vaccine trials.

"The need for speed should not throw caution to the wind. Dubious data sources and poorly designed clinical trials of experimental drugs and vaccines have raised more concerns than solutions," said Sujatha Rao, a former health secretary of the ministry of health and family welfare.

Need for speed

As on June 12, the US National Library of Medicine Registry of ClinicalTrials.gov had 2,122 registered studies on the disease, with hundreds more registered in national registries.

"When publication is going at a high speed, you don't always notice the traffic signals. There are three things happening now. People are publishing through a rapid review process, studies are being published in pre-prints, people are writing blogs where they can write anything and interpret anything they call data. In the usual (scientific journal) publication cycle, nothing gets published in three or four days. From submission to publication, it normally takes at least three to four weeks and often more than six weeks. If I get an article for review from The Lancet, which I frequently do, I get a minimum of 10 days," said Dr K Srinath Reddy, president, Public Health Foundation of India.

Pre-print publication is a practice borrowed from other sciences, such as physics and Math, where researchers put their papers on a website and invite comments from the scientist community, based on which they modify and correct their analysis before publication.

What works for theoretical sciences, however, doesn't work as well for medical research, which has immediate implications on health and life. "Rapid reviews are causing problems because the reviewers are chosen in haste and they don't have adequate time to look at the data properly and they are under pressure to respond quickly," said Reddy.

Peer review is important to ensure quality of scientific communications, incorporating inputs of other experts. "While pre-publication peer-review is the standard, there are good examples of post-publication review as well. Validation by other researchers is perhaps the most important, especially when the findings are unexpected or controversial," said Dr Anurag Agrawal, director of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology.

Review, reform

But this very validation process spectacularly failed in the case of the two retracted studies in The Lancet and The New England Journal of Medicine. The Lancet paper raised safety concerns about the experimental use of the anti-malarial drugs for treatment and led to WHO suspending the hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine arm of its multi-country trial, much to the dismay of India, which is the world's largest producer of these affordable generic drugs that have been used to treat malaria for close to a century. "The key concern for us was that the data was questionable that made analysis unreliable and any results misleading. If not for the name of the journal, the paper would have not have been taken as seriously," said Agrawal.

While journals have established validation processes, such papers can slip between the cracks because of several reasons, including the authors belonging to reputable institutions like Harvard University, or the reviewers having confirmation bias, where they agree with the study's conclusion even before they begin scrutinising how the result has been arrived at.

For a disease barely six months old, generating high-quality data quickly and efficiently is a challenge, which makes review and scrutiny all the more critical. "It's the job of a journal's editorial team to do an independent review and ensure it doesn't get shoddy when it is inundated with research studies," said Dr Jacob T John, former head of the department of virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu.

Retractions are not rare, but they are growing. In 2019, there were 1,433 retractions from scientific journals, according to Retraction Watch, which has been tracking retractions for a decade. In 1997, the number was 44.

Trial by error

Vaccine development, on average, takes 10.71 years from the preclinical phase, and has a success rate of 6%, according to a study in the journal, PLOS One. Some remain elusive despite decades of massive investment, as we have seen in the case of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus that causes the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS.

Work on a Covid-19 vaccine began on January 11, within a day of China sharing the genome of the new coronavirus that came to be called Sars-CoV-2. By June 12, there were 10 experimental vaccines in advanced stages of clinical trials and 115 in pre-clinical evaluation stages, according to WHO.

Scientists are working across emerging technology platforms that have never been used for vaccine development before. Moderna's mRNA-1273, which entered into clinical trials just 66 days after Sars-CoV-2 was first sequenced in China, showcases the potential for DNA- and RNA-based vaccines that use the messenger RNA (mRNA) platform to elicit an immune response against the virus.

"If it is approved, it will be the first messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine against any disease in the world. We don't fully know the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines as yet. However, there is high quality science and pre-clinical evidence for this fast and flexible platform for vaccine development. We will have to wait and see," said Agrawal.

Vaccine development includes at least three human trials to test their safety, dosage and the strength and duration of the protection they offer, followed by production, licensure, deployment of vaccines and plans for post-marketing surveillance. Many of these trials have been collapsed and merged to have a vaccine ready for use within the next six to eight months.

"With Covid-19, the goal from the beginning has been to develop, test and manufacture a vaccine on a scale of hundreds of millions of doses within 12 to 18 months, so an unprecedented approach has been adopted. With promising preliminary preclinical and phase 1 data available, meticulously planned trials are needed to separate the contenders from pretenders. Since approvals are expected for an emergency use vaccine, developers start mass manufacturing as soon as they complete phase 2 trials, and in doing so, risk the failure of phase 3. In such cases, consortiums and countries fund for risk reduction and provide market commitments," said Dr N K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research. This is where new technology lab-based platforms help. RNA- and DNA-based vaccines are faster and cheaper to produce than synthetic vaccines as they involve synthetic production of the genetic material, and not the virus. "The production is lab-based, so it can be quickly standardised and scaled up," said Ganguly.

Getting a large enough sample size across age groups is essential as the results in one population might not translate to the other.

"Whether it is vaccines or drug development, what is crucial is independent scientific validation to ensure the vaccines and drugs are safe and effective because getting it wrong would mean playing with lives," said Ganguly.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- In a diplomatic first, India and Australia are expected to sign an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics facilities and other pacts aimed at developing alternative supply chains when the two sides hold their first virtual summit on June 4.

The summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Australian counterpart Scott Morrison, yet to be formally announced, will be held against the backdrop of heightened friction with China for both countries.

It will be Modi's first virtual bilateral summit and the first time several bilateral agreements will be concluded virtually since the Covid-19 outbreak, two people familiar with the development said.

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), finalised at the "2+2" or combined dialogue of the foreign and defence secretaries in New Delhi last December, was to be signed during Morrison's visit in January, which was called off due to the Australian bushfires.

With joint exercises and defence cooperation between India and Australia on the upswing, MLSA will remove the need for protracted negotiations for reciprocal access to logistics support every time a manoeuvre is organised, the people cited above said on condition of anonymity. It will also improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two sides.

Between 2016 and 2019, India has signed similar logistics exchange agreements with the US, Singapore, France and South Korea.

While the conclusion of MLSA is significant as the two sides have been negotiating it for some time, there is greater buzz about agreements to be signed in science and technology, research, pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, and rare earth metals and critical minerals which are aimed at creating supply chains in strategic areas that are less dependent on China, the people said.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperating on rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves. More than 90% of India's imports of rare earth metals, worth $3.4 million in 2016, come from China.

The two sides will also look at enhancing their partnership in education as part of measures to shift the focus of Australian universities on the Chinese market, the people said. Prior to the Covid-19 crisis, Australia was home to some 90,000 Indian students.

"We're also looking at agreements in the maritime sphere and water resources and negotiations are underway on some other issues. Research and collaboration on Covid-19 will also figure in the discussions," said one of the people cited above.

Morrison has described India as "a natural partner for Australia", and Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell has said the two sides have had regular discussions about how they can shape the post-Covid world order. In this context, O'Farrell said Australia supports India's call for reforming the World Health Organization (WHO) after overcoming the Covid-19 crisis.

While tensions between India and China are at a high following the standoff between their border troops in Ladakh, Australia's relations with China too took a hit after Canberra called for an independent investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nitin Pai, director of the Takshashila Institution, said it made "absolute economic sense" for India and Australia to reduce the risk of their exposure to China even if the two countries weren't grappling with tensions with China and the Covid-19 crisis.

"It makes a lot of sense to find a diversity of suppliers on one hand, and to find a diversity of customers for products on the other," he said, adding the existing geo-political risks, the pandemic and travel restrictions make it vital not to put all eggs in one basket and to build a diversity of economic partnerships.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 27 -- India and Australia are expected to make bilateral diplomatic history by signing an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics facilities and other pacts aimed at developing alternative supply chains when the two sides hold their first "virtual summit" on June 4.

The summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Australian counterpart Scott Morrison, yet to be formally announced, will be held against the backdrop of heightened friction with China for both countries.

It will be Modi's first virtual bilateral summit and the first time several bilateral agreements will be concluded virtually since the Covid-19 outbreak, two people familiar with development said.

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), finalised at the "2+2" or combined dialogue of the foreign and defence secretaries in New Delhi last December, was to be signed during Morrison's visit in January, which was called off due to the Australian bushfires.

With joint exercises and defence cooperation between India and Australia on the upswing, MLSA will remove the need for protracted negotiations for reciprocal access to logistics support every time a manoeuvre is organised, the people cited above said on condition of anonymity. It will also improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two sides.

Between 2016 and 2019, India has signed similar logistics exchange agreements with the US, Singapore, France and South Korea.

While the conclusion of MLSA is significant as the two sides have been negotiating it for some time, there is greater buzz about agreements to be signed in science and technology, research, pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, and rare earth metals and critical minerals which are aimed at creating supply chains in strategic areas that are less dependent on China, the people said.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides were exploring the possibility of cooperating on rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves. More than 90% of India's imports of rare earth metals, worth $3.4 million in 2016, come from China.

The two sides will also look at enhancing their partnership in education as part of measures to shift the focus of Australian universities on the Chinese market, the people said. Prior to the Covid-19 crisis, Australia was home to some 90,000 Indian students.

"We're also looking at agreements in the maritime sphere and water resources and negotiations are underway on some other issues. Research and collaboration on Covid-19 will also figure in the discussions," said one of the people cited above.

Morrison has described India as "a natural partner for Australia", and Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell has said the two sides have had regular discussions about how they can shape the post-Covid world order. In this context, O'Farrell said Australia supports India's call for reforming the World Health Organization (WHO) after overcoming the Covid-19 crisis.

While tensions between India and China are at a high following the standoff between their border troops in Ladakh, Australia's relations with China too took a hit after Canberra called for an independent investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nitin Pai, director of the Takshashila Institution, said it made "absolute economic sense" for India and Australia to reduce the risk of their exposure to China even if the two countries were not grappling with tensions with China and the Covid-19 crisis.

"It makes a lot of sense to find a diversity of suppliers on one hand, and to find a diversity of customers for products on the other," he said, adding the existing geopolitical risks, the pandemic, and travel restrictions make it vital not to put all eggs in one basket and to build a diversity of economic partnerships.

On Tuesday, defence minister Rajnath Singh tweeted that he had spoken on telephone with his Australian counterpart Linda Reynolds and discussed the response of both sides to the Covid-19 pandemic and possible areas of cooperation.

"India-Australia strategic partnership provides a good base for both the countries to work together in dealing with the post COVID challenges. We are committed to take forward the initiatives of bilateral defence and security cooperation under the Strategic Partnership framework," Singh added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 17 -- Large-scale conversion of tracts of land for agriculture; trade and consumption of high-risk wild species are the two main drivers of zoonotic diseases, according to a report by Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) released on Wednesday.

Zoonotic diseases are viral infections that are transmissible from vertebrate animals to humans.

The report, a compilation of existing evidence on SARS-CoV-2, which causes the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), and other zoonotic diseases, said the frequency of zoonotic disease outbreaks caused by a spillover of pathogens from animals to humans might have more than tripled in the last decade.

The diversity of these pathogens has also increased with the number of new zoonotic diseases infecting people quadrupling in the last 10 years, the WWF report titled, "Covid 19-Urgent Call to Protect People and Nature" said, referring to a 2008 paper published in the Nature journal on emerging infectious diseases.

"These increases are driven by more frequent contact between humans and dangerous animal pathogens, as well as by contact with a wider variety of species, resulting in the emergence of new forms of diseases in humans. These new zoonotic diseases have posed a grave threat to human health around the world, causing global pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Swine Flu, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), Ebola and currently Covid-19," the report said.

Every year three to four zoonotic diseases are emerging.

The increase in zoonotic outbreaks is a symptom of a broken relationship between humans and nature and is likely to worsen, the report said warning that ecological conditions are rife for another pandemic unless strong actions are taken such as a complete halt of wildlife trade, enforcing legislation to stop deforestation, a new deal for nature and people that safeguard biodiversity and halves consumption. It also called for the incorporation of a One Health Approach, which has shared policies for humans, animals, and the environment.

The report underlined that though questions remain about the exact origin of Covid-19 by keeping different wild and livestock species in cramped conditions, the risk of genetic recombination between different viruses and transmission to new species, including humans, has increased.

Improper handling of live domestic animals and their meat can also drive potential disease exposure, particularly, when these animals are slaughtered or kept along with other wildlife species. The initial Covid-19 disease outbreak is likely to have been attributed to human contact with infected palm civets and raccoon dogs at a wildlife market in China's Guangdong province.

This was substantiated by the discovery of SARS-like viruses in these animals in Chinese wildlife markets after the initial outbreak.

Researchers have also found that several of the early SARS patients in Guangdong province were involved in selling or preparing wildlife for consumption, the report said.

Globally between 1945 and 2005 land-use change has contributed to almost half of zoonotic disease events, WWF said, referring to findings of another scientific paper published in 2010 in the Nature journal.

Extensive deforestation and fragmentation of land in West and Central Africa are linked to several Ebola outbreaks in these regions, according to WWF.

Most habitat loss associated with agriculture is owing to only three commodities such as beef, soy, and palm oil.

"As a result of extensive land conversion, about 70% of forests globally are now within one kilometre (km) of a forest edge and are exposed to further fragmentation. Not only forests are at risk - over half of the original Cerrado and North American grassland prairies have also been lost," the report said calling for laws to stop the fragmentation of forests.

Experts said India, which has its own rich biodiversity, also needs a One Health policy.

"In a country like India, where people live cheek-by-jowl, not just with each other, but also with among the highest numbers of livestock, including both four-legged and two-legged, as well as in areas of high biodiversity. Such close proximity means that the diversity of pathogens that humans are potentially exposed to is very high. To understand the risks from these pathogens, it's necessary for us to adopt a One Health approach, where we have to work in large interdisciplinary teams that can investigate not only human and animal health, but also the linkages with changes in the natural environment," said Abi Tamim Vanak, fellow, Wellcome Trust and senior fellow at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment.

"It's hard to think beyond the tragic impacts of the ongoing Covid-19 healthcare crisis. But, it's also an opportune moment for us to act if we are to deliver a recovery that benefits both humans and nature. The challenge and opportunity before us are to begin to think of development through the lens of environmental health," said Ravi Singh, secretary-general, WWF India.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 22 -- India will reopen air travel on 383 routes across the country after a two-month gap, the government announced on Thursday, but allowed one-third of the operations beginning May 25 and set limits on fares that airlines can charge in the initial phase of this critical unlocking of swift long-distance travel.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said the government has identified seven bands based on flight durations, while announcing a set of norms for airlines and guidelines for passengers that outline how air travel is set to change in India in the aftermath of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

The fares - consistent for each band - will be capped till at least August 24.

"[Because of the lockdown] we have been able to escape the situation other countries have found themselves in. [But] it is equally important that at some stage you will have to open up. Two months is a very long time...you have to balance between lives and livelihood; it is time to now open up," Puri said at a press conference in New Delhi, a day after announcing the resumption of domestic flights.

According to data by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), flights in the first phase will operate on all routes, taking off from a total of 35 origin cities and landing in 39 destination airports.

"The central government hereby directs that domestic civil flight operations are permitted from 25 May, 2020 to a limited extent... For operations from Metro to Metro cities, One-Third capacity of the approved Summer Schedule...," the civil aviation ministry said in an order on Thursday.

The metro cities were identified as Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The rule will be applicable for metro to non-metro operations as well.

Though there are several guidelines for social distancing in airports and at embarkation and disembarkation points, the middle seat will not be kept vacant in the aircraft.

Lancelot Pinto, an epidemiologist at Mumbai's Hinduja Hospital, said social distancing should be a priority. "Even though the government is saying they will scan each passengers, many of the travellers will not show any symptoms as almost 80% people (Covid-19 patients) are asymptomatic."

Puri, however, said it was not possible to keep the middle seat vacant. "This is not an option being followed by any other country as well. We will keep our fingers crossed," he said.

The seven bands identified by the government are: flights with duration of less than 40 minutes (Sector A), those with journey time of 40-60 minutes (Sector B), 60-90 minutes (Sector C), 90-120 minutes (Sector D), 120-150 minutes (Sector E), 150-180 minutes (Sector F) and 180-210 minutes (Sector G).

A Delhi-Mumbai air travel takes around two hours, putting it in the category of Sector D.

"Earlier, air carriers could put their range (minimum to maximum) on their websites...We want air travel to become affordable. We have set a minimum fare and a maximum fare. For Delhi to Mumbai, the minimum fare will be ~3,500 and maximum ~10,000," Puri said at the media briefing.

The government said 40% of the tickets in all bands will be sold at a price less than the mid-point (of the lower and upper limits). In case of a Delhi-Mumbai journey, these tickets will be priced at around ~6,700.

The move to set fare limits will ensure there is no overcharging by airlines in view of an expected rush of passengers and heightened demand for tickets, Puri said. At the same time, the move to set lower limits is expected to protect carriers from extremely low fares set by competitors.

Domestic flights with less than 40-minute duration, like the ones from Delhi to Chandigarh, will have lower and upper limits of ~2,000 and ~6,000, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) announced later in the day. For flights with duration between 40 and 60 minutes, such as Delhi to Lucknow, the lower and upper fare limits are ~2,500 and ~7,500.

In the next band (60-90 minutes for journeys like the ones between Bengaluru and Mumbai), the lower fare limit is ~3,000 and the upper limit is ~9,000, the aviation regulator said. Flights between 120 and 150 minutes, including those on major routes such as Delhi-Bengaluru, will have lower and upper limits of ~4,500 and ~13,000.

Those with duration between 150 and 180 minutes (such as Delhi to Imphal), the lower and upper limits are set at ~5,500 and ~15,700. And finally, for flights with duration between 180 and 210 minutes - like the ones on Delhi-Coimbatore route - the range will be ~6,500 and ~18,600.

Vistara welcomed the moved to resume domestic flights, which were grounded on March 25, the day restrictions were first imposed in the country.

"Aviation is a growth engine for the economy and resumption of air travel will give great impetus to the government's overall efforts in helping the country eventually return to normalcy," Vistara CEO Leslie Thng said.

Global airlines' body International Air Transport Association (IATA), a grouping of 290 airlines, said the decision to regulate airfares is a "step back". Private carriers such as Air India, Vistara, IndiGo and SpiceJet are its members.

"Airlines need to have the freedom to make their commercial decisions, including the pricing of airfares. Hence, we recognise and hope that this is a one-time measure as a result of Covid-19 and will be discontinued on August 24," IATA assistant director (corporate communications - Asia Pacific) Albert Tjoeng told news agency PTI.

Ravi Kini, managing partner at law firm MV Kini & Co, said: "Fares are published by airlines in the regular course. The range normally published is very wide for allowing flexibility for the airlines to respond to the market demand in free market situation. In the current situation, free market play has been curbed due to Covid-19...This is a good move by the government to balance the consumer interests with airline profitability."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 31 -- : The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday when officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,400 people who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several foreign nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of the country such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz -- which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters -- such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practiced here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors, with the basement and the ground housing a kitchen and a communal dining area. Officials fear that such a nature of the facility may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on Feb 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others. The six who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- The Delhi government has deployed school teachers besides civil defence volunteers at various borders to check and report any illegal transportation of poultry or live birds into Delhi. Teachers, however, urged deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia on Wednesday to withdraw the order.

In a state revenue department order on Tuesday, the government constituted five surveillance teams - each led by a government school teacher and accompanied by two civil defence volunteers - to check the spread of bird flu in Delhi.

The viral infection was confirmed in the city on Monday after more than 150 while birds were found dead in various parts of the capital, prompting the Delhi government to shut the Ghazipur poultry market for 10 days and ban the import of live birds without a valid health certificate and the sale of packaged or processed chicken.

The teams have been asked to stay put at the borders from 8 pm to 6 am, something that has not gone down well with teachers. These teams have been deployed at Auchandi Border, Saboli border, Safiabad border, Lampur border and Muneerpur border - entry points from where most of the poultry or live birds arrive in Delhi.

The government order states that the teams have to ensure that no vehicle carrying live poultry birds in Delhi is allowed to enter without a valid veterinary health certificate from an authorised veterinarian of the concerned state government, declaring the farm of origin of birds as free from any infection and contagious disease of birds. They were also asked to prevent the entry or sale of dressed, processed or canned chicken and its products in the Capital.

The government school teachers' association, (GSTA), Delhi, on Wednesday wrote to Sisodia, who is both education and development minister, to repeal the order and put their teachers back on school duty.

"The revenue department has deputed government school teachers on Delhi borders to check for and to prevent the spread of bird flu under day/night duty. Moreover, teachers have been mostly assigned midnight hours of this duty," read the letter signed by Ajay Veer Yadav, general secretary, GSTA.

"Sir, the teaching community selflessly served when the government and the citizens needed them for Covid-19 prevention. But the revenue department is now taking advantage of the situation and just harassing teachers into unjustified duties... I request you to intervene and stop such deputation of teaching community...," it stated.

The Delhi government did not respond to queries regarding the teachers' demand.

A teacher deputed at the borders said there was no detailed brief on what is allowed.

"As of now the order has not been taken back, so I have to report at the border and perform my duty. But I am not sure what exactly we are supposed to do. Will the vehicles even stop on our insistence? We as school teachers know nothing about a health certificate issued by a veterinarian," the teacher said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 28 -- As the 13-member WHO team stepped out of their two-week quarantine in the central Chinese city of Wuhan on Thursday to begin probing the origin of the Covid-19 virus, a motley group of Chinese citizens will be tracking their activities and statements.

They want answers - primarily, why was there a delay last January in making the information public that a contagious virus was spreading in Wuhan?

Zhang Hai, 51, thinks he lost his father to the deadly infection because that critical piece of information was missing when he brought the senior citizen for a leg surgery from Shenzhen city to Wuhan last January.

Though not very optimistic, Zhang hopes that he would get an opportunity to talk to the WHO team - a prospect which is increasingly looking bleak after he and other disgruntled family members of victims were blocked out of Chinese social media to begin with.

The itinerary of the 13 WHO experts, expected to be here for two weeks under global glare, wasn't revealed by the Chinese foreign ministry on Thursday.

It is expected that they will interact with Chinese scientists and experts, visit the seafood market linked to the first cases and interact with doctors at hospitals that dealt with the deluge of Covid-19 patients in Wuhan.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian said on Thursday that all activities of the group should comply with the principles of scientific traceability of the virus and should be used to prevent future risks and protect the safety and health of the people's lives are the highest goals.

"Highest goals". That's the phrase Zhang did not agree with during the interview with the Hindustan Times.

Zhang said when he reached and admitted his father to a hospital on January 17, nobody told him about the coronavirus - by January 17 at least one person had already died of the virus.

Zhang's father died of the infection on January 30 after slipping into a coma.

Since then, he has been trying to get some answers.

"I openly advocated to pursue the responsibility of Wuhan authorities on Weibo (China's Twitter-like service). But my Weibo account was censored. Wuhan authorities covered up the epidemic.The cover-up was deliberate murder, I think," he said.

"My six Weibo accounts were deleted".

The family's lawsuits were not accepted by the court, Zhang said.

"Our WeChat group was blocked when the WHO team came to Wuhan. This means that Wuhan authorities are afraid of the families contacting the WHO experts. I think authorities here have a guilty conscience."

Zhang hopes that the WHO team could meet the families of the victims and hear their experience.

There seems to be little chance of that happening though with Washington and Beijing already involved in a war of words over the team's visit.

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, new White House spokesperson Jen Psaki said it was "imperative we get to the bottom" of how the virus appeared and spread worldwide.

A "robust and clear" probe is required, Psaki said.

Beijing expectedly snapped back on Thursday, warning the US to "respect facts and science, respect the hard work" of the WHO experts.

They must be allowed to work "free from political interference", Zhao said.

For people like Zhang, the geopolitics involving the deadly virus is meaningless.

"I believe if they did not cover up and took measures earlier, the virus could be controlled. I am not afraid because I am telling the truth. I want to tell the authorities that I will continue to talk until they. meet our demands. I did not frame the story. Everything I said just now is true."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh, July 28 -- MANOHAR LAL KHATTAR, Haryana chief minister

Haryana chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar spoke to Ramesh Vinayak and Hitender Rao about reviving the economy after the pandemic, the virus trajectory in Gurugram, and running a coalition government, among other issues.

Edited excerpts: How is the economy shaping up post the lockdown? How good are revenue receipts and how much is your dependence on the market borrowings? April was bad for us. In fact, the revenue shortfall for April, May and June was about 9,000 crore. We have tried to make up for it by borrowing from the market. Revenue started trickling in after the lockdown was relaxed and the collections were about 60% in June. By July 20, we have recovered well and are at par with our projections. We are now able to meet our routine expenses on our own.

What budgetary cut are you contemplating in the revised estimates? It is quite understandable considering the deficit. The Rs 9,000 crore revenue shortfall would force us to recalibrate our outlay.

How will the downturn in fiscal health impact the state's development projects and welfare schemes? There will be no impact on welfare schemes, though our development projects have been delayed by three months. During the pandemic, we have spend an additional 1,500 crore to give relief to people including 600- 650 crore cash distribution.

This money was spent on the medical services, ration distribution, arranging return of migrant labourers, and relief camps.

In your role as finance minister, how do you plan to boost the economy during the pandemic? The central government package of 20 lakh crore is a big relief. In the changing scenario due to the Covid-19 situation, I feel that the service sector will suffer but the manufacturing and agriculture sectors will do well.

The central government has sought the views of the state and parents of students about reopening of schools.

We will not open primary schools and will take a call for higher classes in August. Colleges and professional institutions would be the first to start.

Projections show a rising coronavirus infection trajectory in the coming months. How do you plan to augment the health infrastructure including ventilator beds to meet any eventuality? See, what essentially matters is the number of active cases and not the cumulative numbers.

How many patients have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic is important since such patients qualify for home isolation and takes pressure off our systems. As per our current projections and rate of recovery, we are doing well in terms of health infrastructure. But we keep reviewing it.

The NCR districts of Gurugram, Faridabad and Sonepat have a majority of Covid-19 cases.

Health minister Anil Vij hinted at the possibility of stricter curbs. Is a curfew or a selective lockdown on the cards? The weekend lockdowns will not bring us results. Things are slowly coming back on track and the imposition of a fresh lockdown would mean putting pressure on people.

Our strategy instead is to go for aggressive containment in the NCR districts. We are screening more people and conducting more tests.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommended that NCR districts should follow Delhi's model for combating the spread of the coronavirus.

Do you see a need to work with Delhi since the increase in the number of cases in Gurugram has been attributed to the movement of people between the two cities? We, along with Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, are implementing a common strategy for combating the infection.

Infection travelled to Haryana from Delhi initially, but now both states are at par in terms of contagion spread.

Since there is so much backand- forth movement from Delhi to Haryana, it is hard to conclude now on the origin of the contagion.

Gurugram was kept in the orange zone despite a sharp rise in the number of cases to facilitate the reopening of the industry.

What impact did the closure of businesses in the Millennium City have on the state's revenue? How is the govt planning to boost the local economy? We cannot overlook the adverse economic impact of three months. But if you look at the power consumption for the industry, it is at par with 2019. This means that the industry is operating at the same capacity as it was last year. Of course, there could be workforce engagement related issues because of the need to maintain social distancing.

You recently spoke in Mewat about enacting a Freedom of Religion law to prohibit religious conversions by force, allurement or marriage. Why do you feel the need for such a law? There were complaints regarding forced conversions and marriages frommany districts.

People are free to adopt any religion in an informed manner but using coercion, allurement to force religious conversions is a matter of concern.

Such incidents vitiate the atmosphere of society. We are studying similar laws enacted by other states and accordingly take a call.

How has been your experience of running a coalition government so far? The BJP and Jannayak Janta Party have not been able decide on the common minimum programme. Any deadline? We are not new to coalition politics in the state. The BJP and the JJP both are likeminded entities, and both oppose the Congress. Common minimum programme is not a major issue because we do not have any conflict with our ally. We are well synchronized.

The proposed 75 % private sector quota law is an example that we are on similar page

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Aug. 3 -- A real recovery in India's automobile industry will be achieved when sales grow in double digits compared to FY18-19, said RC Bhargava, chairman of Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. In an interview, Bhargava refrained from giving a sales forecast for this fiscal, citing the continued uncertainty amid a rising number of Covid-19 cases.

He said the sales rebound seen in July was led by the rural market though there has been some improvement in urban demand as well. Edited excerpts: How will you interpret the current recovery in sales in the sector? There has been a lot of pent-up demand and this has its origins partly in the fact that in the previous year (FY19-20), because of various factors, sales of cars for the industry as a whole went down by 18%, and Maruti, as a consequence, was down by 16%. That was unusual because, usually, every year, we used to have at least 6-8% industry growth. Then, because of these three months of the shutdown and the subsequent restart, there was no sale and there were a lot of people waiting to buy cars.

Is the current recovery in demand sustainable? The real issue we should look for, and I am not talking of the next 4-6 months; the recovery would really be when we get to FY18-19 volumes and then, on top of that, we can get growth in double digits. Then you can say the industry has recovered and Indian manufacturing is on a strong wicket

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- The coronavirus strain that triggered the ongoing outbreak in Beijing could have originated in Europe, local officials said Friday after Chinese scientists released the genome sequence of samples picked up from the Xinfadi market linked to nearly all the cases.

Preliminary genetic sequencing research shows that this virus came from Europe , Zhang Yong, an assistant director at China's Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), was quoted as saying, adding that strain is older than the viruses currently circulating in Europe.

Gao Fu, the CDC director, had earlier said the virus could have started spreading in Beijing as early as the start of May.

The genome sequencing, put out late Thursday, had been shared with the WHO and the Global Influenza Data Initiative (GISAID), the CDC said.

The first cluster of new coronavirus infections was traced to the Huanan seafood market in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, the first epidentre of the pandemic, in December.

It has since infected almost 8.5 million people globally.

Earlier in the day, the national health commission (NHC) said Beijing had added 25 new cases of Covid-19 for June 18, four more than the day before, taking the total number to 183 for the new outbreak in the city with nearly all the infections linked to the sprawling Xinfadi fresh food market in the southwestern Fengtai district.

"The large amounts of samples found in the Xinfadi wholesale market indicate that the virus has been around for some time. If it had only just arrived in the city for a short period of time, there may not have been so many positive samples found; however, we need more data before making an informed decision about its origin," the CDC official Zhang said.

The first case in this new outbreak was reported on June 11, leading city authorities to reimpose a level two alert days after it had been lowered to the level three, or the least, alert on June 6.

Beijing authorities acted quickly to curb infection risks in the capital, shutting down and disinfecting fresh food and wet markets, fencing off dozens of residential communities near the affected markets, restricting travel out of Beijing and carrying out hundreds of thousands of nucleic acid tests.

Beijing is under a restricted lockdown with three categories of people not allowed to leave.

The first category includes confirmed Covid-19 patients, suspected cases, close contacts, asymptomatic carriers and people with fever.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 29 -- The Kumrahar assembly constituency in Patna has traditionally been known as the stronghold of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), but that tag is under a cloud in the ongoing three-phase Bihar polls.

Though the BJP has stitched up the caste calculus and its traditional support base appears to be intact, localised issues could prove to be a stumbling block, despite the party's recent feat such as the Bhoomipujan at Ayodhya for the construction of the long-pending Ram temple.

Lack of development in the constituency is the overriding factor, but the BJP may still afford to be cautiously optimistic because of a lack of a strong candidate against its sitting lawmaker.

But a tour of the constituency amid the raging coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak gives a tell-tale glimpse of the broken civic infrastructure.

Also read | Millions cast votes in Bihar under the shadow of Covid-19

The roads in Kumrahar, which is located in the heart of the state capital Patna and boasts of the historic remains of the ancient city of Patliputra, including an 80-pillar hall of the Emperor Ashoka's era, are in a pitiable condition. Drainage system is also in shambles, as development has been few and far between since the British colonial era.

The open and filthy drain at Saidpur near Moin-ul-Haq Stadium at Rajendra Nagar has been a civic nuisance for local residents, who have to put up with the overpowering stench and mosquito menace.

The roads have become death traps and several accidents have been reported from the neighbourhood. The public's demand to cover and clean the drain has been falling on civic authorities' deaf ears for years.

Public parks and open spaces are also neglected. They have become safe havens for criminal and anti-social activities due to a lack of maintenance.

The approach road to Bazaar Samiti, Bihar's biggest wholesale market, which receives over two dozen truck loads of fruits and fish daily from West Bengal, Maharashtra, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Hyderabad and Karnataka, is in a mess.

Basic civic amenities such as washrooms and drinking water are non-existent, much to the distress of thousands of wholesale fruit and fish market dealers and retailers, including women sellers.

The state government has been found wanting in ensuring supply of water and the crisis aggravates every summer with unfailing regularity.

Kumrahar residents are not spared of their annual monsoon woes, either.

In September-October, 2019 Kumrahar had turned into an island after a burst of intense showers. Local residents remained cut off from the rest of Patna and spent a few harrowing days without food, electricity and water supplies.

These civic issues may impact BJP candidate Arun Kumar Sinha's poll prospects. Sinha is pitted against Dr Dharmendra Kumar of the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) and Rajesh Ranjan Pappu of the Jan Adhikar Party (JAP).

Kumrahar assembly constituency is a part of the Patna Sahib Lok Sabha constituency and comprises areas under Patna Municipal Corporation's (PMC) wards 14 and from 16 to 22.

Earlier, Kumrahar was a part Patna Central Assembly constituency, but was renamed in 2008 following the delimitation as per the Delimitation Act, 2002 and on the basis of the 2001 Census.

The constituency is a treasure trove and boasts of several monuments and heritage sites tracing their origin to the ancient city of Patliputra.

Several illustrious personalities from Bihar such as poet Ramdhari Singh Dinkar, novelist Phanishwar Nath Renu, folk singers, Vindhyavasini Devi and Padamshree Sharda Sinha, and dhrupad singer and Padmashree Pandit Siyaram Tiwari have all called the constituency their home at one point in time of their lives or the other.

The total voter population of the constituency is 4,21,902, including 225328, 196539 and 35 males, females and third gender, respectively.

Upper castes, comprising Kayasthas, Rajputs, Bhumihars and Brahmins, form a bulk of the constituency's voters, but there is also a sizeable population of Yadavs, Chandravanshi, Dalits and Muslims.

Over two dozen candidates are trying their luck at the hustings from Kumrahar, including Vivek Shankar, Amit Kumar and Vinod Kumar Pathak, who are fighting as independents, Ashok Kumar Keshri from the Rashtra Seva Dal and Suryakar Jeetendra from the Socialist Unity Centre Of India (Communist).

Sinha, a three-time lawmaker, had won the seat in 2010, when he had defeated Kamal Parwez of the Lok Janshakti Party (LJP) by over 50% votes. In 2005, he had defeated Aquil Haider of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) by over 40% votes.

However, in this election, many candidates are new entrants to politics.

"The voters are yearning for a change. Though voters have supported the BJP for over a decade, there has been no development in the country. Worse, last year's floods turned out to be a nightmare for local residents, as many had died of hunger and water-borne diseases. Our local legislator (Sinha) was missing in action amid the unfolding humanitarian crisis. Why will the public vote for him? We will vote for a party, which helps the public during floods," said Yogesh Gupta, a young resident of Rajendra Nagar neighbourhood.

Gupta alleged that Sinha, despite being a public representative, is aloof and seldom interacts with the public from his constituency.

CM Agarwal, a businessman and a voter from the constituency, echoed Gupta. He said the majority of the local residents are unhappy with Sinha.

"He was unapproachable, when the public needed him the most last year during the floods. Nobody was compensated for the loss of lives and property. A survey was all that was carried out, but no financial aid was distributed among the flood-affected. Upper caste voters are also seeking a change," Agarwal said.

Dr Amar Kumar Singh, another resident of Rajendra Nagar, said there is no alternative (TINA) factor that appears to be working in favour of Sinha since 2005.

Dr Vinod Kumar, a resident of Sandalpur, and Udit Kumar, a yoga teacher from Kazipur neighbourhood, said most of the parties have failed to field strong candidates in Kumrahar. "Voters have no option, but to support the BJP," they said.

Rajeshwar Prasad Singh, a retired professor from Patna University, gave the BJP an outside chance because of a lack of a strong electoral contest.

"Be that as it may, Sinha is never seen among his voters at any public function," he said.

However, Sinha rebuffed the allegations and maintained that several development works were undertaken by him. He cited the development of Premchand Rangshala and International level Science City as cases in point.

"Many other projects such as an upgrade in Saidpur drainage facility and renovation of Bazaar Samiti are in the works," he said.

"Last year's floods were a lesson for the state government. Fortunately, no such incident was reported this year," he added.

Pappu, the JAP candidate, said he deserved a chance to serve the people from the constituency. "We have proved how committed we are towards social service. The voters may still remember the way we had distributed food packets and water bottles during the floods and evacuated many of them to safer places. Now, it's the payback time for the voters," he said.

"The voters of Kumrahar have given three chances to the BJP. Now, the JAP deserves a chance," he added.

Dr Kumar, a dentist and the RJD's candidate, claimed that Kumrahar brought out Patna's rear as far as development was concerned.

"Besides thoroughfares, all roads and lanes in neighbourhoods are in a deplorable condition," he said.

He said, if he is elected he would resolve teething civic woes such water supply, roads and drainage facility at Saidpur.

Kumarahar goes to polls on November 3 in the second phase of the elections.

The third and the final phase will be on November 7.

The election results will be declared on November 10.

Kumrahar Assembly constituency (No 183): At a glance

* Kumrahar assembly seat is a part of the Patna Sahib Lok Sabha constituency.

* Comprises wards 14 and from 16 -22 of Patna Municipal Corporation.

* Was a part Patna Central Assembly constituency

* Became a separate assembly constituency in 2008 following the delimitation as per the Delimitation Act, 2002 and on the basis of the 2001 Census

* Total number of voters: 4,21,902

* Total number of male voters: 2,25,328

* Total number of female voters: 1,96,539

* Total number of third gender voters: 35

* Upper castes, comprising Kayasthas, Rajputs, Bhumihars and Brahmins, form a bulk of the voters

* Also a sizeable population of Yadavs, Chandravanshi, Dalits and Muslims.

Key issues

* Civic infrastructure woes such as pitiable road condition and poor drainage system

* Public parks have become safe havens for criminal and anti-social elements

*Bazaar Samiti, Patna's main wholesale market, lacks washrooms, drinking water facilities and its approach road is also broken

* Poor water supply

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 31 -- The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday even as officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,100 others who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of India such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz - which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters - such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practised here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors. The basement and the ground floors housing a kitchen and a communal dining area, which, officials fear, may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on February 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others.

The seven who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- Defence minister Rajnath Singh said on Tuesday he was assured by the Russian leadership that all ongoing contracts for military supplies will proceed as scheduled and be completed speedily despite the impact of the Covid-19 crisis.

Singh's remarks, made during a media interaction in Moscow, came against the backdrop of reports that India is pushing Russia to speed up the delivery of S-400 missile defence systems following a tense standoff with Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).

Russia, which accounts for more than 60% of the military hardware used by the Indian armed forces, has called for the easing of tensions between China and India. The tensions spiked after 20 Indian soldiers were killed in a violent face-off at Galwan Valley on June 15.

"I have been assured that ongoing contracts will be maintained, and not only will they be maintained, they will be completed quickly and in less time," Singh said, describing his talks with Russian deputy prime minister Yury Borisov as "very positive and productive".

"All our proposals have received a positive response from the Russian side. I am fully satisfied with my discussions," he said, without giving details about the proposals.

Singh arrived in Russia on Monday - the first trip abroad by an Indian leader since foreign travel was restricted four months ago due to the pandemic - with a high-level delegation to participate in the Victory Day parade on June 24. He is scheduled to hold several meetings with Russian leaders though no talks are planned with his Chinese counterpart Wei Fenghe, who is in Moscow for the parade.

India plans to seek the advanced delivery of the S-400 missile defence systems, currently due by mid-2021. India and Russia signed a $5.4-billion deal in 2018 for five systems. New Delhi is also expected to ask Moscow to cut delays in supplying spares for key Russian-origin platforms such as tanks, combat jets and helicopters.

New Delhi's request could potentially place Moscow in a difficult position due to its relations with Beijing. It's becoming increasingly tricky for Russia to maintain good ties with India and China, Alexander Gabuev, a China expert at the Carnegie Moscow Center, told Bloomberg.

"It's a very important test overall of Russia's ability to balance its relationships amid growing dependency on China, which is becoming increasingly assertive and pushing its partners to choose sides," Gabuev said.

The sale of the S-400 and more combat jets to India won't spoil relations with China, said Igor Korotchenko, head of the Centre for Analysis of World Arms Trade. "The Indian arms market is a top priority for us," he said. "There's no problem here for our ties with China."

Singh described defence cooperation as one of the important pillars of the India-Russia special and privileged strategic partnership and said he and Borisov had reviewed the defence relationship. The traditional friendship between India and Russia remains strong and the mutual interests of the two sides "are solid", he added.

On Tuesday morning, defence secretary Ajay Kumar also held talks with his Russian counterpart, deputy defence minister Alexander Fomin.

Pointing to the 75th anniversary of the Victory Day parade, which marks the end of World War 2, Singh said Indian soldiers too participated in the war effort in the millions and suffered immense causalities. "Many of them were part of the efforts to assist the Soviet Army. Therefore, it is a great honour that an Indian military contingent will be marching in the Red Square tomorrow. This is a sign of the everlasting friendship between the armed forces of our two countries," he said.

Singh also said India is looking forward to a visit by Russian President Vladimir Putin at the invitation of Prime Minister Narendra Modi later this year.

On Tuesday, Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov also hosted a virtual trilateral meeting with his Chinese and Indian counterparts, Wang Yi and S Jaishankar. Following the meeting, Lavrov said, "India and China have every means to solve any problems that arise in their relationship.I don't think India and China need any help."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 8 -- India that is Bharat shall be a Union of States."

That is how our Constitution starts. Never has that line rung truer than now.

Parts of India that they have always been, the states today are more, much more. They are India. The India where life's breath is now drawn with vigilance, where hands and fingers move with caution and frequently come together in prayer.

Facing the biggest challenge since Independence, the states and Union territories are grappling with the pandemic hour by hour, minute by minute. Speaking to chief ministers on April 27, the prime minister got it exactly right. He said that the states are better acquainted with ground realities about the pandemic. He has been a chief minister and he knows what ground realities mean.

The clarion call having been sounded by our prime minister, all chief ministers, their health ministers, chief secretaries, health secretaries and the district administration have been holding the virus by its invisible micro-horns. Their work done with such financial and human resources as they have, and under many constraints, can only be described as heroic.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan's efforts in Kerala have been pioneering. His government took the first steps towards halting the virus in its tracks well before the rest of the country did. Odisha's achievement in controlling the pandemic has been remarkable as has Goa's record of being the first to have zero active cases. Tamil Nadu, by getting an early start in testing, has done well for itself. And Rajasthan, by setting up a framework for food supplies to the poor, and health access with a helpline, has factored care into the lockdown at a great financial cost.

Maharashtra and Mumbai being the most coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-challenged of all states and cities, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray's great firmness has to be lauded. He has shown himself to be just the type of no-nonsense leader that his state needs. Delhi's chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, has done likewise. The West Bengal chief minister's determined outreach to her people is reassuring, though it makes us worry for her own protection.

Federalism has, thus, been at work in the best sense of that first line of our Constitution. Behind this lies a constitutional sanction. In fact, a constitutional imperative. In the Constitution's division of prerogatives and duties as between the Union and the states, severally and in the Concurrent List, jointly, "public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries" form an entry in the State List.

More relevantly "prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants" is an entry in the Concurrent List which is binding on both the states and the Centre. These entries have a passivity to them in normal times. But in times we are facing now, they spring into life, federal life. They make the states of India, where we live, India.

A word here is needed on a state beyond states in India: Migrant workers. They form a floating Union Territory that requires full statehood, not territorially but civilisationally. One great responsibility that lies with the states is to ensure that during these relaxations, urban to rural migration is strictly contained, with the greatest sensitivity. Will a post-Covid-19 India give them that? If it does not, it cannot be expected to have what it takes to win the battle over Covid-19.

The virus is not going to leave us easily or soon. If India is to be safe from this and future death-dealing and death-distributing viruses, it must undertake a few urgent measures. One, seeing the zoonotic origins of this virus, end the suicidal neglect of basic hygiene procedures that lurk like a hidden Wuhan in every unsupervised meat and poultry chain, market and public lavatories. Two, demand an end to the callous and relentless spoliation of our natural resources in the name of industrialisation. Three, get over our passion for congregating en masse in places of worship and entertainment with our stubborn habit of spitting .

Emperor Asoka speaks in his edicts of his subjects' fascination for "unnecessary assemblage". Four, ask "Where do we get clean water?" if we are to "keep washing our hands". Five, demand access to basic medical facilities within walkable distances.

If we can raise the age of marriage, have fewer children than our parents did, realise that untouchability is wrong, absurd and illegal, surely we can attempt these five.

Governments have to reset their priorities dramatically, investing massively and immediately in clean water access and on raising the doctors/nurses population ratio. And raise the status of nurses, hustled on duty and huddled in hostels off duty, from being taken-for-granted appurtenances to being major front-ranking players.

The Constitution asks India to feel its heart beating strong in the pulse of its states.

Gopalkrishna Gandhi is a former administrator, diplomat and governor

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 30 -- Piyush Goyal, Union Minister for commerce and industry, has asked the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) to strengthen the "rules of origin" provisions, one of India's key concerns, because the nation's markets are being flooded by Chinese goods through some Asean countries.

Goyal co-chaired the 17th Asean-India Economic (AEM) Ministers' Consultations held on Saturday via videoconference in a bid to maintain social distancing norms because of the raging coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

He highlighted that the free trade agreement (FTA) has to be "mutually beneficial" and expressed the need to strengthen the rules of origin provisions, work towards removal of non-tariff barriers and provide better market access, a ministry statement said on Sunday.

Goyal asked for an early review of the Asean-India Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA), as the trade pact is hurting India's interest, particularly because of the violation of rules of origin clauses.

Also read: PM Modi lauds India's farmers for higher crop production amid Covid crisis

India is concerned and wants to review FTAs, as several Chinese goods are dumped in its markets through a third country with which the nation has an agreement, a government official said requesting anonymity.

The review is necessary, as many items enter Indian markets taking advantage of Asean-India FTA. Imports at reduced or zero duty put the domestic industry at a major disadvantage, the official said.

Goyal used the Asean ministerial forum to reiterate India's consistent position that the review of the FTA has been inordinately delayed. He asked for a closer engagement ahead of the Asean-India Leaders' Summit scheduled to be held in November and to start the full review before the end of this year, the commerce ministry said in the statement.

Goyal co-chaired the meeting with Tran Tuan Anh, Vietnam's minister of industry and trade.

A report of the Asean India Business Council (AIBC) was also presented in the meeting.

It also recommended a review of the AITIGA for mutual benefit. The ministers from India and Asean countries instructed the officials to start the discussions to determine the scope of the review at the earliest to make the FTA more user-friendly for businesses.

Sangita Reddy, co-chair of AIBC (India), said the nation and Asean should develop a road map for collaboration in healthcare and pharmaceuticals sectors along with exchange of knowledge and digital connectivity. "She shared that special incentives for Indian pharmaceutical companies should be introduced for setting up plants in dedicated Asean zones," the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) said in a statement.

The industry association is the Indian secretariat of AIBC.

The meeting was attended by the trade ministers of all the 10 Asean countries such as Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.

The ministers reaffirmed their commitment to take collective actions in mitigating the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and resolved to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability and resilient supply chain connectivity, particularly the unimpeded flow of essential goods and medicines in the region, in compliance with the World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules, the statement said.

AIBC also recommended elimination of non- tariff measures to enable seamless movement of goods and services, FICCI said in the statement.

It proposed the introduction of a business travel card which would facilitate business travel between India and Asean countries with a minimum 90-day validity.

.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 17 -- Beijing on Thursday said it was ready to cooperate with the World Health Organization (WHO) in tracing the origin of the novel coronavirus, a day after the global public health body announced it was sending a team of investigators to China next year.

A team of 10 experts led by the WHO is expected to visit Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the coronavirus first emerged in December last year.

The Chinese foreign ministry did not directly comment on the upcoming visit or share details but assured cooperation.

"China stands ready to enhance its cooperation with the WHO to advance the global tracing efforts and contribute our share in our early victory against the pandemic," said Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, on Thursday.

Wang added that since the Covid-19 outbreak, China has taken the lead in conducting traceability cooperation with the WHO in an open, transparent and responsible manner.

China, however, has strongly opposed calls for an international inquiry into the origins of the virus, saying such calls are anti-China.

It has been more open to a WHO-led investigation, and allowed experts from the organisation to visit China twice.

Several countries including the US and Australia have called for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 virus. It has become one of the reasons for deteriorating ties between Beijing on one hand, and Washington and Canberra on the other.

In Singapore, a WHO official said on Thursday that Beijing will welcome an international team of Covid-19 investigators due to travel in January.

"WHO continues to contact China and to discuss the international team and the places they visit," Babatunde Olowokure, the WHO's regional emergencies director in the Western Pacific, told a news conference on Thursday.

"Our understanding at this time is that China is welcoming the international team and their visit... This is anticipated, as far as we are aware, to happen in early January," he was quoted as saying by Reuters.

"It's really not about finding a guilty country," Fabian Leendertz of Germany's Robert Koch Institute told AP, adding that the WHO was not seeking to fix the blame but attempting to prevent future outbreaks.

The emergence of the coronavirus was linked to a wet market in Wuhan, though Beijing has been pushing the narrative that it could have been circulating in other countries before it was detected in the Chinese city.

"The present pandemic started almost certainly in the People's Republic of China. Genetic analysis of the virus suggests that it originated in a bat and was transmitted to humans via a yet unknown animal, possibly a mammal used as food or for fur production," Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, told HT in an email recently.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 4 -- Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co. reported sales that fell short of Wall Street estimates, signaling weaker corporate demand for servers amid macroeconomic concerns and the ongoing shift to cloud computing.

Fiscal first-quarter sales declined 8% to $6.95 billion, the San Jose, California-based company said Tuesday in a statement. It marked the fifth consecutive quarter of year-over-year sales declines. Analysts, on average, expected $7.21 billion, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

Profit, excluding some items, was 44 cents a share, matching analysts' projections. The company also maintained its fiscal 2020 outlook for adjusted profit at $1.78 to $1.94 a share.

HPE Chief Executive Officer Antonio Neri has sought to fuel growth at the hardware company by moving to a subscription business model and investing in more sophisticated server technologies. The strategy may take years to pay off. In the meantime, HPE is exposed to China, the origin of the coronavirus, through its supply chain and its H3C server joint venture in the country. The company opted not to give a profit forecast for the current period due to uncertainty over the effects of the outbreak.

HPE's server sales decreased 16% to $3.01 billion in the period ended Jan. 31 because of macro uncertainty, supply chain disruption and a factory consolidation, Neri said in an interview. Businesses have reduced the pace of purchases for major information technology products amid slowing global economic growth.

ALSO READ: Xerox tries to woo HP after raising takeover offer

"I'm disappointed in the revenue performance for the business," Neri said. "(But) we see continued momentum in key strategic areas," including big-data storage, supercomputer sales and edge computing, which lets clients process information closer to the source rather than at far-away data centers, he added.

On a conference call with analysts, Chief Financial Officer Tarek Robbiati said HPE wouldn't produce any revenue growth this year, citing the supply chain disruptions. The company had said in November that it expected 1% to 3% sales growth in the next three years.

HPE's shares declined about 6% in extended trading after closing at $12.59 Tuesday in New York. The stock has dropped 23% in the past 12 months, including a 12% fall in the last two weeks as the broader market plunged on coronavirus concerns.

The server maker cut its forecast of fiscal 2020 free cash flow to $1.6 billion to $1.8 billion, from a range of $1.9 billion to $2.1 billion, because of supply-chain disruptions due to the virus. HPE still expects to return 50% to 75% of free cash flow to investors, Neri said.

The outbreak of the virus, known as Covid-19, has triggered companies to cut their financial outlooks and cancel events such as conferences. HPE said late Monday that it would cancel almost all events that require travel through April, except for a conference in London.

"The situation is very fluid in the supply chain," Neri said. "We can move products around. We are doing that as much as we can."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. The story drew little attention, as the world prepared to celebrate the beginning of a new year later that night.

In less than 100 days in the new year - Thursday is the 93rd day to be precise - the virus has infected 1 million people and killed 50,000, ripping through 203 countries in a rampage that will likely exact as severe an economic, social and psychological toll as the number of casualties by the time humanity can beat it. Till now, a little over 200,000 have recovered from the disease.

In India, infections crossed 2,000 on Wednesday and the country was on course to add 514 more on Thursday -- the first time daily new cases crossed the 500 mark. New fatalities too logged a big jump -- 19 -- taking the total toll to 72 in the country, which is in the middle of a three-week long nationwide shutdown to ensure the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak does not assume the proportions it has in countries such as Italy and the United States.

The United States is now the worst-hit region, accounting for more than a third of all daily new cases around the world. New York has lost 2,200 people and the virus was on course to surpass the 9/11 terror attacks in the next 36 hours as the deadliest tragedy in a city that is at the heart of modern day pop culture.

Almost 10 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the last two weeks.

The United States and Europe are largely being regarded as the current hot spots of the pandemic, with world leaders expecting "the roughest two or three weeks" in their country. "We're going to lose thousands of people," US President Donald Trump said earlier in the week, while projecting that up to 240,000 people could die.

Italy, with a large ageing population that is the most vulnerable to the Sars-Cov-2 pathogen, has seen the highest number of deaths at 13,000. Spain, the United Kingdom, France and Germany together account for close to 20,000 fatalities.

China, where the pathogen is believed to have mutated in either bats or pangolins to jump to humans, has recorded 3,300 deaths - with a rate of growth that slowed into single digits only after what has been a close two months of lockdown in large parts of the country.

Stock markets around the world suffered historic losses in the first three months of the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and London's FTSE 100 saw their biggest quarterly drops since 1987, plunging 23% and 25% respectively. In India, Bombay Stock Exchange investors lost around 33.38 lakh crore (in market value) in March, the month when the coronavirus contagion spread to equities. In an age largely defined as the era of social media, Covid-19 has now introduced a new zeitgeist: social distancing. Jobs that can be done are now being done from home -- as are classes for schools and college, and even the UK parliament. As a result, digital pipelines are sagging under the load of unprecedented video streaming and conferencing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 22 -- India will reopen air travel on 383 routes across the country after a two-month gap, the government announced on Thursday, but allowed one-third of the operations beginning May 25 and set limits on fares that airlines can charge in the initial phase of this critical unlocking of swift long-distance travel.

Civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said the government has identified seven bands based on flight durations, while announcing a set of norms for airlines and guidelines for passengers that outline how air travel is set to change in India in the aftermath of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

The fares - consistent for each band - will be capped till at least August 24.

"[Because of the lockdown] we have been able to escape the situation other countries have found themselves in. [But] it is equally important that at some stage you will have to open up. Two months is a very long time...you have to balance between lives and livelihood; it is time to now open up," Puri said at a press conference in New Delhi, a day after announcing the resumption of domestic flights.

According to data by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), flights in the first phase will operate on all routes, taking off from a total of 35 origin cities and landing in 39 destination airports.

"The central government hereby directs that domestic civil flight operations are permitted from 25 May, 2020 to a limited extent... For operations from Metro to Metro cities, One-Third capacity of the approved Summer Schedule...," the civil aviation ministry said in an order on Thursday.

The metro cities were identified as Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata. The rule will be applicable for metro to non-metro operations as well.

Though there are several guidelines for social distancing in airports and at embarkation and disembarkation points, the middle seat will not be kept vacant in the aircraft.

Lancelot Pinto, an epidemiologist at Mumbai's Hinduja Hospital, said social distancing should be a priority. "Even though the government is saying they will scan each passengers, many of the travellers will not show any symptoms as almost 80% people (Covid-19 patients) are asymptomatic."

Puri, however, said it was not possible to keep the middle seat vacant. "This is not an option being followed by any other country as well. We will keep our fingers crossed," he said.

The seven bands identified by the government are: flights with duration of less than 40 minutes (Sector A), those with journey time of 40-60 minutes (Sector B), 60-90 minutes (Sector C), 90-120 minutes (Sector D), 120-150 minutes (Sector E), 150-180 minutes (Sector F) and 180-210 minutes (Sector G).

A Delhi-Mumbai air travel takes around two hours, putting it in the category of Sector D.

"Earlier, air carriers could put their range (minimum to maximum) on their websites...We want air travel to become affordable. We have set a minimum fare and a maximum fare. For Delhi to Mumbai, the minimum fare will be Rs 3,500 and maximum Rs 10,000," Puri said at the media briefing.

The government said 40% of the tickets in all bands will be sold at a price less than the mid-point (of the lower and upper limits). In case of a Delhi-Mumbai journey, these tickets will be priced at around Rs 6,700.

The move to set fare limits will ensure there is no overcharging by airlines in view of an expected rush of passengers and heightened demand for tickets, Puri said. At the same time, the move to set lower limits is expected to protect carriers from extremely low fares set by competitors.

Domestic flights with less than 40-minute duration, like the ones from Delhi to Chandigarh, will have lower and upper limits of Rs 2,000 and Rs 6,000, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) announced later in the day. For flights with duration between 40 and 60 minutes, such as Delhi to Lucknow, the lower and upper fare limits are Rs 2,500 and Rs 7,500.

In the next band (60-90 minutes for journeys like the ones between Bengaluru and Mumbai), the lower fare limit is Rs 3,000 and the upper limit is Rs 9,000, the aviation regulator said. Flights between 120 and 150 minutes, including those on major routes such as Delhi-Bengaluru, will have lower and upper limits of Rs 4,500 and Rs 13,000.

Those with duration between 150 and 180 minutes (such as Delhi to Imphal), the lower and upper limits are set at Rs 5,500 and Rs 15,700. And finally, for flights with duration between 180 and 210 minutes - like the ones on Delhi-Coimbatore route - the range will be Rs 6,500 and Rs 18,600.

Vistara welcomed the moved to resume domestic flights, which were grounded on March 25, the day restrictions were first imposed in the country.

"Aviation is a growth engine for the economy and resumption of air travel will give great impetus to the government's overall efforts in helping the country eventually return to normalcy," Vistara CEO Leslie Thng said.

Global airlines' body International Air Transport Association (IATA), a grouping of 290 airlines, said the decision to regulate airfares is a "step back". Private carriers such as Air India, Vistara, IndiGo and SpiceJet are its members.

"Airlines need to have the freedom to make their commercial decisions, including the pricing of airfares. Hence, we recognise and hope that this is a one-time measure as a result of Covid-19 and will be discontinued on August 24," IATA assistant director (corporate communications - Asia Pacific) Albert Tjoeng told news agency PTI.

Ravi Kini, managing partner at law firm MV Kini & Co, said: "Fares are published by airlines in the regular course. The range normally published is very wide for allowing flexibility for the airlines to respond to the market demand in free market situation. In the current situation, free market play has been curbed due to Covid-19...This is a good move by the government to balance the consumer interests with airline profitability."

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 6 -- Here's one more issue to add to the bonfire of tensions with China brought on by the coronavirus pandemic. The country is reportedly reopening its wet markets, the fresh produce stalls associated with Covid-19's early spread in Wuhan.

It's understandable that countries now in the grip of the first wave of infection might be outraged. Many blame wet markets for starting the outbreak in the first place. Opening them again, at a moment when thousands are dying overseas, seems emblematic of Beijing's increasingly chauvinistic approach to world affairs.

Animals in wet markets are penned and slaughtered or sold live right next to stalls selling fruit and vegetables. Conditions, as my colleague Adam Minter has written, are often less than hygienic.

Places where a range of common and exotic animals mix together while bodily fluids flow freely may seem a fertile breeding ground for the virulent novel diseases that cross the species barrier to humans and occasionally become pandemics.

At the same time, let's put the outrage on pause. Wet markets are increasingly losing ground to supermarkets in China. If they're showing resilience as suppliers of fresh goods, it's precisely because consumers regard them as a healthier and more sustainable alternative.

That perception isn't inaccurate. The prevalence of food-borne microbial illness in developing East Asia suggests that far from being cesspits of disease, wet markets do a good job of providing households with clean, fresh produce. And while the origins of coronavirus remain obscure, they may have at least as much to do with more worldwide activities such as intensive farming as practices specific to Asia.

The attraction of wet markets isn't so different fromthat of farmers' markets in Western countries. In contrast to a supermarket model where multiple layers of retailers, wholesalersand logistics companies stand in between the consumer and the grower, wet markets offer a personal and direct connectionbetween shopper, stallholder and farmer.

Consumers know the food is fresh because there's generally little refrigeration, so everything must be sold on the day. If in doubt, they can ask the stallholder what's in season and which produce is best at the moment. If they think one market looks unsanitary, they can choose to shop at another.

That helps explain how wet markets have managed to hold their own in spite of the growth of store-based retail in recent years. Supermarkets now account for about half of all grocery spending in China, up from about 36% in 1995, according to Euromonitor International. Add in convenience stores and the like and so-called modern groceryhas about 68% of China's retail wallet, giving wet markets less than a third.

Still, that store-based spending is overwhelmingly concentrated in packaged, rather than fresh produce. Foreign retailers that once hoped to dominate China's staple goods sector such as Carrefour SA and Metro AG have struggled and sold out of local ventures -but wet markets are still going strong.

The evidence suggests this consumer loyalty isn't misplaced. One 2015 study for the World Health Organization compared the number of years of life lost per 100,000 people due to food-borne sickness, disability and death. The region encompassing the wet market zone from China and South Korea down through most of Southeast Asia has the best record for microbial infections outside the Americas, Europe and the rich countries of the Pacific Rim.(1)

What about Covid-19 itself, though? There's good evidence that the virus has genetic characteristics from another pathogen found in pangolins, an exotic mammal sometimes sold in Chinese markets. And it circulated extensively around one of Wuhan's seafood and meat markets last December, although the earliest infections don't seem to have been connected to the site.

Only a small minority of wet markets sell such exotica, though, so you can close down the wild animal trade without shutting the places where most Chinese people get their daily sustenance. And don't overlook the possibility that a key ingredient in Covid-19's genetic cocktail isn't wild game, but domesticated livestock. The high-density conditions on farms are far more conducive to cooking up novel diseases, as we've written- and even pangolins are farmed in China these days.

To the extent that the mix of the raw and the cooked in Asia's wet markets is a health problem, it can easily be mitigated by better building design (such as separating meat,vegetable and livestock areas and keeping markets fully enclosed), plus the sort of mandated cleaning regulations found in places like Singapore, Hong Kong and South Korea.There's plenty to complain about in the way that China downplayed and hushed upthe initial outbreak until it was all but inevitable it would become a worldwide pandemic. Closing all wet markets, though, isn't the solution.

(1) Indeed, the data suggest the problem with Asia's appetite for 'warm meat' isn't that fresh-slaughtered produce is less healthy than the chilled meat from an abattoir, but that local preferences for undercooked meat and fish lead to unusually high burdens of tapeworms, flukes and other parasitic worms. That's not something different retail formats can solve.

(This story has been published from a wire agency feed without modifications to the text. Only the headline has been changed. )

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- Never has the international community been so divided and so paralysed in the face of common threats to humanity. How did we get here? More importantly, where do we go from here?

We have been facing a "synchronised global crisis" for some time now. The crisis has entailed great power rivalry, conflict, terrorism, trade wars, climate change and now a pandemic: all occurring in synchronised fashion. In an ideal world, this level and scale of crisis might have elicited coordination and cooperation among all the stakeholders. Instead, what we are witnessing today is not just an absence of global cooperation but worse, finger pointing and blame game among major powers.

The UN Security Council has been in limbo for the last few years now. And given the state of relations between the US on the one hand and Russia/China on the other, the prospect of this forum doing anything meaningful is diminishing by the day. If the UNSC cannot get its act on Yemen, Libya and Afghanistan, then what hope for this conflict-ridden world?

The World Trade Organization (WTO), whose mandate it is to provide a predictable framework for international trade at a time like this, is itself facing a serious crisis. Powerful members of the WTO have to take the blame for bringing this organisation to a grinding halt. As for Climate change, the less said the better. There could not be a more existential threat to humanity, yet countries have behaved in a "devil take the hindmost" fashion that beggars belief.

It is against the above backdrop that the coronavirus hit the world, beginning with China. As outlined above, the timing could not have been worse. Already, the global institutions set up in the aftermath of World War II had atrophied to such an extent as to become dysfunctional. Add to that a high degree of mistrust between the great powers for a variety of reasons.

When the deadly virus happened, China committed the cardinal sin of trying to cover up. Authoritarian societies have both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage is ramming through measures and seeking compliance from its population. The disadvantages are lack of transparency, arguable accountability and absence of a vigilant press. China appears to have taken a huge gamble by seeking to cover up the truth in the beginning, hoping that the strong state can then beat this virus through draconian measures. It may have overlooked the fact that the coronavirus is an equal opportunity infector and does not spare anyone. If in late December or even early January, China had acknowledged the problem and sought international cooperation, things might have been different. But then, trust and confidence between major powers was so low that China may have been more keen on saving face and in asserting its great power status than in seeking outside help.

As often happens in such cases, the initial cover-up led to subsequent lies and subterfuge by the Chinese Communist Party. One of the most egregious things that China did was to either mislead the World Health Organization or worse, bulldoze the organisation into asserting in January that there was no evidence of human transmission by this dreaded virus. If this complicity is established, the WHO stands enormously diminished as an organisation whose fundamental objective (Article 1 of the WHO Constitution) is the "attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health".

Then, there is the "small" matter of how or where this virus originated. Against massive evidence, China refuses to accept even to this day that the virus began in a wet market in Wuhan. Instead, it has consistently sought to change the narrative by floating outlandish theories that the virus may have had an American origin! China is currently desperate to prove that as a Great Power, it has brought the issue under control, even while the West is floundering around.

There is now little doubt that China will use this global crisis to gain geo-strategic advantage. Take the simple case of masks, of which there is a global shortage. China already produced 50 percent of world supply and is now all set to ramp up production. France, a country battling the coronavirus, for instance depends 100 per cent on China for supply of masks. Italy presents an interesting example of how China plays the strategic game. Just as the EU was dragging its feet in meeting Italy's request, China rushed supplies and medical teams earning Italy's gratitude. Chinese assistance, whether it is for Italy/France or indeed for Africa, is nevertheless based on quid pro quo rather than any altruism.

The world got here because the liberal international order was showing signs of collapse even before the coronavirus hit us. The fact that there was no global leadership at this juncture led to geo-strategic paralysis. Based on evidence so far, China will try to assume the mantle of global leadership but it is unlikely to be smooth going. Indeed, a leadership struggle in China is not inconceivable. Meanwhile, expect more churn, more disorder and more jostling for strategic influence by major powers. Can India, along with others like Japan, try and foster multilateral cooperation using the G-20 framework? It will be a long haul and success by no means guaranteed, but may be worth a try.

(Dr Mohan Kumar is a former Indian Foreign Service officer and retired as the Indian Ambassador to France)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- The headquarters of a religious sect in Delhi's Nizamuddin area has emerged as one of the biggest coronavirus disease (Covid-19) hot spots in India with 24 people testing positive and nearly 200 others showing symptoms on Monday when officials began evacuating the six-storey building of some 1,400 people who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.

The building belongs to the Tablighi Jamaat, an evangelical Muslim sect that hosted this month its annual congregation with attendees coming in from several foreign nations such as Indonesia and Malaysia before they spread out to other parts of the country such as Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh, creating a web of close contacts that now threatens to create an explosion of cases in the country.

"There are several foreign travellers who visit the complex for gatherings and prayer. We suspect the infection was first brought in by them," said a senior health department official, asking not to be named.

The first indications of the site being a source of the disease came in the middle of last week when officials in four regions - Andaman, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kashmir - began working back the travel histories of patients who tested positive there.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

Eight of these people, including seven who went to Hyderabad and one who went to Srinagar, have succumbed to the disease. The Hyderabad deaths took place on Monday.

All of them had been to the building in Nizamuddin - also referred to as a markaz -- which shares a boundary with the police station and is close to the famous Nizamuddin Auliya shrine.

Shortly after, the district surveillance officer went to the area to screen people for symptoms and collect their samples. "Yesterday we got back the reports and six people had tested positive. Now our officers are there screening everyone in the area, anyone with symptoms is being taken to various hospitals. The operation will go on all night long," said Dr Nutan Mundeja, Delhi's director general of health services.

As officials began clearing the building slowly, the number of people showing symptoms for Covid-19 had risen to 188 by Monday evening and authorities expected around 300 more with a cough, fever or respiratory distress.

Till now, the most serious instances of the disease spread in India have been in large local clusters -- such as the groups infected in Rajasthan's Bhilwara, Maharashtra's Sangli and in Punjab's Banga. The patients linked to the Tablighi Jamaat have fanned out across the country, in some instances infecting locals, raising the spectre of having triggered community transmission.

The outbreak prompted the Arvind Kejriwal government to ask the Delhi Police to register an FIR against the head of the markaz. "A lockdown was imposed in entire India on March 24 and it was the duty of every owner and administrator of every hotel, guesthouse, hostel and similar establishment to maintain social distancing. It looks like social distancing and quarantine protocols were not practiced here," said a statement by the government.

A hostel-like complex, the building has six floors with accommodations for up to 2,000 people on the upper floors, with the basement and the ground housing a kitchen and a communal dining area. Officials fear that such a nature of the facility may have made the spread of the virus easier.

The 18 patients confirmed on Monday include people from Indonesia, Nepal, and the Indian regions of Kashmir, Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.

The Tablighi Jamaat, a sect of preachers that travels across the world to encourage other Muslims to follow the faith, traces its origins in UP and has several chapters outside of the country. The biggest outside India is in Pakistan's Raiwind, where the congregation this month was linked to at least 30 infections.

A more serious spread from a sect's gathering was reported from Malaysia, where at least 500 from the nearly 16,000 who gathered for the four-day event starting on Feb 27 at the Sri Petaling mosque compound, according to a New York Times report. Three days later, they dispersed to other countries, including India, Pakistan and Indonesia - the three other prominent countries where the sect was next scheduled to hold congregations.

According to a Delhi Police official, the foreign arrivals for the Nizamuddin congregation began on March 10.

On Monday, police cordoned off roads leading to the Nizamuddin area near the police station. "The whole city is under lockdown. Now with some cases of people showing symptoms of Covid-19 reported from Nizamuddin area, we have posted more police personnel at the market places and the lanes to ensure that people follow the lockdown. Our officers on the ground are also helping the government officers in Nizamuddin basti area," said deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena.

Several of the confirmed Covid-19 patients linked to the Nizamuddin building covered vast distances, taking trains and flights, after they likely became infected and were potentially passing it on to others. The six who died in Hyderabad were, for instance, in a group including 10 Indonesians who started showing symptoms around March 18. Disease surveillance officials traced their travel history back to Delhi through a train journey and found that they took part in several religious events and stayed at a local madarsa in the Telangana city.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 15 -- The World Health Organisation (WHO) is "extremely anxious" to know the origin of the pandemic-triggering novel coronavirus first found in the central Chinese city of Wuhan and is ready to help the ongoing Chinese investigation looking into the roots of the pathogen.

So far, the WHO, which the world's top UN body for public health, has not been involved in the multi-layered and critical probe - set up to find the virus' animal origin and the exact sequencing of the animal-to-human interface.

The coronavirus pandemic or the Covid-19 disease has until Sunday morning killed more than 5840 people and sickened over 157000 globally, a vast majority of them in China.

"The WHO would be ready, but currently the investigation is being done by the government, into the origin (of the virus)," Gauden Galea, the organisation's China representative said, adding "As far as we can see, we have not been involved in it".

"We are extremely anxious to know where the virus came from".

"The animal origins may take a very long time to identify. If you look at SARS, it took 10 years to identify the source after it happened; if you look at MERS, we are seven years down the line, and we are not yet sure still. So, this is not a story that is going to end quickly," Galea said.

"There are several areas where additional research and inquiry is necessary to help the global community respond to this outbreak and prevent an outbreak in the future. WHO has discussed the question of animal-origins of Covid-19 on multiple occasions and is prepared to join China's efforts to research this issue".

Bats and pangolins have been said to be the source of the virus but scientists are still researching aspect, and whether an intermediate animal host played a part in the zoonosis.

The initial sequences of the transmission aren't clear either.

For example, it's not clear if the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan was the only source or there were multiple sources in the city, Galea, working at WHO since 1998, said.

"There's a big lesson that has been learned. But at this point, we still need that fuller investigation to know was it (the market) really the origin or was it one of the multiple events that had happened in Wuhan over a period? And that can only be done with further investigation," Galea said.

Galea said it was very important for the investigation to be done to ensure such an outbreak doesn't recur from the same source - "and before it fades from memory".

"The epidemiology has to be done and, and chased through to the first case if it's possible and to the first exposure," Galea said in an interview with the HT in Beijing over the weekend.

The WHO has been involved with the Chinese government in monitoring and containing the outbreak formally since January 3, preceded by three days of "informal" exchanges from December 31.

By January 3, the WHO had put in place an "incident management team" comprising members from its Beijing office, regional headquarters in Manila and the Geneva headquarters.

"We know for certain that there was a cluster associated with the Huanan seafood market (in Wuhan) in December. And, that was very clear. You can see that from the environmental samples, from the geographical distribution and from the time connections between the cases and so on. It was a very clear cluster," Galea said.

Not all cases were connected to the market, however.

"We do know that even in the first cluster there were cases that were not reportedly associated with the seafood market and those cases need to be investigated".

"It is our understanding that the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention is looking into these cases. It is important to do this and do it fast before memories fade way. It is very important to be able to go back to the origins," the WHO's China head said.

"Independent of who identifies, when identifies, the epidemiological investigations (into) the human side, as well as the human-animal interface, need urgent and detailed investigation," Galea said.

"We do not want whatever source originated it, to do it again unexpectedly.If you don't have the sources, you are always open to it happening again. On this part, we cannot be more anxious to get the answers," Galea said.

Galea headed the first WHO team that went to Wuhan on January 20 and January 21.

Later, in February, a WHO-China joint team also visited Wuhan and Beijing among other places.

Galea hopes China will continue to share information.

"We continue to ask questions," Galea said, adding until now China has shared "a new package of knowledge" whenever identified by the authorities.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 5 -- "The commercial music industry needs to take more risks," says composer AR Rahman. "There is a set of commercial expectations in Hindi movies especially. The vibe, the movie, the song. sometimes it's savage, the way it's done. They could take more risks with the box office not being a priority for OTT platforms and should go much deeper into our roots of music and find new ways to express the tradition."

Rahman, 54, has been both part of that industry, and a catalyst outside it for nearly three decades. He wrote his first tune on his father's harmonium at age 5, was performing in a professional orchestra at 11 and began his film career at 25, with Mani Ratnam's Roja (1992), for which he won the first of his six National Awards.

A golden streak followed, with Bombay (1995), Rangeela (1995), Lagaan (2001), Rang De Basanti (2006), Jodhaa Akbar (2008) and Rockstar (2011), among others, and a parallel track in Tamil cinema that included films such as Iruvar (1997), Vinnaithaandi Varuvaayaa (2010), Kochadaiiyaan (2014) and I (2015). In 2008, as part of the Danny Boyle crossover film Slumdog Millionaire's series of wins, Rahman won two Academy Awards, two Grammies, a BAFTA, a Golden Globe and international stardom.

Through these decades, he was also known for seeking out fresh talent to work with. "Most composers have their regular singers, but Rahman has always scouted for new voices. He had a young Baba Sehgal and Shweta Shetty sing Rukmani Rukmani in Roja and a relatively unknown Sukhwinder Singh sing Chaiyya Chaiyya for Dil Se [in 1998]," says Archisman Mozumder, a musicologist with the infotainment platform Rewind.

In 2008, Rahman founded the KM Music Conservatory to train aspiring musicians. A year later, he started Sunshine Orchestra, offering free musical training to children who couldn't afford it.

He's now turned his attention to the struggling South Asian indie artists. He and a trio of Canadian entrepreneurs - Noel Kirthiraj, Sen Sachi and Prasana Balachandran - have launched a platform called maajja (apparently derived from "Majestic"), promising "creative liberty" and "global reach" to independent musicians.

As things stand, there are platforms that aspire but struggle to enable artists, Rahman told Wknd. "There are a lucky few who benefit from the system and rise to great heights, while others continue to struggle."

Maajja seeks to bring data and resources to bear on this problem. "The industry must support itself. We often say it but we don't really do it. Any successful entrepreneurship or idea needs to be able to generate money and it needs to be interesting," Rahman says. "The music market is very segregated and we don't know who is consuming what. Our aim is to unite and create a new ecosystem with deserving talent, good production value for content and a robust platform to showcase it."

Any artist of South Asian origin or catering to an audience in South Asia will be eligible. Aspirants will be able to sign up on the website and reach out through social media or email demos of their work. "It's not surprising that Rahman is launching a concept like this. He is one of a very few musicians in the country who could breach the north-south industry divide," says Mozumder. "Rahman successfully took Indian fusion to the world too."

"Maajja will be giving a window of hope to indie musicians in the country. People won't be discouraged to participate in counter-culture. That's a huge thing," says Tenma, a Tamil indie musician and co-founder of the band The Casteless Collective who is also associated with the new initiative.

Rahman, the Sufi-loving BTS fan with his finger on the pulse of the youth, says he essentially wants to make it easier for other music lovers to make their career dreams come true. "To come into music is not easy. It takes a lot of courage," he adds. Plans for a major music festival to follow the announcement of maajja have been delayed by Covid-19, but it was time to launch the initiative and move towards the festival. "Creative collaboration was the most powerful response to the pandemic," Rahman says.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. The story drew little attention, as the world prepared to celebrate the beginning of a new year later that night.

In less than 100 days in the new year - Thursday is the 93rd day to be precise - the virus has infected 1 million people and killed 50,000, ripping through 203 countries in a rampage that will likely exact as severe an economic, social and psychological toll as the number of casualties by the time humanity can beat it. Till now, a little over 200,000 have recovered from the disease.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

In India, infections crossed 2,000 on Wednesday and the country was on course to add 514 more on Thursday -- the first time daily new cases crossed the 500 mark. New fatalities too logged a big jump -- 19 -- taking the total toll to 72 in the country, which is in the middle of a three-week long nationwide shutdown to ensure the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak does not assume the proportions it has in countries such as Italy and the United States.

The United States is now the worst-hit region, accounting for more than a third of all daily new cases around the world. New York has lost 2,200 people and the virus was on course to surpass the 9/11 terror attacks in the next 36 hours as the deadliest tragedy in a city that is at the heart of modern day pop culture.

Almost 10 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the last two weeks.

The United States and Europe are largely being regarded as the current hot spots of the pandemic, with world leaders expecting "the roughest two or three weeks" in their country. "We're going to lose thousands of people," US President Donald Trump said earlier in the week, while projecting that up to 240,000 people could die.

Italy, with a large ageing population that is the most vulnerable to the Sars-Cov-2 pathogen, has seen the highest number of deaths at 13,000. Spain, the United Kingdom, France and Germany together account for close to 20,000 fatalities.

China, where the pathogen is believed to have mutated in either bats or pangolins to jump to humans, has recorded 3,300 deaths - with a rate of growth that slowed into single digits only after what has been a close two months of lockdown in large parts of the country.

Stock markets around the world suffered historic losses in the first three months of the year. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and London's FTSE 100 saw their biggest quarterly drops since 1987, plunging 23% and 25% respectively.

In India, Bombay Stock Exchange investors lost around Rs 33.38 lakh crore (in market value) in March, the month when the coronavirus contagion spread to equities.

In an age largely defined as the era of social media, Covid-19 has now introduced a new zeitgeist: social distancing. Jobs that can be done are now being done from home -- as are classes for schools and college, and even the UK parliament. As a result, digital pipelines are sagging under the load of unprecedented video streaming and conferencing.

Also Read: Genetic sequencing takes lead in Covid-19 vaccine development

In India, authorities have now begun preparations to deal with what may be an inevitable surge in infections, and chart out strategies to allow at least some people to resume work when the lockdown ends on April 15.

"It is important to formulate a common exit strategy to ensure staggered re-emergence of the population once the lockdown ends," Prime Minister Narendra Modi told chief ministers on Thursday, asking states to send their suggestions for such an exit strategy.

"It can't be business as usual," a government release quoted the PM as saying, perhaps summing up the reality the rest of the world will need to confront - at least for the next 12-18 months by when a viable, mass-produced vaccine is expected to be a reality.

Research labs and pharmaceutical companies in the US, China and European nations are working at full tilt to develop a vaccine that can fight stem the pandemic.

Trials have begun in China, United States and Germany with first participants taking shots of the first vaccine candidates.

A drug used in the treatment of malaria has also held out hope, and prompted India to prescribe it as a prophylactic for medical staff dealing with the cases. Hydroxychloroquine when paired with azithromycin (an antibiotic) has been shown to clear patients of the virus at a much faster rate than seen usually.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 27 -- The United States stands with India in its efforts to defend its sovereignty and liberty, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Tuesday after the third edition of the 2+2 strategic dialogue that majorly focused on dealing with China's aggressive military behaviour in eastern Ladakh, Indo- Pacific and other parts of the world.

Here is the full text of the joint statement issued by India and US:

India's Minister of Defence Rajnath Singh and Minister of External Affairs Dr. S. Jaishankar welcomed US Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo and Secretary of Defense Dr. Mark T. Esper to New Delhi for the third annual India-US. 2+2 Ministerial Dialogue. The Ministers welcomed the elevation of the India-U.S. relationship to a Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership during the visit of President Donald J. Trump to India in February 2020. They reiterated their commitment to further strengthening the India-US. partnership, anchored in mutual trust and friendship, shared commitment to democracy, converging strategic interests, and robust engagement of their citizens.

While celebrating more than seven decades of diplomatic engagement between India and the United States, the Ministers intend to expand cooperation under the 2+2 framework to realize the full potential of the India-US. Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership.

Co-operation during the Covid-19 Pandemic

The Ministers applauded the exemplary cooperation between India and the United States in confronting challenges emerging from the Covid-19 pandemic. They reiterated their resolve to strengthen cooperation in the development of vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics, ventilators and other essential medical equipment. Recognizing that bilateral engagement in the research & development and the mass production of vaccines and therapeutics plays to our respective strengths, the Ministers sought to jointly promote access to high quality, safe, effective and affordable Covid-19 vaccines and treatments on a global scale. India expressed appreciation for the 200 ventilators provided by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) to the Indian Red Cross Society, while the US expressed appreciation for India's export of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), essential medicines, and therapeutics to the United States during these challenging times. The Ministers looked forward to the conclusion of an overarching MoU between India's Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), including their component agencies and departments, to enhance health cooperation, including on health emergencies and pandemics, prevention, diagnosis and treatment of communicable and non-communicable diseases, and biomedical research and innovation. The Ministers also looked forward to the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAD/NIH) to collaborate through an International Center of Excellence in Research focused on infectious diseases including Covid-19 and other emerging threats. They welcomed the upcoming call for applications for clinical research fellowships for early and mid-career Indian and American scientists to help expand the cohort of physician scientists focused on research that will advance clinical practice and benefit public health in both countries. Noting the importance of health sector cooperation, they also looked forward to convening the India-US Health Dialogue at an early date.

The Ministers reaffirmed efforts to enhance supply chain resilience and to seek alternatives to the current paradigm, which had come under severe strain during the pandemic and exposed critical vulnerabilities. The Ministers sought to support the global economic recovery, including in India and the United States, to emerge from the pandemic more resilient than ever.

The Ministers expressed appreciation for the repatriation of stranded Indian and US nationals from both countries during the pandemic.

Shared Vision for the Indo-Pacific and Global Leadership

The Ministers reiterated their commitment to maintaining a free, open, inclusive, peaceful, and prosperous Indo-Pacific built on a rules-based international order, underpinned by ASEAN centrality, rule of law, sustainable and transparent infrastructure investment, freedom of navigation and overflight, mutual respect for sovereignty, and peaceful resolution of disputes. Highlighting the importance of securing the economic and security interests of all stakeholders having a legitimate interest in the region, the Ministers welcomed the growing understanding on the Indo-Pacific among like-minded countries. They reaffirmed that closer India-US cooperation will support shared interests in promoting security and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region and beyond. They also emphasized that the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea should not prejudice the legitimate rights and interests of any nation in accordance with international law.

The Ministers welcomed the recent convening of the Second Australia-India-Japan-United States Quadrilateral Ministerial Meeting in Tokyo on October 6, 2020.They appreciated the exchange of views on regional issues of mutual interest, as well as ongoing cooperation related to maritime security, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, regional connectivity, health security and counter terrorism. The Ministers also welcomed the fact that these Consultations would now be held annually. They expressed their support for further strengthening Quad cooperation through expanded activities, including initiating a dialogue among the development organizations of partner countries.

The Ministers expressed their support for sustainable, transparent, quality infrastructure development in the Indo-Pacific region. They looked forward to furthering collaboration between USAID and India's Development Partnership Administration (DPA) with a view to undertaking joint projects in the region. The Ministers welcomed the establishment of a permanent presence of the US International Development Finance Cooperation (DFC) in India this year. The United States expressed strong support for the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) as a leading mechanism for promoting regional economic development. Recognizing the need to contain the build-up of sovereign debt in developing and low-income countries by ensuring responsible, transparent, and sustainable financing practices for both borrowers and creditors, the Ministers looked forward to exploring ways to cooperate under the Blue Dot Network. They also looked forward to the Second Indo-Pacific Business Forum (IPBF) to be held on October 28-29, 2020.

Building on a strong record of peacekeeping cooperation, the Ministers decided to expand joint capacity building efforts with partner countries in the Indo-Pacific and to participate in multilateral peacekeeping training exercises.

The Ministers discussed their shared interest in promoting a sovereign, peaceful, united, democratic, inclusive, stable and secure Afghanistan, including support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. They applauded India's development assistance, and efforts to build trade linkages and multi-modal connectivity infrastructure for Afghanistan to enhance its regional connectivity to sustain growth and development over the long term.

The United States congratulated India for its non-permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) for the term 2021-2022. The Ministers reiterated their commitment to work together in close coordination at the UNSC and in International Organizations. The US also reaffirmed its continued strong support for India's permanent membership in a reformed UNSC as well as for India's early entry into the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).

Advancing the Defence and Security Partnership

Noting the 15th anniversary of the inaugural US-India Defense Framework Agreement, the Ministers commended what has become a comprehensive, resilient, and multi-faceted Major Defense Partnership (MDP) between India and the United States. They applauded the significant step of the signing of the Basic Exchange and Cooperation Agreement (BECA). They also welcomed enhanced maritime information sharing and maritime domain awareness between their Navies and affirmed their commitment to build upon existing defense information-sharing at the joint-service and service-to-service levels and explore potential new areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.

The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to deepening bilateral defense consultation and collaboration and to exploring opportunities to expand cooperative capacity-building efforts with partners across the region. They also affirmed their commitment to pursue increased cooperation between the Indian military and US Central Command and Africa Command, including broader participation in exercises and conferences, so as to promote shared security interests. The US appreciated India's leadership in establishing an Information Fusion Centre for the Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR). The Ministers welcomed the positioning of a Liaison Officer from the US Navy at the IFC-IOR and the positioning of an Indian Liaison Officer at NAVCENT, Bahrain and reiterated their intent to assign additional Liaison Officers.

The Ministers expressed satisfaction at the ongoing progress in the implementation of Logistics Exchange Memorandum of Agreement (LEMOA) and Communications, Compatibility and Security Agreement (COMCASA), including the expansion of secure communications capabilities to include secure video teleconference capabilities between their respective Navies, Armies and Air Forces as well as between respective Foreign and Defense Ministries. The Ministers welcomed the convening of the Military Cooperation Group (MCG) later this year to review bilateral military-to-military engagement including joint exercises, training and expert exchanges. They looked forward to interaction between the Special Forces of India and the United States.

The Ministers welcomed the inclusion of the Royal Australian Navy in the US-India-Japan MALABAR Naval Exercise scheduled to be held in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea in November 2020. Highlighting the importance of deepening maritime cooperation and the growing sophistication of US-India naval cooperation, the Ministers welcomed the PASSEX carried out by the Navies of both countries. They also looked forward to the convening of the next edition of the Tri-Services Amphibious TIGER TRIUMPH HADR Exercise and Army Exercises YUDH ABHYAS and VAJRA PRAHAR in 2021. The US welcomed India's co-hosting of the Indo-Pacific Armies Chiefs Conference (IPACC), Indo-Pacific Armies Management Seminar (IPAMS) and Senior Enlisted Leader Forum (SELF) in 2023.

The Ministers decided to work together to realize the development of their respective defense industries. Acknowledging India's contributions to the global supply chain of major defence platforms and commitment to defense innovation, the Ministers reiterated the importance of Defence Technology and Trade Initiative (DTTI), and stated their intention to fast track projects under DTTI. They noted with satisfaction the signing of a Statement of Intent (SoI) at the 10th DTTI meeting to strengthen dialogue on defence technology cooperation on several specific DTTI projects as well as a DTTI Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for identification and development of joint projects. India looked forward to the participation by the US Government and defence industry at the upcoming Aero-India in February 2021.

Recognizing the importance of cooperation in defence innovation, the Ministers welcomed the inaugural meeting between the Indian Defence Innovation Organization (DIO-iDEX) and US Defense Innovation United (DIU) in July 2020. They also looked forward to the inaugural Industrial Security Annex (ISA) Summit later this year which would further strengthen defence industrial cooperation between both countries.

Strengthening Bilateral India-US Cooperation

The Ministers welcomed efforts to rejuvenate and expand bilateral India-US trade in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this regard, they noted ongoing discussions by the Unites States Trade Representative and India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry to reach an understanding on improving market access, removing barriers to trade, and improving the business environment.

The Ministers noted with satisfaction the significant strides made under the four Pillars of the Strategic Energy Partnership (SEP) covering Oil & Gas, Power and Energy Efficiency, Renewables and Sustainable Growth. They also appreciated the progress made under the India-US Gas Task Force and the launch of industry-led projects. They welcomed the announcement of new priorities and roadmap for each of the Pillars during the Ministerial meeting of the SEP held on July 17, 2020. With the objective of intensifying cooperation in the area of Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPRs), the Ministers welcomed the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding in this regard.

Recalling the historic India-US Civil Nuclear Agreement, the Ministers welcomed the project Division of Responsibility principles between Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) and Westinghouse Electric Company (WEC) for the construction of six nuclear reactors at Kovvada, and looked forward to the detailed Division of Responsibility that would pave the way for a techno-commercial offer. The Ministers also welcomed the extension of the MoU between the Government of India and the Government of the United States of America concerning cooperation with India's Global Centre for Nuclear Energy Partnership (GCNEP).

The Ministers welcomed the virtual convening of the 17th meeting of the India-US Counter Terrorism Joint Working Group and the 3rd Session of the India-US Designations Dialogue on September 9-10, 2020. They denounced the use of terrorist proxies and strongly condemned cross border terrorism in all its forms. They emphasised the need for concerted action against all terrorist networks, including al-Qaeda, ISIS/Daesh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Hizb-ul-Mujahideen. The Ministers called on Pakistan to take immediate, sustained and irreversible action to ensure that no territory under its control is used for terrorist attacks, and to expeditiously bring to justice the perpetrators and planners of all such attacks, including 26/11 Mumbai, Uri, and Pathankot. The Ministers also committed to continued exchange of information about sanctions and designations against terror groups and individuals, particularly in light of recent legislative changes in India, as well as countering the financing and operations of terrorist organizations, countering radicalism and terrorist use of the internet, cross-border movement of terrorists, and prosecuting, rehabilitating, and reintegrating returning terrorist fighters and family members.

The Ministers intend to enhance their ongoing cooperation in multilateral fora, including the UN. They also reaffirmed their support for the early adoption of a UN Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) that will advance and strengthen the framework for global cooperation and reinforce the message that no cause or grievance justifies terrorism.

In view of the announcement made during President Trump's visit to India to establish a new India-US Counter-Narcotics Working Group, the Ministers welcomed the proposal to convene the first such virtual meeting later this year, with an in-person meeting in 2021, to enhance cooperation between Indian and US drug and law enforcement agencies. The Ministers welcomed efforts by the US Department of Homeland Security and India's Ministry of Home Affairs to reinvigorate the Homeland Security Dialogue.

The Ministers welcomed the virtual convening of the India-US Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Working Group on October 1, 2020. They reaffirmed their commitment towards an open, reliable and secure internet as well as the multi-stakeholder model of internet governance. They emphasized fostering cooperation between their industry and academia for an open, secure and resilient supply of strategic material and critical infrastructure and to independently evaluate the risk associated with deployment of emerging ICT technologies, including 5G networks.

The Ministers also welcomed the recent convening of the annual India-US Cyber Dialogue on September 15, 2020 and the first India-US Defence Cyber Dialogue on September 17, 2020.

Recalling their countries' proud record of achievement in space science and satellite application, the Ministers applauded the ongoing collaboration between the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), including on the NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) satellite scheduled to be launched by 2022. The Ministers also looked forward to sharing Space Situational Awareness information, which will catalyze efforts to create the conditions for a safe, stable, and sustainable space environment. They also expressed the intent to continue the India-US Space Dialogue as well as discussions on areas of potential space defense cooperation.

The Ministers welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Technical Cooperation in Earth Observation and Earth Sciences between the Indian Ministry of Earth Sciences and the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for developing a better understanding of the regional and global weather origins in the Indian Ocean and advancing common research goals in meteorology, oceanography, and management of living marine resources. The Ministers welcomed the signing of an Agreement between India's Department of Post and the United States Postal Service, which will facilitate the electronic exchange of customs data related to postal shipments. They also applauded the signing of the Letter of Intent (LoI) between the Indian Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH and the Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine, US Department of Health and Human Services.

Nurturing the People-to-People Bonds

Underscoring the importance of ties between our respective legislatures, the Ministers welcomed the launch of an India-US Parliamentary Exchange.

Applauding the entrepreneurial spirit of Indians and Indian-Americans that has mutually benefitted both nations, the Ministers recognised the important role of people-to-people linkages in strengthening the overall bilateral relationship and economic ties. Both sides look forward to the next iteration of the India-US Consular Dialogue to further increase cooperation and discuss issues of mutual concern, including visas, and familial issues related to marriage, adoption and child custody.

The Ministers welcomed the increasing number of Indian students in the United States and acknowledged the role of expanding educational ties and fostering entrepreneurship and scientific innovation. In this context, the Ministers welcomed India's National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 which would pave the way for enhanced collaboration between academic institutions of both countries. The Ministers looked forward to discussions to further advance India-US educational partnerships.

Appreciating the valuable contribution of the Fulbright-Nehru Program over the years in furthering exchange of outstanding academics and professionals between both countries, the Ministers celebrated the 70th anniversary of the Program this year.

The Ministers welcomed the commencement of issuance of 12-month reciprocal temporary duty visas to officials from both Governments as a step to facilitate the growing partnership.

The United States looks forward to hosting the next 2+2 Ministerial in 2021.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 13 -- Three more special trains ferrying around 3,500 stranded migrant workers left the Capital on Wednesday for Bihar's Bhagalpur, Darbhanga and Barauni districts from the Old Delhi Railway Station.

Five trains have left Delhi so far-one for Madhya Pradesh and four for Bihar-with around 6,000 stranded migrant workers as part of a special arrangement between the states under guidelines issued by the union home ministry on April 29.

All 6,000 migrants who have so far left Delhi had taken shelter in government-run camps set up after the implementation of the nationwide lockdown on March 25, a senior government official said. There are at least 10,000 more stranded migrants from Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Odisha, West Bengal and Jharkhand in Delhi.

Government officials said a large number of migrants, however, had chosen to stay back after witnessing the scaling down of lockdown norms and the partial revival of business and commercial activities in several sectors, including industries and construction, since last week.

Over 300 state-run buses ferrying stranded migrants queued up outside the Old Delhi Railway Station on Wednesday afternoon. Ready with luggage, home-cooked food packed in layers of cloth, bottles of water and packets of dry snacks, scores of migrant workers waited inside designated circles marked for each of them to maintain distance at the entry to the station.

Despite economic activities gradually opening up in different sectors, several of them said that they may return to Delhi after their workplaces reopen, but they needed to go home for now. Most said they wanted a break from the uncertain circumstances in the city.

Rajendra Kumar, 36, said he had come to Delhi in early March to work at a cloth factory in Okhla, but could not wait to return home, where his old parents were waiting for them. While his wife wiped their two children's faces with a wet cloth to try and save them from the heat, Kumar said he did not know when his factory would reopen. "The last two months have been really difficult to survive. My parents too don't have much to survive on. We have a patch of land at home. I will farm it until things return to normal," Kumar, who is from Munger, said.

Vinod Kumar (49) and his son, labourers at a bag-making factory in Paharganj, said returning to their village would be a relief. "At least back in the village, there is no fear of people getting infected. We need a break from the prison-like life here. There is no option but to come back. But for some days, we will breathe without fear," Kumar said.

A group of labourers from Sadar Bazar, one of the biggest wholesale markets in Delhi, said their employer told them that he cannot pay their salaries and will call them back once the market reopens.

"The owner told us he won't be able to pay us our salaries for April. I don't know how soon we will be able to go back. I will do some work at home to survive for a while," said Sanjay Kumar Singh, 39, who worked at a toy factory here.

Besides migrant workers, the trains also ferried a few students and out-of-work employees of private firms, who were stuck in rented accommodations.

Delhi labour minister Gopal Rai said all migrants who left in the trains were screened. "They were provided with adequate food and water. The Delhi government paid for their tickets," Rai said. Under the scheme meant for movement of stranded migrants, the central government bears 85% of the ticket cost and the remaining 15% is to be borne by either the state of origin or destination state.

FIRST ARRIVALS IN SEVEN WEEKS

On Wednesday, Delhi recorded arrivals after nearly seven weeks of train operations being suspended by the Indian Railways in the light of the spread of Covid-19. On Wednesday morning, Delhi recorded arrivals from Patna, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Howrah, a senior government official said. For the convenience of passengers, the city government and the police arranged buses connecting the New Delhi Railway Station with district headquarters in all 11 revenue districts in the city, the official said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh,, Nov. 9 -- Even though Diwali is just a few days away, sellers of string lights and diyas are facing dark days because of the Covid-19 pandemic, complaining that demand has dropped by 50% when compared to the previous years. A firecracker ban by the administration is also not helping, they say.

Interestingly, buyers have been asking about the origin of the fancy lights and not picking up products made in China.

Electrical shops selling string lights are empty, except for the Sector 18 Electronics Market, with RP Gupta, chairman of the sector's Market Dealer Association saying, "This year we have barely managed to sell 50% of our stock compared to sales in previous years. Fancy lights are not selling and even though there are a few days left for Diwali, the footfall in the markets and the response of the shopkeepers have been discouraging."

Many shopkeepers in other sectors have skipped the annual ritual of stringing up lights outside. Gurpreet Singh, proprietor of an electronics shop in Sector 35, said, "We have not received a single enquiry about Diwali lights, which is why the entire stock hasn't been unpacked. Due to the pandemic, people's spending power has been impacted. Many families are making do with what they bought last year."

The China effect

Although it is not very pronounced, shopkeepers have also reported that people are refusing to buy Chinese products.

Confirming this, RP Gupta says unlike previous years, shopkeepers have been stocking the comparatively more expensive India made lights, which are selling faster than the Chinese ones.

Rajwinder Singh, who also runs a shop in Sector 18, adds that there has been a shift away from the China made lights, but not necessarily for patriotic reasons. "Today brands of repute such as Philips have started making fancy decoration lights for Diwali which are more durable and people are willing to shell a few extra bucks to get them instead of the Chinese products that develop faults quickly."

Simple designs, fewer buyers

Diyas too have no takers. "A year ago we were making pillars of diyas and other works of art, but now we are stocking diyas with simple designs," says Vinod Kumar, the president of the potters group which sells its wares in Sector 24.

All hope was not lost, however, as he added that an order had come in for a three-foot diya pillar from Sector 15 that would cost Rs900.

Laxmi of Jagatpura, who has been selling diyas in Sector 46 for the past 15 years, says this year will be tough for her. "These are difficult times. Everyone knows someone close to them who has been affected because of Covid. The festive spirit is lacking in the markets, due to which our diyas are also not selling."

Laxmi failed to sell a single diya on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- With the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) affecting more and more people in West Bengal's hill district of Darjeeling, traders in Siliguri, the district's biggest town located in the plains, on Monday decided to shut down three major markets for at least a week.

This will affect people not only in the town but also neighbouring districts and even states such as Sikkim since Siliguri is the main trade hub and shipping point in the north Bengal region. Goods from Siliguri are shipped to Bihar and the North-East as well.

So far, five people have died in Darjeeling district where the number of Covid-19 cases stood at 296 till Sunday. Siliguri has so far recorded more than 170 cases. Sunday witnessed the highest single-day spike in the town with 25 new cases. Fourteen cases were recorded on Monday.

Incidentally, Siliguri Regulated Market, the largest fish, vegetable and fruit market in north Bengal was closed down by the administration more than a week ago after some people who regularly visited the market were infected. Ward number 46 in Siliguri Municipal Corporation area, where the market is located, has the highest number of Covid-19 cases.

Most of the fish, vegetable and fruit sold in the market are shipped to Darjeeling hills, Sikkim and other parts of north Bengal.

On Monday, traders at Bidhan Market, the biggest general goods market in Siliguri with around 4,000 shops, decided to suspend business till June 28. Their counterparts at the jewellery market in Deshbandu Para will keep shops closed till June 30. Hong Kong Market, the hub of foreign goods principally of Chinese origin and having around 500 shops, will remain closed till June 30, the traders said.

Bhabotosh Saha, secretary of the Hong Kong Market traders' body said, "The rise in Covid-19 cases has forced us to close the market for eight days. The spike is alarming people."

A few days ago, two local journalists, veteran Communist Party of India (Marxist) leader and former minister Asok Bhattacharya, who is chairman of board of administrators of the municipal corporation, and Raju Shah, general secretary of Bharatiya Janata Party's Siliguri organisational district committee, tested positive for the coronavirus disease.

Bapi Saha, secretary of the traders' body at Bidhan Market said, "With 20 cases being reported a day on an average it is better to have fewer people on the streets."

Traders at Seth Srilal Market, however, are opposed to the suspending business. Khokan Saha, secretary of the traders' union, said, "Another shutdown would mean another blow to business." The market has around 1,000 shops.

Surajit Paul, secretary, North Bengal Industries Association said, "Closing down markets is not the solution when we need economic activities to increase."

Last week, 16 trade and transport organisations in Darjeeling town had decided to suspend business for a week but called it off after meeting district administration officials.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 20 -- A Covid-19 super spreader could have aided the rapid spread of more than 200 infections linked to the Xinfadi fresh food market in the southwestern district of Fengtai in Beijing, experts have said.

New infections linked to a single market indicates the sign of a super spreader,Yang Zhanqiu, deputy director of the pathogen biology department at Wuhan University, told the state media.

The speculation on the presence of a super spreader - or an infected human passing on the infection to others - comes in the backdrop of another 22 new cases of Covid-19 in Beijing for June 19, taking the caseload to 205 since June 11.

Follow latest updates on coronavirus here

A new case related to the outbreak in neighbouring province Hebei was also reported.

More tests were needed to track a super spreader, the experts said.

Michale Ryan, WHO's emergencies chief, said a super spreading event could have amplified the spread of the new outbreak in Beijing.

"You get a few cases occurring and it then is a super spreading event or something happening where there's a large amplification of the disease. And when that happens, you want to avoid that first amplification turning back into community transmission," he said at a press conference in London.

Ryan said China had shared coronavirus sequences from its latest outbreak with the global community and says it appears the virus was imported to Beijing from strains circulating in Europe.

Ryan noted that "strains and viruses have moved around the world" throughout the pandemic.

Analysis of the genetic sequences so far suggests that the virus spread to people in China from other humans instead of jumping from animals directly into humans.

Click here for complete coronavirus cases

Ryan said a detailed investigation into the recent Beijing outbreak was needed to find out how the imported cases sparked such a large cluster.

"This coronavirus (in China's latest outbreak) looks very much like it's of human origin," Ryan said.

Ryan said it was essential to understand how the virus spread so quickly and what conditions in the market-included crowded workers, air conditioning and the presence of water-may have helped.

"The environment itself may have facilitated the spread of disease, at least initially," he said.

"That's we've seen that in meatpacking plants," he said, adding: "We've seen that all over the world. So what is it about this environment that allows the disease to amplify that setting?"

The WHO official said that Beijing has done well to control the new outbreak from spreading.

Illustrating the good examples of Germany, Japan and South Korea, Ryan said: "I think our colleagues in Beijing as well are mounting a very large-scale response ... in an attempt to prevent that from getting out of hand," emphasising the importance of rapid detection, investigation and suppression of clusters of cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Shimla,, Aug. 31 -- Grappling with labour shortage and transportation challenges in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, fruit growers of Himachal Pradesh have now urged the central government to take steps to check the sale of apples and kiwi fruit from Iran and Turkey that are finding their way into fruit markets across the country.

This year has been tough for apple growers. Himachal's Rs 4,500-crore apple economy sustains the livelihood of 1.65 lakh families. Of the 12 districts, apple is grown in seven with Shimla, Kullu and Kinnaur being top apple-producing districts. The primary concern of fruit growers was the labour shortage with skilled Nepalese labourers unable to return in time due to the sealed borders. The apple orchardists managed with local labour and worked overtime as harvest got off to a slow start in mid-July.

Since the crop was lean, the growers got a good price for premium apples being sold for Rs 1,400 to Rs 2,500 per box of 20 kg. But the growers now fear that unregulated and uncontrolled imports from Iran and Turkey could have an impact on the apple prices.

"Uncontrolled and unregulated cheap imports of kiwis and apples from these countries is affecting our realisation from the market," said Lokinder Singh Bisht, the president of the Progressive Growers Association. Bisht has written to Union commerce minister Piyush Goyal to draw his attention towards the issue.

"Most of the imports with sanctions are routed through hawala transactions, undervaluing the fruit to ride over the 33% tax barrier of import duty. Besides the quarantine inspections are overlooked and the fruit is being dumped in third grade plastic, becoming an environmental hazard," he said in the letter.

"If this goes on unchecked, it will not only lead to insects being imported with the fruit but will also make the cash crop unviable in our region," he said.

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority data shows that Turkey dumped 7,500 metric tonnes of apples in 2017-18 which grew to 32,289 metric tonnes in 2019-20. While the apple import from Iran was 7,020 MT in 2018-19, it grew to 21,521 MT in 2019-20.

Three years ago, the Centre allowed the import of kiwis and since then the volume has grown to 30,000 metric tonnes in 2019-20.

"Fruit imports should complement our consumption and not replace our domestic crop. There are more apples from Iran this time. The only way to differentiate the apple from Iran is from its packing," says Abhinav Jaggi, a Delhi-based apple importer.

Apples from Iran change the port of origin in Dubai. There are reports that the apples are also smuggled from Afghanistan and later sold under different trademarks.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 27 -- Haryana chief minister Manohar Lal Khattar spoke to Ramesh Vinayak and Hitender Rao about reviving the economy after the pandemic, the virus trajectory in Gurugram, and running a coalition government, among other issues. Edited excerpts:

How is the economy shaping up post the lockdown? How good are revenue receipts and how much is your dependence on the market borrowings? April was bad for us. In fact, the revenue shortfall for April, May and June was about Rs 9,000 crore. We have tried to make up for it by borrowing from the market. Revenue started trickling in after the lockdown was relaxed and the collections were about 60% in June. By July 20, we have recovered well and are at par with our projections. We are now able to meet our routine expenses on our own.

What budgetary cut are you contemplating in the revised estimates? It is quite understandable considering the deficit. The Rs 9,000 crore revenue shortfall would force us to recalibrate our outlay.

How will the downturn in fiscal health impact the state's development projects and welfare schemes? There will be no impact on welfare schemes, though our development projects have been delayed by three months. During the pandemic, we have spend an additional Rs 1,500 crore to give relief to people including Rs 600-650 crore cash distribution. This money was spent on the medical services, ration distribution, arranging return of migrant labour, and relief camps.

In your role as finance minister, how do you plan to boost the economy during the pandemic?The central government package of Rs 20 lakh crore is a big relief. In the changing scenario due to the Covid-19 situation, I feel that the service sector will suffer but the manufacturing and agriculture sectors will do well.

The central government has sought the views of the state and parents of students about reopening of schools. We will not open primary schools and will take a call for higher classes in August. Colleges and professional institutions would be the first to start.

Projections show a rising coronavirus infection trajectory in the coming months. How do you plan to augment the health infrastructure including ventilator beds to meet any eventuality?See, what essentially matters is the number of active cases and not the cumulative numbers. How many patients have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic is important since such patients qualify for home isolation and takes pressure off our systems. As per our current projections and rate of recovery, we are doing well in terms of health infrastructure. But we keep reviewing it.

The NCR districts of Gurugram, Faridabad and Sonepat have a majority of Covid-19 cases. Health minister Anil Vij hinted at the possibility of stricter curbs. Is a curfew or a selective lockdown on the cards?The weekend lockdowns will not bring us results. Things are slowly coming back on track and the imposition of a fresh lockdown would mean putting pressure on people. Our strategy instead is to go for aggressive containment in the NCR districts. We are screening more people and conducting more tests.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi recommended that NCR districts should follow Delhi's model for combating the spread of the coronavirus. Do you see a need to work with Delhi since the increase in the number of cases in Gurugram has been attributed to the movement of people between the two cities? We, along with Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, are implementing a common strategy for combating the infection. Infection travelled to Haryana from Delhi initially, but now both states are at par in terms of contagion spread. Since there is so much back-and-forth movement from Delhi to Haryana, it is hard to conclude now on the origin of the contagion.

Gurugram was kept in the orange zone despite a sharp rise in the number of cases to facilitate the reopening of the industry. What impact did the closure of businesses in the Millennium City have on the state's revenue? How is the government planning to boost the local economy? We cannot overlook the adverse economic impact of three months. But if you look at the power consumption for the industry, it is at par with 2019. This means that the industry is operating at the same capacity as it was last year. Of course, there could be workforce engagement related issues because of the need to maintain social distancing.

You recently spoke in Mewat about enacting a Freedom of Religion law to prohibit religious conversions by force, allurement or marriage. Why do you feel the need for such a law?There were complaints regarding forced conversions and marriages from many districts. People are free to adopt any religion in an informed manner but using coercion, allurement to force religious conversions is a matter of concern. Such incidents vitiate the atmosphere of society. We are studying similar laws enacted by other states and accordingly take a call.

How has been your experience of running a coalition government so far? The BJP and Jannayak Janta Party have not been able decide on the common minimum programme. Any deadline? We are not new to coalition politics in the state. The BJP and the JJP both are like-minded entities, and both oppose the Congress. Common minimum programme is not a major issue because we do not have any conflict with our ally. We are well synchronized. The proposed 75 % private sector quota law is an example that we are on similar page.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, April 28 -- Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the origin of the coronavirus, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Australia shot back, cautioning China against any threat of "economic coercion".

In the past week, Morrison spoke with the leaders of the US, France and Germany to gather support for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Beijing didn't take the move lightly. Chinese ambassador to Australia, Cheng Jingye, told The Australian Financial Review on Sunday that the call for the probe was "dangerous".

"If the mood is going from bad to worse, people would think 'Why should we go to such a country that is not so friendly to China?' The tourists may have second thoughts," Cheng said, adding, "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine?'"

"The parents of the students would also think... whether this is the best place to send their kids," he added.

China is not only Australia's largest export market for wine and beef, it is also the largest markets for energy exports, education and tourism. Bloomberg reports that Australia's economy is the most China-reliant one in the developed world.

On Monday, Australian foreign minister Marise Payne cautioned China against attempts at "economic coercion". Payne said in a statement that Australia had made a "principled call" for an independent review of the Covid-19 outbreak, which first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

"We reject any suggestion that economic coercion is an appropriate response to a call for such an assessment, when what we need is global cooperation," Payne said.

China had earlier called the move to ask for an independent inquest politically motivated.

"With the pandemic still spreading across the world, the most pressing task is to put people's life and health first and work together to defeat the virus," Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang had said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 22 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Working from home to be the new norm in Covid-19 aftermath: Ravi Shankar Prasad

Work-from-home will be the new norm in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic, minister of communications, and electronics and information technology Ravi Shankar Prasad said on Tuesday, and asked the departments under his charge to work on putting in place a platform to facilitate the emerging trend.

Lockdowns may have only arrested first wave of Covid-19, says WHO

The sweeping shutdowns across the world appear to have absorbed what may only be the first wave of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections, according to officials from the World Health Organization (WHO) and findings by researchers in France - one of the countries hardest hit by the pandemic.

Trump's immigration suspension to last 60 days, targets those seeking green cards

President Donald Trump has said he expects to sign an executive order Wednesday that will suspend immigration - mostly impacting Green Cards - for the next 60 days to ensure Americans hits by record layoffs caused by the coronavirus outbreak get a first shot at all available jobs.

Facebook to buy 9.99% stake in Reliance Jio platforms for $5.7 billion

Facebook on Wednesday announced an investment of USD 5.7 billion (Rs 43,574 crore) to buy a 10 per cent stake in the firm that houses billionaire Mukesh Ambani's telecom arm Jio as the social media giant looks to expand presence in its largest market in terms of subscriber base.

'Instead of squash, thinking of groceries': Saurav Ghosal

Saurav Ghosal, the world No. 13 squash player who became the only Indian male to break into the top 10 of the world rankings last year, says he during the lockdown due to Covid-19, instead of analysing my performance in the French league, which would have taken place on the weekend of March 14, playing the Egyptian league and playing in El Gouna by the Red Sea soon after, he is thinking of groceries these days.

TV actor Rashmi Desai calls leaked bank statements disturbing

Television actor Rashami Desai is disturbed by screenshots of her bank statements posted on social media. She says she had sent those screenshots to her accounting team after returning from Bigg Boss house.

Are you violating video-call etiquette?

We've never video-called more than at present. Office meetings, catching up with friends, parties, consulting your doctors or checking in on loved ones. But there is a right way and a wrong way to do this.

Covid-19: China vs Germany as Angela Merkel demands 'transparency'

War of words have erupted between China and Germany over Covid-19. Beijing hit back after German Chancellor raised questions on virus' origin. German Chancellor, Angela Merkel said, "I think that the more transparently China makes clear the story of the emergence of this virus, the better that is for us all in the whole world to learn from it."

Watch the full video for more.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 29 -- The WHO-led team of experts began their probe into the origins of the Covid-19 virus in the central Chinese city of Wuhan by meeting Chinese scientists and visiting the hospital that treated the first patients suspected to have been infected in December, 2019.

"Extremely important 1st site visit. We are in the hospital that treated some of the first known cases of Covid-19, meeting with the actual clinicians & staff who did this work, having open discussion about the details of their work," Peter Daszak, a member of the team led by World Health Organization, tweeted on Friday.

The itinerary of the expert team has not been announced, though the UN agency has said it plans to visit the seafood market linked to the first cases in the early days of the outbreak in Wuhan and the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which conducts research on pathogens.

Speaking to state media, team leader Peter Ben Embarek, said: "[We hope to] understand the setting, see the places where cases were linked, reconstruct the initial event there, search for records of animals, products traded there. And possibly talking to some of the merchants who were there (Huanan seafood market) at that time."

"My understanding is that there will be no restrictions or limitations in working with our Chinese colleagues or in visiting places the joint team deem of interest," Ben Embarek told the tabloid, Global Times.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said on Friday that WHO and Chinese experts were working together to trace the origin of the virus, but stressed that the mission was not a probe.

"It is part of a global research, not an investigation," Zhao said at the regular ministry briefing.

"It is important to remember that the success of this mission and origin-tracing is 100% depending on access to the relevant sources," Thea Fischer, a Danish member of the team, told Reuters on Thursday.

"No matter how competent we are, how hard we work and how many stones we try to turn, this can only be possible with the support from China."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Chandigarh,, Nov. 9 -- Even though Diwali is just a few days away, sellers of string lights and diyas are facing dark days because of the Covid-19 pandemic, complaining that demand has dropped by 50% when compared to the previous years. A firecracker ban by the administration is also not helping, they say.

Interestingly, buyers have been asking about the origin of the fancy lights and not picking up products made in China.

Electrical shops selling string lights are empty, except for the Sector 18 Electronics Market, with RP Gupta, chairman of the sector's Market Dealer Association saying, "This year we have barely managed to sell 50% of our stock compared to sales in previous years. Fancy lights are not selling and even though there are a few days left for Diwali, the footfall in the markets and the response of the shopkeepers have been discouraging."

Many shopkeepers in other sectors have skipped the annual ritual of stringing up lights outside. Gurpreet Singh, proprietor of an electronics shop in Sector 35, said, "We have not received a single enquiry about Diwali lights, which is why the entire stock hasn't been unpacked. Due to the pandemic, people's spending power has been impacted. Many families are making do with what they bought last year."

The China effect

Although it is not very pronounced, shopkeepers have also reported that people are refusing to buy Chinese products.

Confirming this, RP Gupta says unlike previous years, shopkeepers have been stocking the comparatively more expensive India made lights, which are selling faster than the Chinese ones.

Rajwinder Singh, who also runs a shop in Sector 18, adds that there has been a shift away from the China made lights, but not necessarily for patriotic reasons. "Today brands of repute such as Philips have started making fancy decoration lights for Diwali which are more durable and people are willing to shell a few extra bucks to get them instead of the Chinese products that develop faults quickly."

Simple designs, fewer buyers

Diyas too have no takers. "A year ago we were making pillars of diyas and other works of art, but now we are stocking diyas with simple designs," says Vinod Kumar, the president of the potters group which sells its wares in Sector 24.

All hope was not lost, however, as he added that an order had come in for a three-foot diya pillar from Sector 15 that would cost Rs900.

Laxmi of Jagatpura, who has been selling diyas in Sector 46 for the past 15 years, says this year will be tough for her. "These are difficult times. Everyone knows someone close to them who has been affected because of Covid. The festive spirit is lacking in the markets, due to which our diyas are also not selling."

Laxmi failed to sell a single diya on Monday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 9 -- Union health minister Harsh Vardhan on Monday spoke about filling the self-declaration form at the airport, which will help authorities in tackling the coronavirus outbreak.

The 'self reporting form', is issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and asks for details about the flight number, the origin of the journey and a passenger's final destination (in case he/she is staying in India for layover), apart from the regular details about the person's name, address, mobile number, e-mail ID etc.

Coronavirus Outbreak: Track Live Updates

Below this information, there is a set of questions specifically about China, where the coronavirus originated in December last year. The questions mentions on the form ask a passenger what all cities he/she visited in China, if Wuhan was one of them; if yes, the period of stay in Wuhan and did the passenger visit any seafood market.

Finally, the traveller has to declare if he/she is suffering from fever, cough or any other respiratory distress.

The advisory issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has made it mandatory for the passengers to furnish duly-filled self-declaration form to health officials and immigration officials, and undergo universal health screening at the designated health counters at all points of entry. "In addition to visa restrictions already in place, passengers travelling from/having visited Italy or Republic of Korea and desirous of entering India will need certificate of having tested negative for Covid-19 from the designated laboratories authorised by the health authorities of these countries," the advisory further says.

Speaking to reporters after chairing a high-level meeting on coronavirus, Vardhan stressed on the need to voluntarily declare the travel history so that it becomes easier to check the spread of Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.

"Voluntary declaration is for the well-being of everyone. All of us will benefit if people start filling out the form," said Vardhan.

Four new cases of Covid-19 have been reported since Sunday - one each from Kerala, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Jammu.

According to official estimates, till Monday 43 samples have tested positive out of the 3,003 samples tested for Covid-19 with 2,694 samples having returned negative results. 177 of them have been hospitalised and 33,599 passengers are under observation. 21,867 passengers have completed their observation period.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 27 -- Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the coronavirus origins, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Australia has shot back against the threat, cautioning China against any threat of "economic coercion".

In the past week, Morrison had spoken to the leaders of the US, France and Germany to gather support for an international investigation into the Wuhan origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Beijing didn't take lightly to the move.

Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye said in an interview to The Australian Financial Review on Sunday that the call for the probe was "dangerous".

"If the mood is going from bad to worse, people would think 'why should we go to such a country that is not so friendly to China?' The tourists may have second thoughts," Cheng said, adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'"

"The parents of the students would also think... whether this is the best place to send their kids," he added.

China is not only Australia's largest export market for wine and beef, it is also the largest markets for energy exports, education and tourism - Bloomberg reports that Australia's is the most China-reliant economy in the developed world.

On Monday, Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne cautioned China against attempts at "economic coercion".

Payne said in a statement on Monday that Australia had made a "principled call" for an independent review of the Covid-19 outbreak which first emerged in the Chinese city of Wuhan in late last year.

"We reject any suggestion that economic coercion is an appropriate response to a call for such an assessment, when what we need is global cooperation," Payne said in the statement.

China had earlier called the move to ask for an independent inquest politically motivated.

"Currently, with the pandemic still spreading across the world, the most pressing task is to put people's life and health first and work together to defeat the virus," Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang had said.

"At such a critical juncture, it is highly irresponsible to resort to politically motivated suspicion and accusation. We advise the Australian side to put aside ideological bias and political games, focus on the welfare of the Australian people and global public health security, follow the international community's collective will for cooperation, and contribute to the global cooperation in fighting the virus, instead of doing things to the contrary," Geng had said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- "India that is Bharat shall be a Union of States."

That is how our Constitution starts. Never has that line rung truer than now.

Parts of India that they have always been, the states today are more, much more. They are India. The India where life's breath is now drawn with vigilance, where hands and fingers move with caution and frequently come together in prayer.

Facing the biggest challenge since Independence, the states and Union territories are grappling with the pandemic hour by hour, minute by minute. Speaking to chief ministers on April 27, the prime minister got it exactly right. He said that the states are better acquainted with ground realities about the pandemic. He has been a chief minister and he knows what ground realities mean.

The clarion call having been sounded by our prime minister, all chief ministers, their health ministers, chief secretaries, health secretaries and the district administration have been holding the virus by its invisible micro-horns. Their work done with such financial and human resources as they have, and under many constraints, can only be described as heroic.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan's efforts in Kerala have been pioneering. His government took the first steps towards halting the virus in its tracks well before the rest of the country did. Odisha's achievement in controlling the pandemic has been remarkable as has Goa's record of being the first to have zero active cases. Tamil Nadu, by getting an early start in testing, has done well for itself. And Rajasthan, by setting up a framework for food supplies to the poor, and health access with a helpline, has factored care into the lockdown at a great financial cost.

Maharashtra and Mumbai being the most coronavirus disease (Covid-19)-challenged of all states and cities, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray's great firmness has to be lauded. He has shown himself to be just the type of no-nonsense leader that his state needs. Delhi's chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, has done likewise. The West Bengal chief minister's determined outreach to her people is reassuring, though it makes us worry for her own protection.

Federalism has, thus, been at work in the best sense of that first line of our Constitution. Behind this lies a constitutional sanction. In fact, a constitutional imperative. In the Constitution's division of prerogatives and duties as between the Union and the states, severally and in the Concurrent List, jointly, "public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries" form an entry in the State List.

More relevantly "prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants" is an entry in the Concurrent List which is binding on both the states and the Centre. These entries have a passivity to them in normal times. But in times we are facing now, they spring into life, federal life. They make the states of India, where we live, India.

A word here is needed on a state beyond states in India: Migrant workers. They form a floating Union Territory that requires full statehood, not territorially but civilisationally. One great responsibility that lies with the states is to ensure that during these relaxations, urban to rural migration is strictly contained, with the greatest sensitivity. Will a post-Covid-19 India give them that? If it does not, it cannot be expected to have what it takes to win the battle over Covid-19.

The virus is not going to leave us easily or soon. If India is to be safe from this and future death-dealing and death-distributing viruses, it must undertake a few urgent measures. One, seeing the zoonotic origins of this virus, end the suicidal neglect of basic hygiene procedures that lurk like a hidden Wuhan in every unsupervised meat and poultry chain, market and public lavatories. Two, demand an end to the callous and relentless spoliation of our natural resources in the name of industrialisation. Three, get over our passion for congregating en masse in places of worship and entertainment with our stubborn habit of spitting .

Emperor Asoka speaks in his edicts of his subjects' fascination for "unnecessary assemblage". Four, ask "Where do we get clean water?" if we are to "keep washing our hands". Five, demand access to basic medical facilities within walkable distances.

If we can raise the age of marriage, have fewer children than our parents did, realise that untouchability is wrong, absurd and illegal, surely we can attempt these five.

Governments have to reset their priorities dramatically, investing massivelyand immediately in clean water access and on raising the doctors/nurses population ratio. And raise the status of nurses, hustled on duty and huddled in hostels off duty, from being taken-for-granted appurtenances to being major front-ranking players.

The Constitution asks India to feel its heart beating strong in the pulse of its states.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 18 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Covid-19 vaccination drive gets underway in Delhi on day 2

After administering shots to over 4,300 healthcare workers on the opening day, Covid-19 vaccination teams across the national capital started to give vaccines to more medical staff at various hospitals on Monday. Read more

500K trout ova dispatched from Kashmir to 3 other states for rearing

From Asia's largest trout farm in south Kashmir's Kokernag, 500,000 trout ova were dispatched to Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Uttarakhand for rearing. Read more

Maharashtra gram panchayat poll results 2021: Trends show Sena, allies in lead

Ruling Shiv Sena, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), Congress in Maharashtra are leading in gram panchayat elections, according to the initial trends from counting that began on Monday morning. Read more

India vs Australia: India-origin Australian businessman recalls 'ugly and blatant' racism at SCG during 3rd Test

An Indian-born Australian businessman Darshak Mehta recalled the alleged acts of "ugly" and "blatant" racism during the third Test between India and Australia at Sydney Cricket Ground. Read more

Parler can return to App Store provided app gets moderation together, says Cook

Apple CEO Tim Cook said that Parler can make a comeback to the App Store provided the app gets "their moderation together." Read more

Liger first look: Vijay Deverakonda a cross between a tiger, lion in fiery poster

The first look of Puri Jagannadh's Liger, which marks south star Vijay Deverakonda's pan-India debut, is here. The film has Ananya Panday in the lead role. Read more

Honda H'Ness CB 350 road test review: New challenger to the 'Royal' throne

Sales in the retro classic motorcycle segment have soared in the Indian market lately and Honda is the latest entrant in the 350 cc classic motorcycling space that allures riders of all ages. Read more

Shilpa Shetty Kundra's favourite fitness routine releases pent up stress | Watch

A simple trick to help cope with stress during the lockdown or work from home amid Covid-19 pandemic is to pick an activity or exercise that you enjoy and Shilpa Shetty Kundra's latest fitness video is enough to back our claim. Read more

Girl Scout's adorable virtual sales pitch is the cutest thing you'll see today

A 6-year-old Girl Scout from Arizona, USA has won the hearts of netizens recently with an oh-so-cute sales pitch for selling Girl Scout cookies. Read more

Watch| Biden swearing-in: Security beefed up at statehouses in US amid small protests

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, July 1 -- India suspects that China could be engaging in unfair trade practices by supplying goods and investments through a third party such as Hong Kong and Singapore, but may not bar legitimate Chinese trade and investments in India while scanning them from the perspective of national interest, people with direct knowledge of the matter said.

Data suggests significant indirect inflow of Chinese goods and investments through locations with which India has free trade agreements (FTAs), preferential trade agreements (PTAs) or other bilateral commercial arrangements. This is not only illegal but also injuring domestic industry, the people said, requesting anonymity.

The development comes a day after the Narendra Modi govenment announced ban on 59 mostly Chinese mobile applications such s Tik-Tok, UC Browser and WeChat, citing concerns that these are "prejudicial to sovereignty of India, defence of India, security of state and public order."

Sino-Indian tensions have shot up after a violent brawl between Chinese and Indian soldiers on June 15 along the Line of Actual Control in the Galwan Valley in eastern Ladakh in which 20 Indian army personnel were killed.

Data shows that total foreign direct investment (FDI) from China is minuscule, but many Indian firms have received Chinese investments. Similarly, imports from China have registered a minor decline recently, but at the same time imports from Hong Kong and Singapore have surged. These figures show that something is amiss and needs to be probed, one of the people cited above, who works in an economic ministry, said.

According to the Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO), while India's trade deficit with China narrowed by $6.05 billion to $51.25 billion in 2019, the gap with Hong Kong widened sharply by $5.8 billion in 2019, nullifying almost all the gains.

Similarly, India trade deficit with Singapore was $5.82 billion in the previous financial year, the person mentioned above said.

"The principal imports from Hong Kong, which have shown a significant increase, are electrical and electronic products where imports jumped from $1.3 billion to $8.6 billion between 2017 and 2019," FIEO director general and chief executive officer Ajay Sahai said.

The increase in imports is definitely a setback to domestic industry, he said. "If the goods made in China are re-routed through Hong Kong and Singapore, showing such origin of products, customs can always ask importers to provide the proof of adhering to the Rules of Origin," he said.

He advised the government to be extra cautious in case of imports from Singapore because of the India-Singapore Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) as well as India-ASEAN {Association of South-East Asin Nations} Free Trade Agreement (FTA) that increase the possibilities of re-routing of Chinese products to India to derive a preferential tariff advantage.

"Any increase in imports has an adverse bearing on domestic industry and thus on job creation," Sahai said .

"Many times, a product originally belonging to China enters from Singapore, Vietnam or even Hong Kong and we might lose the revenue which could come as tax. In simple terms, if consumers will get cheaper imports, market share and profit margins of the domestic manufacturer will get hurt," Trade Promotion Council of India (TPIC) chairman Mohit Singla said.

A second person working in another economic ministry said, "Even the Chinese FDI inflow also appears skewed."

The latest official data shows foreign direct investment from China between April 2000 and March 2020 was $2.378.71 billion, which is 0.51% of the total FDI inflow into the country in the two decades.

The second person quoted above said, "Apparently the FDI figures do not capture actual Chinese investments in India and possibly some investments could have flowed into the country undetected, routed through a third country. All such suspicious Chinese inflows need to be scanned properly."

Email queries sent to ministries of finance and commerce did not elicit any response.

Even before the current standoff with China over border issue, India in April clubbed FDI proposals from China with those from other hostile countries such as Pakistan, making prior government approval mandatory for any investment in the country to prevent opportunistic takeovers of Indian firms during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Burgeon Law, which styles itself as new-age boutique law firm that caters to start-ups and emerging companies, said start-ups will have to scout for other avenues of investment from newer geographies.

"With recent events of Indo-Chinese face off and developments of scrutinizing the FDI from nations that share a land border with India, the situation depicts a tightness between the neighbouring countries," said Roma Priya, founder of the legal firm. "The immediate impact of this can be observed in business relations as well, with contractions, trade deficit and fundings being put on hold."

"Companies which fall under the portfolio of Chinese investors will also have to look for newer alternatives as their transactions will get delayed due to these macro events," Priya added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 30 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

'Grateful nation': President Kovind tweets on Mahatma Gandhi's death anniversary

President Ram Nath Kovind paid homage to the father of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi, on his 73rd death anniversary on Saturday. He said that the nation was grateful to him and that everyone should embrace his ideals of peace, non-violence, simplicity, purity of means and humility. Read more

Raj Thackeray to visit Ayodhya Ram Mandir in March; Shiv Sena takes a veiled dig

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray will visit the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya in March, according to a senior party leader. The decision was taken in a party meeting held at Bandra in Mumbai. Read more

Mamata Banerjee asks TMC to hit campaign trail as Amit Shah heads to Bengal

Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee has asked top leaders of the party to hit the campaign trail for West Bengal assembly elections 2021 with full steam from February 1 and project the state government's work before the people instead of engaging in mere political rhetoric against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said party leaders, who attended the closed-door meeting at the chief minister's south Kolkata residence on Friday afternoon. Read more

WHO team visits Wuhan hospital that had early coronavirus patients

A World Health Organization team visited a hospital on Friday where China says the first COVID-19 patients were treated more than a year ago as part of the experts' long-awaited fact-finding mission on the origins of the coronavirus. Read more

Errors won't be swept under the carpet: India fielding coach Sridhar

The leg-side trap by India's bowling unit to choke the Australian batsmen-hatched in July last year as revealed by bowling coach Bharat Arun-worked wonders during India's 2-1 series win. Read more

Bridgerton is Netflix's 'biggest series ever', clocks 82 million households

Online streamer Netflix recently announced that the show Bridgerton is its "biggest series ever." Netflix on Thursday revealed that the series has been watched by 82 million households around the globe within the first 28 days of its release. The show's views have surpassed Netflix's own projections of 63 million households. Read more

Milind Soman's latest fitness post is about headstands, nature and resolutions

If there is one celebrity who doesn't miss out on an opportunity to talk about fitness and urge his fans to keep exercising, it is Milind Soman. The actor along with his wife Ankita Konwar, who is also a fitness freak, uses his social media accounts to talk about physical and mental fitness with his followers. Read more

'We want hedges too': 'Normal person' explains what is going on with the stock market in funny video

If you've been on the Internet recently or have heard the news, then you may know of the stock market's odd happenings. But do you genuinely understand what is happening with the stock market? You may have heard terms such as GameStop, hedge funds and WallStreetBets being thrown around. Read more

Watch| Does Indian captainship have shelf life?/Can you bat like Fawad Alam?

Hindustan Times' Senior Associate Editor, Rasesh Mandani poses two cricket questions of your interest, every week. In this video he wonders if there is shelf life to captainship in Indian cricket, and takes stock of how Virat Kohli is faring. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 5 -- Australia's advertising watchdog is investigating a camping advertisement which shows a man eating a bat sandwich. Australian camping retailer Boating Camping Fishing store (BCF) released an advert designed to encourage people to explore their own backyard while there remain several travel restrictions around the world. In the video, a man jokes that the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic was caused by someone eating a bat.

A spokesperson for the Advertising Standards Bureau told the BBC that the ad watchdog has received several complaints about the BCF's commercial. The spokesperson added that Ad Standards is in the process of assessing these complaints to see if they raise an issue.

A BCF spokesperson had earlier told Australian media that they understand the severity of the pandemic, adding that the camping commercial was a light-hearted marketing campaign. The YouTube video has garnered over 250,000 views so far but the bat sequence has been edited out for TV.

"Over the years BCF has established a tradition of irreverent campaigns in the spirit of good-natured fun," the spokesperson said. "They will have their detractors and we recognise that.

Also Read | China doubles down on Covid-19 narrative as WHO investigation looms

While the initial coronavirus outbreak was reported from a wildlife market in Wuhan, there has not been any definitive proof of how the virus originated. However, preliminary studies suggested that the bats could be the source since the coronavirus present in bats has a genome that is 96 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2.

Australia was one of the first countries to a demand an independent inquiry into the origin of the coronavirus outbreak, triggering a decline in its relationship with China. China punished Australian beef producers and barley farmers in apparent retaliation and asked Chinese students to reconsider studying Down Under.

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison maintained that the call for an inquiry into the coronavirus outbreak was reasonable and not meant to target any country. The call for a probe was followed by China launching another investigation into the alleged subsidies on Australian wine imports and, in November, Beijing imposed taxes on Australian wine of up to 212%. The commercial currently under scanner could further strain the bilateral relations.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 21 -- The two key lines of inquiry recommended in the World Health Organisation's preliminary report on the origin of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has caused surprise and disbelief among independent experts. A team of experts sent by the UN health agency returned from China's Wuhan earlier this month after a four-week trip to investigate the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.

According to a CNN report, the WHO panel is set to recommend further contract tracing of the first known Covid-19 patient, also known as "patient zero", and an immediate investigation into the supply chain of the Huanan seafood market. Peter Daszak, a member of the WHO team that visited Wuhan, reportedly said that the first known patient had no connection to the Huanan seafood market, a place initially believed to be connected to the early virus outbreak.

Maureen Miller, an epidemiologist at Columbia University, told CNN it was implausible that such rudimentary investigative work wasn't already done by Chinese scientists while looking for the origin of the virus month ago. "It's not realistic, given they have world-class scientists there, and the technology invested in over the last 20 years. They are sophisticated, they understand transmission pathways, and have been working on them for years," Miller was quoted by the US media network as saying.

The team also discovered several signs of a much wider outbreak in December 2019 than it was reported earlier. WHO expert Peter Ben Embarek, who led the team in Wuhan, had earlier said in an interview that the investigators are seeking access to hundreds of thousands of blood samples from the Chinese city that Beijing has not allowed them to examine.

The Chinese scientists presented the visiting WHO team with 174 Covid-19 cases detected from in and around Wuhan in December 2019, which, according to Embarek, suggested the virus could have infected more than 1,000 people in the Chinese city in that month, given the "vast majority are mild cases" that are not noticed by doctors.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 14 -- A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson on Friday refueled his allegation that the novel coronavirus has US military origins by citing a story from a website known to promote conspiracy theories to bolster his claim.

Late on Thursday night, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian had tweeted to his large number of followers that the US military might be behind the covid-19 epidemic, and China, where it was first detected last year, wasn't the origin of the virus.

The covid-19 pandemic has gone to kill over 4000 and infect more than 1.32 lakh globally.

"When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an explanation," Zhao had tweeted in English and Chinese.

Zhao did not offer any evidence but referred to statement by a top US health official that a few flu-related deaths in the US that occurred earlier could have been caused by the coronavirus.

On Friday, he doubled down on his claim by referring to a similar story from the Montreal-based Centre for Research on Globalisation, which says it's an independent think-tank but is often called out for peddling outlandish theories including on 9/11.

Sharing a link from the website, Zhao tweeted on Friday that ".this article is very much important to each and every one of us. Please read and retweet it. covid-19: Further Evidence that the Virus Originated in the US."

It led to a bit of a firestorm on Twitter with thousands sharing Zhao's tweets and many trashing it, saying China was on the aggressive to help it cover up the fact had officials had covered-up information on the covid-19 in December and for nearly three weeks in January.

The Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post (SCMP), in fact, reported on Friday, citing government documents that the first case of the infection was detected at the epicentre Wuhan in November.

The SCMP report said Chinese health authorities had identified at least 266 people who contracted the virus last year.

They were put under medical surveillance, and the earliest case was November 17 - weeks before authorities announced the emergence of the new virus, and then finally put in place containment measures.

At the regular foreign ministry press conference, Zhao's colleague, spokesperson

Geng Shuang somewhat sidestepped questions on whether Beijing blames the US for the coronavirus.

"The international community including the US has different opinions about the origin of the virus," said Geng.

"The origin of the virus is a scientific matter and as such scientific views should be listened to," said Geng.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 14 -- A top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

Earlier this month, Chinese news outlets quoted Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, as saying that the virus originated in Italy.

"The novel coronavirus running rampant around the world is not the Wuhan variant, but a variant that mutated in north Italy," China's national broadcaster quoted Kekule as saying in an interview on German television.

"The starting point of the pandemic is not in Wuhan, " official news agency Xinhua quoted him as saying.

In an emailed interview with the Hindustan Times, Kekule strongly denied the version of his argument published in Chinese state media, saying his words were twisted out of context.

"Chinese media are quoting from my recent bestseller book Der Corona-Kompass (The Corona Compass, available only in German so far) and from an interview I gave about the book in the popular German TV show Markus Lanz," said Kekule, who also holds a chair as University Professor and Director of the Institute for Medical Microbiology at Martin Luther University in Halle.

"The origin of the virus in China is described in detail in my book, and also the Chinese efforts to conceal the magnitude of the outbreak at the beginning. I never stated that the virus originally came from Italy, this is pure propaganda," he added.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Kekule's interview to a German channel was similarly picked up to fit into the narrative.

By the time the German expert reacted, his interview had spread across Chinese social media, with many thanking him for clearing China's name.

"Unfortunately, they are taking one or two phrases out of context, giving my statement a made-up twist. Chinese state media are referring to my account of the outbreak in Northern Italy and my critique of the WHO and EU in this context," Kekule said.

"There is, however, no scientific basis to deny that the virus originally came from China. I explained (on the television show) that the virus came of course from China, but the "G" variant was able to prevail in northern Italy because the outbreak was not detected there for several weeks, paving the way to the pandemic around the globe, including re-imports to China."

Kekule explained that the "G variant" (carrying a D614G mutation in the S gene) of the virus emerged in northern Italy, possibly because the outbreak went undetected for several weeks there.

"The G variant is most likely more contagious than the variant originally detected in Wuhan. This might be the reason why it spread world-wide from Italy. Since July 2020, more than 99% of the virus strains analysed worldwide are G variants, i.e. the viruses presently circulating have their common origin in Northern Italy."

The German scientist said that he went on the same television show to explain his position.

"The same evening I spoke again on the TV show Markus Lanz and we made it crystal clear that I had been misquoted in an act of propaganda," he said.

"Science tells us, that humankind must change its behaviour towards nature, including the habit of killing wild animals that carry dangerous viruses," he said.

"When even nations refuse to take responsibility of their actions, how should individuals learn to change their dangerous habits?"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 31 -- AustraliaonThursday backed India's position on the border standoff with China, saying it opposes attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo along theLineofActualControl(LAC) as that could increase the risk of instability.

Australian high commissionerBarryO'Farrellconveyed hiscountry'spositiontoexternal affairs minister S Jaishankar during a meeting where the two sides discussed developments across the Indo-Pacific region amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Australian side urges restraintalongtheLACandsupports continued moves towards de-escalation, said a statement from the Australian high commission.

"As I told the external affairs minister of India today, Australia opposes any attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo, which only serves to increase tension and the risk of instability," O'Farrell was quoted as saying.

"It is important that the bilaterally- agreed principles and norms that have helped prevent escalation or miscalculation in the border areas over many decades continue to be observed." India has repeatedly said in recentweeksthatitisopposedto any unilateral efforts to change the status quo along the LAC, alongwhichtensofthousandsof Indian and Chinese troops continue to be deployed.

There has been growing convergencebetweenIndiaandAustralia on security issues and the role of China in the Indo-Pacific in recent months. The two sides elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed an agreement for reciprocal access to military logisticsduringavirtualsummit last month.

Australia, which is set to be invitedtojointheMalabarnaval exercise conducted by India, Japan and the US, has also backedIndia'scallsforreformof international bodies such as the WHOandsoughtaprobeintothe origins of the pandemic.

DuringameetingoftheUSand Australian defence and foreign ministers in Washington on Tuesday,thetwocountriesenvisaged a key role for India in defence cooperation and post- Covid-19 recovery efforts in the Indo-Pacific.

The Australian mission's statementfurthersaidthat"Australia remains vigilant about strategic trends inimical to our vision of the region" even as it focuses on health and economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis.

Australia envisages an Indo- Pacificthatisanopen,free,rulesbased region that is "resilient to coercion" and supported by inclusive institutions, the statement said. "Territorial disputes and competing claims should be resolvedpeacefullybytheclaimant countries, and in ways consistentwithinternationallaw," it added.

Australia also continues to be deeply concerned by China's actions in the South China Sea thatare"destabilisingandcould provoke escalation", the statement said. On July 23, Australia lodged a note with the UN Secretary General refuting China's "unlawfulmaritimeclaimsinthe South China Sea".

Rory Medcalf, head of the National Security College at the AustralianNationalUniversity, recently said the Indo-Pacific "serves as a canvas for framing policy responses to Chinese power", including a web of securitycooperation based on the US alliance system, and "emerging middle power coalitions, involving Japan, India, Australia and occasionally others such as Southeast Asian or even European states".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 30 -- India has dealt with the worst crisis on the border with China in decades with "firmness and maturity" even as it has worked with partners to create an open and inclusive architecture for the Indo-Pacific region, foreign secretary Harsh Shringla said on Thursday.

Speaking on the theme "India's foreign policy in the post-Covid world" at the Institut Francais des Relations Internationales (IFRI) in Paris, Shringla said India's actions, as it prepares for the world order emerging amid the pandemic, were not "seeking to target or exclude any country" but to create an environment in which all countries can operate with respect for the sovereignty of others.

He reiterated India's condemnation of the recent terror attacks in France, including the one in Nice, and conveyed the solidarity of the Indian people in confronting terrorism and extremism. He also noted that one of the two recent terrorist incidents in France had its origins in Pakistan.

"Despite the pandemic, we have dealt with the worst crisis in decades on our border with China and we have done so with firmness and maturity. At the same time, we have continued to ward off terrorism from across our western border," said Shringla, who is on a three-nation tour that will also take him to Germany and the UK.

India's immediate challenges have not distracted the country from its broader strategic goals, especially in the Indo Pacific, where "we are moving purposefully at multiple levels to create an open, inclusive architecture", he said.

New Delhi has a cooperative and inclusive outlook, as laid out in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's SAGAR vision or "Security And Growth for All in the Region", and India has steadily enhanced its diplomatic and security engagement in Southeast Asia too, he said.

"With Australia, Japan and the US, there is tangible progress in realising our shared vision. We are not seeking to target or exclude any country, but create an environment that induces all countries to operate with respect for the sovereignty of others and in a manner consistent with international norms in global commons," Shringla said against the backdrop of the military standoff with China that is set to enter its seventh month.

Noting that the pandemic has led to "geopolitical repositioning primarily by China and the US", Shringla outlined what he said were four key outcomes of the accelerated global transition and increased geopolitical competition and tension triggered by the Covid-19 crisis.

These developments, he said, will shape the nature and terms of India's engagement with major economies such as the US, China, the European Union, Japan and ASEAN. There is a need for greater global conversations on resilient supply chains, he added.

The practices that New Delhi perfects at home in response to the pandemic will "inevitably become exportable abroad", and India's thinking "about deeper global economic engagement with the world will be influenced by both geopolitical divides and pandemic pressures," he said.

"There was already a reassessment of FTA experiences, keeping in mind the unsettling impact they have had on India's manufacturing. The attention could now well shift to becoming part of global value chains, complemented by focused trading arrangements," Shringla remarked.

"This would be so especially as efforts towards making India an easier location for doing business gain traction. We are conscious of the need not just to improve on our own record but to become more competitive," he added.

Like-minded countries need to coordinate to emerge from the pandemic more resilient than before, he said, adding: "We cannot afford to let multilateralism be held hostage by great power competition. A multipolar world without an international order based on rule of law and collaboration will lead to uncertainty and turbulence."

Turning to terrorism, Shringla said India and France face similar non-traditional security threats in the form of radicalism and cyber-security challenges. "Both India and France have suffered. The fight today is not against specific communities or individuals but against a radical politico-religious ideology that attempts to negate the progress made by secular democracies...," he said.

"This radical ideology espouses violence and separatism, very often fanned and supported by foreign influence...It was horrifying to hear about the two recent terrorist incidents in France, one of which, as is very often the case, had its origins in our western neighbourhood - Pakistan," Shringla said.

"For the past three decades, we have experienced what unbridled radicalism can wreak - and what malevolent violent forces it can unleash. The civilised world needs to act together and act with firmness to address this threat to our cherished democratic value systems."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 26 -- Even as the world grapples with the pandemic unleashed from Wuhan, China is back to the business of great power politics - building military infrastructure, conducting naval exercises and sinking the fishing boats of other nations. While the rest of the world has come to its knees, in no small part due to China's behaviour, Beijing is busy reaping the dividends of this global disorder.

If, at one level, it is using this coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to project itself as a global leader by supplying medical kits and expertise to nations in dire need, thereby trying to distinguish itself from an inward-focused Donald Trump administration, at another level, it is waging an information war in Europe, seeking to create internal rifts within the European Union.

It is extraordinary to witness the full play of great power politics at a time which, according to most liberal institutionalists, should have been a case study of greater global coordination. Global pandemics were widely viewed as non-traditional security threats which would lead to greater cooperation among major powers, and not as arenas of contestation among major powers for relative gains. And international institutions were supposed to help the international community navigate these security challenges.

But the state of the world today should disabuse us of all these fallacies. If anything, the fault lines between the United States (US) and China have been accentuated because of the crisis. Historically, China and the US have tried to work together to manage various global crises in the past. But not this time. Trump's "America First" approach has meant antagonising even close allies by diverting medical supplies, outbidding the original buyers, or forcing American companies to stop exporting hospital-grade N95 masks.

The lack of leadership shown by Washington has made China a necessity for many nations even in the West which had to import faulty Chinese medical kits for lack of any alternative. While a large part of the world remains furious with China for its initial concealment of adequate information, they are forced to take Chinese help. This has allowed China to expand its influence under the garb of helping the world during this pandemic, a crisis which would have been much less severe had the country behaved responsibly initially. Europe is now pushing back strongly with French President Emmanuel Macron questioning China's handling of the outbreak, saying things "happened that we don't know about" and British foreign secretary Dominic Raab suggesting that "hard questions" would have to be asked about how the outbreak started "and how it couldn't have been stopped earlier." Yet, the ability of these nations to take on China directly remains severely limited.

As a result, the world will continue to transition to a phase where the jostling between China and the US will get exacerbated and the biggest loser will be global governance. The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) held its first session on the pandemic, some four months after the deadly contagion emerged as the biggest security challenge since World War II. After assuming the presidency of the UNSC last month, China's Ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, made it clear that Beijing does not plan to discuss the pandemic situation in the Council during its presidency as there was no need to panic, even adding that the world is not far from the defeat of Covid-19 "with the coming of spring." Washington and Beijing remain divided on the scope of the joint resolution with the US insisting that the UNSC resolution should be explicit about the origin of the virus in Wuhan, China, much to Beijing's annoyance.

But more serious has been how the World Health Organization (WHO) has dealt with this once-in-a-lifetime crisis. Far from being the nodal agency to coordinate a global response to this pandemic, it seems to have made itself subservient to Chinese interests, losing credibility in the eyes of its other stakeholders. WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus was forced to declare an international public health emergency only at the end of January after calling it off just a week earlier under Chinese pressure. Tedros repeatedly defended China's handling of the crisis with the WHO even tweeting in mid-January that "preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission".

Tedros suggested at the end of January that "WHO doesn't recommend limiting trade and movement". This has generated an intense backlash in Washington which is WHO's largest single funder with President Trump not only accusing the UN agency of being "very China-centric" but also following it up by halting US funding "while a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization's role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus." Though Trump's move to cut funding has led to political bickering in the US, senior members of the US Congress have also called for a Congressional investigation into the WHO's handling of the crisis, ostensibly in cahoots with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

Great power politics has continued unabated even when many expected greater global solidarity. The international order was getting fragmented and major power rivalry was beginning to shape the global contours before the present crisis. That process has been galvanised by the Covid-19 crisis. Where on the one hand, the CCP stands exposed for its shenanigans during the pandemic, the vulnerabilities of the US and the West in general too are out in the open.

Nations like India should be prepared to navigate the externalities of this challenging environment.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 17 -- The Narendra Modi government has given iron clad assurances to Nepal that it will be among the first countries to receive India developed twin Covid-19 vaccines, supply schedule of which will be announced in the coming week. This assurance was conveyed to Nepalese foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali during his visit to New Delhi for the Joint Commission Meeting with external affairs minister Subramanyam Jaishankar.

While the political detractors of Nepal Prime Minister Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli has portrayed Gyawali's visit as a damp squib, fact is that interlocutors of Nepalese foreign minister in New Delhi were impressed by his professionalism and sobriety with which he approached the bilateral relationship. Gyawali could not meet PM Modi as the Indian PM was totally involved in the launch of Covid-19 vaccines on January 16, according to top government sources. It was only due to PM's prior commitments that Gyawali was received by defence minister Rajnath Singh, who is number two in the Modi government.

It is understood that India will be taking care of emergency requirements of its friends by supply vaccines for restricted use to priority neighbourhood countries like Bhutan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Maldives apart from Nepal with supply schedule being worked out now.

According to government interlocutors, Gyawali briefed EAM Jaishankar about the preparedness in Nepal to receive the Indian vaccine with Nepal regulator granting approval during the foreign dignitary visit. The two countries are now on way to discuss training of medical modules, who will vaccinate Nepalese front line workers during the restricted use period. Nepal has a total of 2,67,056 Covid-19 cases with as many as 1,954 persons losing their lives to the pandemic, which had origins in China.

During Gyawali's visit the two sides agreed to gradually open the air and land route connectivity, which had been hit by the pandemic. The two countries agreed to expedite the field location survey related to the Raxaul-Kathmandu railway line.

While India-Nepal decided to deepen defence cooperation by closer military to military cooperation, Rajnath Singh also offered to provide humanitarian assistance and disaster relief training and capacity building to the Oli Government.

"There were no acrimonious notes during Gyawali's visit with the visitor taking a very responsible view of the bilateral relationship," said one of the officials present in the bilateral meetings.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, July 1 -- Bipartisan support for India has been growing among the US lawmakers amid its military standoff with China. Mitch McConnell, the leader of the Republican-dominated US Senate, kicked off a floor debate on next year's defense budget on Monday by slamming China for "picking deadly fights" with India.

McConnell appealed for the chamber's bipartisan support to pass the National Defense Authorization Act, 2021, with remarks highlighting recent threats from China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran. "China has resumed its submarine intrusions into Japanese contiguous zones and picked deadly fights with India at high altitude," McConnell said.

In a floor speech on June 18, McConnell said the Chinese military appeared to have "instigated the worst violent clash between China and India since those nations went to war way back in 1962." The clash left 20 Indian soldiers dead on June 15.

Also on Monday, another Republican senator, Marco Rubio, supported India. "Today I spoke to @SandhuTaranjitS to express our solidarity with the people of #India as they firmly confront unwarranted & lawless armed aggression by the Communist Party of #China." He was referring to a conversation with Taranjit S Sandhu, the Indian ambassador to the US.

"India has made it clear, they will not be bullied by Beijing," added Rubio, who is a member of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a congressional panel with oversight of the State Department and the country's foreign policy.

The State Department has also held Chinese aggression responsible for the borer clashes. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has referred to the clashes several times. "The [Chinese] PLA [People's Liberation Army] has escalated border tensions--we see it today in India, the world's most popular, populous democracy," he said on June 18. He also conveyed his condolences over the killing of the Indian soldiers.

President Donald Trump offered to mediate in May, but the offer was turned down by both countries.

In a TV interview on Sunday, Tom Cotton, a Republican senator, who is a close ally of Trump, denounced China's aggression on the border with India to illustrate the growing threat Beijing poses to the US and its allies. "The Chinese Communist Party is certainly using the [Covid-19] pandemic to try to assert claims and take very aggressive action against almost all of its neighbours," he said. "...China has essentially invaded India, an ally of ours. And they have killed 20 Indian soldiers."

The Democratic-led House Foreign Affairs Committee chairman Eliot Engel denounced the Chinese aggression early June before the deadly border clash. "I am extremely concerned by the ongoing Chinese aggression along the Line of Actual Control on the India-China border," Engel said. "China is demonstrating once again that it is willing to bully its neighbours rather than resolve conflicts according to international law."

"I am concerned by continued Chinese aggression along its border with India," Ami Bera, Indian-origin chair of the Asia subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, tweeted.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 27 -- A war of words between the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress over the Sino-India border dispute and alleged links between China and the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation (RGF), a trust chaired by Congress president Sonia Gandhi, intensified on Saturday with allegations and counter-allegations flying thick and fast on both sides.

BJP president JP Nadda asked the principal opposition party a series of questions, reiterated allegations that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) was in power at the Centre, said his party will leave no stone unturned in "exposing double-faced politicians", and alleged that fugitive economic offender Mehul Choksi gave donations to the trust.

The BJP says both the Chinese government and the Chinese embassy in India have contributed to RGF, and even the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund (PMNRF) donated money to the trust when the Congress-led UPA was in power.

"I want to tell Sonia Gandhi that under the garb of China and Covid-19 crisis, one should not shy away from answering the questions the nation wants to know... It's a shame. It's a sacrifice of national interest by accepting money from foreign powers in personal trusts," Nadda said in a statement.

He alleged that RGF received donations from the Chinese embassy between 2005 and 2009 and from "tax havens" such as Luxembourg between 2006 and 2009. NGOs and companies with "deep commercial interests" also donated to the foundation, he said.

"Congress and corruption are synonymous," Nadda said, asking the opposition party to come clean on its "links" with China and the details of its MoU (memorandum of understanding) with the Communist Party of China. He said India's trade deficit with China soared to $36.2 billion in 2013-14 from $1.1 billion in 2003-2004, and asked if it was a "quid pro quo". The Congress-led UPA was in power between 2004 and 2014.

Nadda also targeted former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, accusing him of allocating Rs 100 crore to the foundation as the finance minister in 1991, when India was going through its "worst financial crisis".

Singh and Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi and P Chidambaram are trustees of RGF, which was set up in June 1991.

"RGF not only takes money from scams but also gives dodgy donations to their own organisations. Why did it turn donate money to Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust controlled by the family and Christian Missionary organisations like World Vision?" Nadda asked, referring to the Nehru-Gandhi family.

He alleged that RGF worked with the China Association for Internationally Friendly Contact, "which is just a vehicle of the Central Military Commission of China to infiltrate and influence top voices in other countries".

He said the UPA government forced multiple ministries, including the home ministry and the health ministry, and public sector units such as SAIL, SBI, GAIL, and ONGC to donate to RGF. He also wondered how RGF, a private charitable trust, could function from Jawahar Bhawan, a prime location in the heart of Delhi.

"Why was a Congress man's company auditing PMNRF? PMNRF auditor's name is Thakur, Vaidyanathan and Aiyyar Co, founded by Mr Rameshwar Thakur (who was a Rajya Sabha MP for two terms, former MoS finance, and the governor of four states)," Nadda said.

In its reply, the Congress dared the ruling party to ask the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) - the BJP's ideological mentor - and think-tanks Vivekananda International Foundation and India Foundation -considered pro-BJP - to disclose their source of funding and donors.

"Will the BJP disclose the source of funding, amounts received, name of donors [including of Chinese origin] for "Overseas Friends of BJP [OF-BJP]"?" Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala asked. "...What is the connection of Shri Rajkumar Naraindas Sabnani alias Raju Sabnani to OF-BJP?" he added. Sabnani is a businessman based in Hong Kong.

Surjewala said neither did RGF receive any donation from Choksi, wanted in the Punjab National Bank fraud case, and nor did it give him any loan to him. But the foundation received "a modest donation of Rs. 10 lakh from Naviraj Estates Pvt. Ltd. in 2013, of which Shri Choksi was one of the Directors".

S Gurumurthy, the chairman of Vivekananda International Foundation (VIF), said on Twitter its trust deed prohibits receipt of foreign donations. "...It permits donations from people of Indian origin associated with VIF. As yet no one has got associated and no donations have been received," he said.

Earlier on Saturday, former Union minister P Chidambaram targeted Nadda in a series of tweets, a day after the BJP chief accused the Congress of committing a "brazen fraud" by diverting public money in PMNRF to a "family-run foundation".

PMNRF was set up in 1948 by India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, entirely with public contributions. It does not get any budgetary support. PMNRF resources are utilised primarily to give relief to families of those killed in natural calamities, and to victims of major accidents and riots, according to its website.

Chidambaram said Nadda "specialises in half-truths", and pointed out that Surjewala "exposed his half-truths".

In his rebuttal on Friday, Surjewala issued a statement saying the BJP and the central government "keep referring to a 2005 grant of Rs 1.45 crores" from the Chinese embassy to RGF for a disabled persons' welfare programme and research on Sino-India relations. The statement also said after the 2004 tsunami, RGF received Rs 20 lakh from PMNRF for relief activities in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

"What has the grant to RGF 15 years ago got to do with China's intrusion into Indian territory in 2020 under the watch of the Modi government?

"Suppose RGF returns the Rs 20 lakh, will PM Modi assure the country that China will vacate its transgression and restore status quo ante?" Chidambaram asked.

The allegations and counter-allegations come against the backdrop of a face-off between India and China along the contested border. Twenty Indian Army soldiers and an undisclosed number of Chinese troops died in a brawl in eastern Ladakh's Galwan Valley on June 15, ratcheting up tensions between the neighbours amidst a military build-up on both sides of the disputed border. While the Congress accuses the government of ceding ground to the Chinese, the ruling BJP says the opposition party is playing with issues of national security. The Congress also says the BJP is raking up the RGF donation issue to divert attention.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 4 -- India and Australia elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed a crucial agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his counterpart Scott Morrison on Thursday.

The two sides also upgraded their "2+2" foreign affairs and defence dialogue to the ministerial level and unveiled a "shared vision for maritime cooperation in the Indo- Pacific".

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), one of seven agreements signed during the summit, will facilitate reciprocal access to military logistics facilities, allow for more complex joint military exercises and improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two countries.

"India is committed to expanding its relations with Australia in a comprehensive and quick manner. This is important not only for our two countries, but also for the Indo-Pacific region and the world," Modi said in his opening televised remarks in Hindi.

Morrision said the comprehensive strategic partnership formed by the two sides will take them "to a whole new level of relationship" and "continue to build the trust because we want commercial and trading relationships that are built on trust".

Referring to the joint declaration on cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, he added, "We share an ocean and we share responsibilities for that ocean as well - its health, well-being [and] security and the relationship we're forming around those issues and our maritime domain is the platform for so many other things between our countries."

The summit was held against the backdrop of growing tensions with China for both India and Australia, though secretary (east) Vijay Thakur Singh of the external affairs ministry told an online briefing there was no specific discussion on China.

However, many of the items on the agenda - shared democratic values, rules-based multilateral systems, an open and inclusive Indo-Pacific, respect for transparency, strengthening and diversifying supply chains for critical health, technology and other goods and services, and cooperation in rare earth minerals - appeared to be aimed at countering China's influence in the region, experts said.

Modi said the two sides should focus on how their relationship can be a "factor of stability for our region and for the world", while Morrison said Australia is working with friends such as India and Japan to provide a "steadying and stabilising and wise influence during.an incredibly difficult time".

Morrison said Australia is "committed to an open, inclusive, prosperous Indo-Pacific and India's role in that region.will be critical". He added, "We share a vision for open, free, rules-based multilateral systems in our region, whether that's in the health area or it's in trade or in other places."

He also tacitly referred to Australia's demand for a probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic while commending India's taking over as chair of the World Health Organization (WHO)'s executive board.

"This is a very important time to be chairing that executive board. I have no doubt the way that that will be led under India's leadership will be critical to how we deal with many difficult problems that we are encountering globally, particularly in the health area," Morrison said.

Among the other important agreements signed by the two sides during the virtual bilateral summit - the first such meeting for Modi - were a framework arrangement on cyber and cyber-enabled critical technology cooperation, a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on cooperation in mining and processing of critical and strategic minerals, and an implementing arrangement on cooperation in defence science and technology under the existing MoU on defence cooperation.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperation in mining and processing of rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves.

Indian officials said Australia is seen as a "reliable and secure supplier" of rare earth metals and institutions from both sides will jointly take forward collaboration in this field.

India, which imports more than 90% of the rare earth metals it needs from China, has been looking to diversify sources. In 2016, the imports from China were worth $3.4 million.

The two sides also signed three MoUs on cooperation in public administration and governance reforms, cooperation in vocational education and training and water resources management.

The virtual summit was arranged after Morrison was forced to put off a planned visit to India twice - first in January because of the devastating bushfires in Australia and then in May because of the Covid-19 crisis. Though the discussions were slated to last 40 minutes, they stretched to 70 minutes and secretary (east) characterised the talks as "extremely productive".

As part of the joint response to the Covid-19 crisis, an allocation will be made from the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund for work in seven areas to counter the pandemic.

An Australian statement said the joint declaration on maritime cooperation in the Indo-Pacific committed both sides to supporting rules-based maritime order in the region and working together to strengthen maritime domain awareness and combating trans-national challenges such as people smuggling, arms and narcotics trafficking, terrorism, and illegal and unregulated fishing.

The Australian side also said the cooperative arrangement on cyber affairs and critical technology will be complemented by a new, four-year $12.7 million partnership that will create a research and development fund for Indian and Australian businesses and support other countries to improve their cyber resilience.

Modi reiterated his invitation to Morrison to visit India when the situation normalises. Morrison, who has met Modi four times in the recent past, joked about how he had missed out on the "famous Modi hug".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 2 -- The WhatsApp universe would have us believe that Nostradamus predicted the coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19) and that the authors Sylvia Browne and Lindsay Harrison, too, foresaw this in their book End of Days: Predictions and Prophecies about the End of the World.

In a life-imitating-fiction moment, people are amazed at how prescient Steven Soderberg's 2011 masterly science fiction film, Contagion, foreshadowed just such a pandemic with wide-ranging effects. That Dr Lipkins, the virologist consultant for the film tested positive for Covid-19 adds to an eerie feeling about the virus' surreal reach and power across time and space.

Foretold or not, the scale, scope and rapid spread of Covid-19 has taken the world by surprise and caused a tectonic shock to global public health, economy and society. The United Nations called it the most challenging crisis since World War II.

Our deepest fears about individual and collective vulnerability and the mortality of the human race itself in the face of this highly-contagious pandemic have been stoked. This is especially because there is no immediate vaccine or proven cure yet.

Theories about whether it was a spontaneous, accidental or deliberately perpetrated outbreak, and about the origin of the virus from animal-to-human being a blow back from nature are abound. We may perhaps never find out, but we must learn lessons. The need for a truly global, empowered and effective bio-surveillance and forewarning mechanism to prevent, detect and track viruses at inception within countries for the global public good has been underlined.

The biggest dilemma in shaping and executing public policy to contain the pandemic is to banish an apocalyptic sense of doom and gloom. At the same time, a morale-raising message about the seriousness of the pandemic and the do-or-die socioeconomic choices people need to make to win the war against Covid-19 need to be conveyed. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has managed to do just that with the media playing a largely positive role.

The coronavirus outbreak began in China and gripped its Hubei province of 60 million people and Wuhan, its glittering capital, in December 2019. It then spread as a global pandemic to 163 countries in all continents with nearly 858,000 infected and over 40,000 dead, and counting.

It went on to affect the rest of Asia and particularly affected Europe and the United States. The latter is now the country with the highest number of cases and fatalities, outstripping China .

It is being reported that after being secretive and in an initial state of denial about gravity of the outbreak, China moved to curb its spread within China with iron-curtain efficacy, military ruthlessness and logistical prowess. It has now declared that it has flattened the curve with only a few new cases and deaths. A video of the Governor of Wuhan claims it as a victory of the Chinese system of discipline and control over people's behaviour.

While it is comforting that China, the original epicentre of the virus, has been able to flatten the curve, it owes the world some answers . How did China reach the present stage? What lessons were learnt? How did Chinese authorities manage to lock off huge parts of the country affecting 800 million people? And now, how are they opening up Wuhan once again domestically and internationally? Equally important: How are they using pharmaceutical and virological knowledge and capital to find and share data, a possible cure and vaccine with the rest of the world?

Can democracies - developed countries like those in Europe and North America and a large, developing, densely-populated country of 1.3 billion like India with a federal polity, socioeconomic and cultural complexity and plurality - discipline their populations into complying with social distancing norms to flatten and bend the curve? As the Nizamuddin case shows, one dereliction can trigger a cluster contagion and be one too many.

Countries like India have mounted unprecedented and comprehensive prevention, transmission control, mitigation and response efforts. It has forced the government to impose a total lockdown affecting 1.3 billion people. This is a truly staggering, but necessary, response.Transformational behaviour change is the key to success.

The impact of Covid-19 is being acutely experienced at the community, province and national levels. Governments have the primary responsibility. It is a time when we erect walls, fences and ensure border controls, but it is also a truly global existential crisis requiring a concerted global response, action and solidarity. The World Health Organization and the United Nations along with all countries must work to make sure that end-of-the-world prophesies about the pandemic do not come to pass.

Lakshmi Puri is a former deputy executive director of UN Women and former acting deputy secretary general of UNCTAD. This is the first of a series of three articles by the writer.

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 4 -- India and Australia elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed a crucial agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his counterpart Scott Morrison on Thursday.

The two sides also upgraded their "2+2" foreign affairs and defence dialogue to the ministerial level and unveiled a "shared vision for maritime cooperation in the Indo- Pacific".

The Mutual Logistics Support Agreement (MLSA), one of seven agreements signed during the summit, will facilitate reciprocal access to military logistics facilities, allow for more complex joint military exercises and improve interoperability between the armed forces of the two countries.

"India is committed to expanding its relations with Australia in a comprehensive and quick manner. This is important not only for our two countries, but also for the Indo-Pacific region and the world," Modi said in his opening televised remarks in Hindi.

Morrision said the comprehensive strategic partnership formed by the two sides will take them "to a whole new level of relationship" and "continue to build the trust because we want commercial and trading relationships that are built on trust".

Referring to the joint declaration on cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, he added, "We share an ocean and we share responsibilities for that ocean as well - its health, well-being [and] security and the relationship we're forming around those issues and our maritime domain is the platform for so many other things between our countries."

The summit was held against the backdrop of growing tensions with China for both India and Australia, though secretary (east) Vijay Thakur Singh of the external affairs ministry told an online briefing there was no specific discussion on China.

However, many of the items on the agenda - shared democratic values, rules-based multilateral systems, an open and inclusive Indo-Pacific, respect for transparency, strengthening and diversifying supply chains for critical health, technology and other goods and services, and cooperation in rare earth minerals - appeared to be aimed at countering China's influence in the region, experts said.

Modi said the two sides should focus on how their relationship can be a "factor of stability for our region and for the world", while Morrison said Australia is working with friends such as India and Japan to provide a "steadying and stabilising and wise influence during.an incredibly difficult time".

Morrison said Australia is "committed to an open, inclusive, prosperous Indo-Pacific and India's role in that region.will be critical". He added, "We share a vision for open, free, rules-based multilateral systems in our region, whether that's in the health area or it's in trade or in other places."

He also tacitly referred to Australia's demand for a probe into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic while commending India's taking over as chair of the World Health Organization (WHO)'s executive board.

"This is a very important time to be chairing that executive board. I have no doubt the way that that will be led under India's leadership will be critical to how we deal with many difficult problems that we are encountering globally, particularly in the health area," Morrison said.

Among the other important agreements signed by the two sides during the virtual bilateral summit - the first such meeting for Modi - were a framework arrangement on cyber and cyber-enabled critical technology cooperation, a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on cooperation in mining and processing of critical and strategic minerals, and an implementing arrangement on cooperation in defence science and technology under the existing MoU on defence cooperation.

Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the two sides had been exploring the possibility of cooperation in mining and processing of rare earth metals such as lithium, neodymium and dysprosium, of which Australia has the world's sixth largest reserves.

Indian officials said Australia is seen as a "reliable and secure supplier" of rare earth metals and institutions from both sides will jointly take forward collaboration in this field.

India, which imports more than 90% of the rare earth metals it needs from China, has been looking to diversify sources. In 2016, the imports from China were worth $3.4 million.

The two sides also signed three MoUs on cooperation in public administration and governance reforms, cooperation in vocational education and training and water resources management.

The virtual summit was arranged after Morrison was forced to put off a planned visit to India twice - first in January because of the devastating bushfires in Australia and then in May because of the Covid-19 crisis. Though the discussions were slated to last 40 minutes, they stretched to 70 minutes and secretary (east) characterised the talks as "extremely productive".

As part of the joint response to the Covid-19 crisis, an allocation will be made from the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund for work in seven areas to counter the pandemic.

An Australian statement said the joint declaration on maritime cooperation in the Indo-Pacific committed both sides to supporting rules-based maritime order in the region and working together to strengthen maritime domain awareness and combating trans-national challenges such as people smuggling, arms and narcotics trafficking, terrorism, and illegal and unregulated fishing.

The Australian side also said the cooperative arrangement on cyber affairs and critical technology will be complemented by a new, four-year $12.7 million partnership that will create a research and development fund for Indian and Australian businesses and support other countries to improve their cyber resilience.

Modi reiterated his invitation to Morrison to visit India when the situation normalises. Morrison, who has met Modi four times in the recent past, joked about how he had missed out on the "famous Modi hug".

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 14 -- A top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

Earlier this month, Chinese news outlets quoted Alexander Kekule, director of the Institute for Biosecurity Research in Halle, Germany, as saying that the virus originated in Italy.

"The novel coronavirus running rampant around the world is not the Wuhan variant, but a variant that mutated in north Italy," China's national broadcaster quoted Kekule as saying in an interview on German television.

"The starting point of the pandemic is not in Wuhan, " official news agency Xinhua quoted him as saying.

In an emailed interview with the Hindustan Times, Kekule strongly denied the version of his argument published in Chinese state media, saying his words were twisted out of context.

"Chinese media are quoting from my recent bestseller book Der Corona-Kompass (The Corona Compass, available only in German so far) and from an interview I gave about the book in the popular German TV show Markus Lanz," said Kekule, who also holds a chair as University Professor and Director of the Institute for Medical Microbiology at Martin Luther University in Halle.

"The origin of the virus in China is described in detail in my book, and also the Chinese efforts to conceal the magnitude of the outbreak at the beginning. I never stated that the virus originally came from Italy, this is pure propaganda," he added.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Kekule's interview to a German channel was similarly picked up to fit into the narrative.

By the time the German expert reacted, his interview had spread across Chinese social media, with many thanking him for clearing China's name.

"Unfortunately, they are taking one or two phrases out of context, giving my statement a made-up twist. Chinese state media are referring to my account of the outbreak in Northern Italy and my critique of the WHO and EU in this context," Kekule said.

"There is, however, no scientific basis to deny that the virus originally came from China. I explained (on the television show) that the virus came of course from China, but the "G" variant was able to prevail in northern Italy because the outbreak was not detected there for several weeks, paving the way to the pandemic around the globe, including re-imports to China."

Kekule explained that the "G variant" (carrying a D614G mutation in the S gene) of the virus emerged in northern Italy, possibly because the outbreak went undetected for several weeks there.

"The G variant is most likely more contagious than the variant originally detected in Wuhan. This might be the reason why it spread world-wide from Italy. Since July 2020, more than 99% of the virus strains analysed worldwide are G variants, i.e. the viruses presently circulating have their common origin in Northern Italy."

The German scientist said that he went on the same television show to explain his position.

"The same evening I spoke again on the TV show Markus Lanz and we made it crystal clear that I had been misquoted in an act of propaganda," he said.

"Science tells us, that humankind must change its behaviour towards nature, including the habit of killing wild animals that carry dangerous viruses," he said.

"When even nations refuse to take responsibility of their actions, how should individuals learn to change their dangerous habits?"

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- Even otherwise, Juan Ferrando would possibly have been working from home. That's how coaches in the Indian Super League (ISL) operate at this time of the year, three months prior to pre-seasons. Ferrando says he is getting ready to be Sergio Lobera's successor at FC Goa like he would in "normal times".

Ferrando is linking up with the fitness coach every morning, getting the team doctor on WhatsApp to inquire about previous injuries, watching games to understand the Indian Super League (ISL) and preparing individual programmes for players who can train outside. "This is a moment to learn," he says.

Also Read | Premier League clubs agree to return to small-group training from Tuesday

If that sounds like a lot of work in the time of lockdown, it is. After all, Ferrando is replacing someone who took FC Goa to two ISL semi-finals, one final and a Super Cup title in three seasons. In 2020-21, FC Goa will also be the first team from India in the main round of the Asian Champions League by topping the league phase of ISL 6.

"I go for a run for one or two hours every day to take my mind off football. The rest of the day is about programme, planning and players," says Ferrando, 39, on a Zoom call, from his home in Barcelona.

Then he lowers his glasses, looks into his screen as if to digitally lock eyes with the questioner, and says: "But this is not really football. One month without it is okay but two months is so hard. and you can't see Espanyol play at home."

Also Read | The 10 youngest debutants in 21st century in LaLiga history

Uncertainty in the time of Covid-19 also isn't helping the new coach "close" his squad - especially new foreign players - by August-September for six or eight weeks of pre-seasons assuming ISL 7 would begin in late October. "The pre-seasons prepare muscles and players' psychology because the next season would be a hard season," says the man who has a doctorate from the University of Zaragoza's department of medicine. Ferrando's thesis was on how body vibration training helps spot jumps of professional footballers. He has also been fitness, tactical and technical coach at Espanyol's football school.

Ferrando's interest in sports science - he has degrees and diplomas from University of Barcelona - took him to Arsene Wenger's Arsenal and to Brighton when Gus Poyet was manager. It was an opportunity to learn coaching, says Ferrando who was also the personal trainer of Cesc Fabergas and Robin van Persie.

A coach since he was 18, Ferrando has also learnt from Marcelo Bielsa - "crazy coach but an inspiration about lot of things," he says about the Argentinean - Pep Guardiola, Thomas Tuchel, Manuel Pellegrini and Antonio Conte who "was perfect at Chelsea (in 2016-17)."

Intensity, innovation, verticality, the importance of possession and attacking football unite those famous names. Statements such as "protecting the ball is good," and "keeping the ball is important" followed from Ferrando.

"If the focus is positive, of course, you can lose but maybe you will have more options to win," he says. It's an idea Lobera, who like Ferrando spent time at FC Barcelona, wedged deep in FC Goa; one he fine-tuned with increased defensive discipline in 2019-20 before the sudden departure.

"There are, however, certain tactical details I would want to change but let that stay a secret," says Ferrando.

Now with Mumbai City FC, Lobera sealed a 2021 Champions League berth for FC Goa. Indians clubs have done poorly in Asia last season and that was in the AFC Cup, the continent's second-tier competition. "Our mentality will be competitive," says Ferrando.

Will ISL allowing five imports in the playing 11 and the continent following the 3+1 rule, including one player of Asian origin, add to his squad-building problems? "We will take the best three players who can help the team. In this moment, we are in that position," says Ferrando the fifth Spanish coach in the 10-team ISL.

As assistant-coach Ferrando was part of Moldova's FC Sheriff campaign in Europe. His biggest moment as a coach though came in Greece when Ferrando helped Volos NFC win successive promotions and move from third to first division between 2017 and 2019 before leaving because of an eye problem. "We had players hungry about their future and players with experience. There was also a good feeling in the dressing room," he says.

To create that feeling of team spirit, it is crucial that everybody enjoys what they are doing, he says. "You need to find exercises to enjoy. I am not a military type coach like many Serbians and Russians," says the polyglot who can speak Spanish, English, Russian, Greek and Catalan.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- The international team of World Health Organisation seeking investigation into the origin of Covid-19 virus will go to China in January, the global health body announced on Wednesday.

"I can confirm that this will take place in January," WHO spokesman Hedinn Halldorsson told AFP when asked about reports that the expert team, which includes epidemiologists and animal health specialists, would finally go to China next month, reported news agency AFP.

The global call to investigate the origin of the virus, suspected to be in China's Wuhan, has been echoed by scientists and medical experts as the scourage by coronavirus disease has claimed millions of lives and upended economies across the world.

The coronavirus first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in December, 2019, before spreading across China, and triggering a global pandemic.

Also read | 'Pure propaganda': German scientist rebuts Chinese media on Covid origin

China has rejected the claims for almost a year now on the reports of virus originating from its central city. Recently, a top German biochemist quoted by Chinese state media as saying that the coronavirus did not originate in Wuhan has called it "pure propaganda" and said there is no evidence to suggest that the virus did not come from the central Chinese city.

China has denied that it deliberately hid information about the spreading virus in January or earlier.

A year into the Coronavirus pandemic, China has effectively controlled the spread of Covid-19 within its borders, putting in place efficient lockdown and contract tracing measures and conducting mass testing for the virus for every small outbreak.

At the same time, Beijing, in the face of global criticism, has been trying to change the virus-origin theory and shift the blame outside. Several theories are in circulation - the origin could be the Indian subcontinent including India and Bangladesh or Saudi Arabia, Italy, the US and the US military, or imported frozen packaged food.

Also read | Coronavirus Outbreak: WHO advance team concludes China visit to probe Covid-19 origin

In August this year, the agency's chief and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had said the "international team" will deploy to Wuhan, the city where the pandemic is believed to have erupted late last year. Tedros said "terms of reference" have been drawn up by the WHO and China, but he did not specify.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 7 -- India fast-tracked delivery of the last batch of the US-built Apache attack choppers after the May 5 stand-off with China in eastern Ladakh to be able to ramp up their presence along the Line of Actual Control (LAC). The last batch of five choppers arrived in India last month after the central government exempted Boeing contractors from the mandatory quarantine rules notified due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The team assembled the five choppers that had been shipped to India and quickly had them flown to the Pathankot air base after being flight-tested for deployment in Ladakh.

"The military wanted to be prepared for the worst-case scenario. And it was," a top government official told Hindustan Times on Monday.

India had last year inducted 17 of the 22 AH-64 Apache choppers ordered from Boeing that can track 128 targets, prioritise threats and engage 16 targets. The remaining five were to arrive in India by the end of March. But the plan to ship the choppers had to be halted due to the nationwide lockdown enforced in India due to the coronavirus pandemic.

India was taken by surprise in early May when China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) soldiers adopted an aggressive posture, setting up a stand-off at four locations in eastern Ladakh. As it became clear that the stand-off was probably directed from Beijing, New Delhi started preparing for all eventualities.

Over the next few days and weeks, the air force started moving its assets such as the Apache choppers and the 15 heavy-lift Chinook choppers to airbases closer to Jammu and Kashmir.

Simultaneously, it also reached out to Boeing to indicate its ability to receive the shipment. Special visas were arranged and formal orders exempting the contractors who would re-assemble the choppers from the mandatory quarantine rule was issued on grounds of national security. By 1 June, the Home Ministry allowed visas to foreign technical specialists travelling for installation, repair and maintenance of foreign-origin equipment.

The induction of the two aerial platforms acquired in a $3 billion deal is a game-changer for the Indian military which otherwise relied on Russian Mi-17 medium lift helicopters for rapid induction of forces and an obsolete squadron of Russian Mi-26 helicopters.

The Chinook helped the military transport troops, artillery, equipment, and fuel to forward bases. The AH-64 Apache choppers, described by some as the Ferrari of attack choppers, was one of India's primary counter to Chinese threats on the ground and in the air. Because they have an amazing maneuverability, the Apache is designed to operate in "nap-of-the-earth" flight - that is flying at an extremely low level and using terrain and vegetation to hide from hostile elements.

Counted among the deadliest flying machines, the Apache has a 30mm cannon under the nose that can fire 1,200 rounds in less than two minutes. It can also carry 80 rockets besides Hellfire missiles that can identify, track and hunt targets in the dark.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 16 -- With reports emerging that the first case of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) was detected in China as early as November 17, 2019, Beijing should reveal more information about the virus behind the global health scourge. The world economy has come to a virtual standstill, and people are forced to live in isolation, largely because one of the most powerful countries in the world either chose to be in denial or actively muzzled information in the initial stages.

As some confusion lingers over the exact nature and origin of the disease, a Chinese government spokesperson last week appeared to blame the US military for the spread of contagion, immediately attracting diplomatic retaliation from the US State Department. Though many in China and other places have now said the spokesperson spoke out of turn, official communiques in the country are known to have a sanction from the Xi Jinping regime.

In any case, for prevention, the world needs to know the exact source of this contagion. The total number of affected are heading towards 165,000 with more than 6,000 deaths, and the virus has spread to large communities in Italy, France, Germany and Spain.

The Chinese response to coronavirus was in two phases. First, it appeared to live in denial despite the numbers mounting in Hubei province late last year, and clamped down on contrarian voices.

This may have led to people from other countries getting affected and carrying the contagion to their countries of origin. The second phase was after China realised that it could not control the spread, and so it opened data and specifics of the disease to the world while locking down its own communities.

Professor K VijayRaghavan, principal scientific adviser to Narendra Modi government, told HT that the world has learnt two things from the Chinese responses to the virus. "Acknowledgement of a potential problem is best done speedily. China could, perhaps, have acted better, earlier. Second, act speedily to identify, test, contain, and manage. Hubei and China have done well here. India has analysed this and scenarios from other countries such as Iran, Italy, US and UK etc," he said.

The former head of National Centre for Biological Sciences added: " The health ministry, ICMR and the Central and state governments in general have been constantly analysing the global and national situation, and taking decisions based on best science and public health practices. This can help "flatten" the intensity over the time, allowing systems to effectively deliver to most needy and vulnerable, he said.

Given India's weak health infrastructure, PM Modi, with foreign minister S Jaishankar and the para-military chiefs, have been involved in the health ministry's response right from the start.

According to top experts, while the cure of the disease may be found in about a year, the best way out is to flatten its impact by controlling community spreads through social distancing. Virologists all over the world are meanwhile trying to tweak existing anti-viral drugs to see if they can control the coronavirus. Others are trying to develop new drugs so that they can scale up the production much faster, if proven successful.

We must remember that the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) first appeared in November 2002 in the Guangdong province of southern China, affecting 8,000 people, with the source again linked to transmission from animals. Two decades later, it's time Beijing answers some hard questions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 18 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organization's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organization and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organization for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-co-ordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic" as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- Chinese President Xi Jinping has called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

The early Friday phone conversation between Xi and Trump was held in the backdrop of Covid-19 cases in the US surging past China's and Beijing's late night decision on Thursday to close down its borders to foreigners amid fears of a second wave of infection coming in from abroad.

China's decision to ban foreigners from entering the country was preceded by the call to limit incoming international flights to one every week from every country.

Data from the Johns Hopkins University said Friday the US had 82,404 confirmed Covid-19 cases by Thursday evening.

China's national health commission (NHC) reported 81,340 confirmed cases, and 3298 deaths.

The pandemic has spread to at least 175 countries and territories, more than 532,700 cases have been reported worldwide since last December and the death toll is now above 24,000 with over 122,600 recoveries.

During the phone call, Xi told Trump that bilateral relations were at a critical juncture and both nations stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation and that cooperation is the only correct choice for both sides.

According to Chinese state media, Xi "called for joint efforts from both sides to bolster cooperation in areas such as epidemic containment and develop a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation".

"Working together brings both sides benefits, fighting hurts both. Cooperation is the only choice," he said.

The Chinese president urged Ttump take "substantive actions" in improving bilateral relations.

"China has always shared information on the Covid-19, including the genetic sequence of the virus, at the earliest time possible, with the World Health Organisation and countries including the US in an open, transparent and responsible manner since the start of the pandemic," Xi said.

"The country has also shared its experience on epidemic containment and medical treatment and done its best to support and help countries in need of assistance," Xi was quoted as saying.

Soon after the conversation, Trump tweeted that he had a "very good conversation" with Xi and called the pathogen "coronavirus" instead of the "China virus", which had infuriated China.

"Just finished a very good conversation with President Xi of China. Discussed in great detail the CoronaVirus that is ravaging large parts of our Planet. China has been through much & has developed a strong understanding of the Virus. We are working closely together. Much respect!"

Trump and other US politicians have repeatedly to call the disease "the Chinese virus," in the face of strong protestations from Beijing, which called it attacks which are racist and stigmatises China.

A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in turn tweeted that the virus, which emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, originated in the US and was planted in the city by the US military.

In context of reports on racist attacks that Chinese have faced, Xi told Trump China hopes for the U.S. side to take practical and effective measures to safeguard the safety and health of Chinese citizens includes students in the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 16 -- With reports emerging that the first case of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) was detected in China as early as November 17, 2019, Beijing should reveal more information about the virus behind the global health scourge. The world economy has come to a virtual standstill, and people are forced to live in isolation, largely because one of the most powerful countries in the world either chose to be in denial or actively muzzled information in the initial stages.

As some confusion lingers over the exact nature and origin of the disease, a Chinese government spokesperson last week appeared to blame the US military for the spread of contagion, immediately attracting diplomatic retaliation from the US State Department. Though many in China and other places have now said the spokesperson spoke out of turn, official communiques in the country are known to have a sanction from the Xi Jinping regime.

In any case, for prevention, the world needs to know the exact source of this contagion. The total number of affected are heading towards 165,000 with more than 6,000 deaths, and the virus has spread to large communities in Italy, France, Germany and Spain.

The Chinese response to coronavirus was in two phases. First, it appeared to live in denial despite the numbers mounting in Hubei province late last year, and clamped down on contrarian voices.

This may have led to people from other countries getting affected and carrying the contagion to their countries of origin. The second phase was after China realised that it could not control the spread, and so it opened data and specifics of the disease to the world while locking down its own communities.

Professor K VijayRaghavan, principal scientific adviser to Narendra Modi government, told HT that the world has learnt two things from the Chinese responses to the virus. "Acknowledgement of a potential problem is best done speedily. China could, perhaps, have acted better, earlier. Second, act speedily to identify, test, contain, and manage. Hubei and China have done well here. India has analysed this and scenarios from other countries such as Iran, Italy, US and UK etc," he said.

The former head of National Centre for Biological Sciences added: " The health ministry, ICMR and the Central and state governments in general have been constantly analysing the global and national situation, and taking decisions based on best science and public health practices. This can help "flatten" the intensity over the time, allowing systems to effectively deliver to most needy and vulnerable, he said.

Given India's weak health infrastructure, PM Modi, with foreign minister S Jaishankar and the para-military chiefs, have been involved in the health ministry's response right from the start.

According to top experts, while the cure of the disease may be found in about a year, the best way out is to flatten its impact by controlling community spreads through social distancing. Virologists all over the world are meanwhile trying to tweak existing anti-viral drugs to see if they can control the coronavirus. Others are trying to develop new drugs so that they can scale up the production much faster, if proven successful.

We must remember that the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars) first appeared in November 2002 in the Guangdong province of southern China, affecting 8,000 people, with the source again linked to transmission from animals. Two decades later, it's time Beijing answers some hard questions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 17 -- India has backed calls to identify how the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes Covid-19 was transmitted from animals to humans and conduct an 'impartial' evaluation of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic, according to a draft resolution proposed for the WHO's annual meet beginning tomorrow.

New Delhi's decision to sign off on the push for an inquiry led by the European Union and Australia is the first time that India has formally articulated its stand on the Covid-19 outbreak that was detected in central China's Wuhan city late last year. The disease has, at last count, killed over 300,000 people worldwide and devastated the global economy.

But Prime Minister Modi did indicate New Delhi's stand at the G20 summit in March where he backed WHO reform and referred to the need for transparency and accountability.

China, which has been accused of concealing information about the virus in the early days of the outbreak, had later contested that the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen detected in its territory could have originated just about anywhere. Chinese foreign ministry officials even shared conspiracy theories that accused the US military of starting the coronavirus outbreak.

World Health Organisation and its director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, on the other hand, have been blamed for playing along with China till the virus reached enough countries and spread rapidly. Ghebreyesus, a former Ethopian minister, was elected with support from China in 2017. The accusations - he has denied them - also led United States President Donald Trump to suspend funding to the UN global health body.

Diplomats in Geneva, where the WHO headquarters is located, told Hindustan Times that the draft resolution - supported by 62 countries including Bangladesh, Canada, Russia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Japan - was an effort to bring about transparency and accountability for the spread of the disease that has been widely-acknowledged to be the worst crisis since the second world war.

To be sure, the draft resolution does not mention China or its Wuhan city.

It asks the WHO director general to work with the World Organisation for Animal Health to conduct "scientific and collaborative field missions" and "identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts".

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

The seven-page draft resolution seen by Hindustan Times also proposes to ask the WHO chief to start, "at the earliest appropriate moment", a stepwise "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.

This, the document says, should include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal and "the actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic".

Also Read: Early Covid lockdown in China could have reduced cases: Study

The draft also asks countries to provide WHO "timely, accurate and sufficiently detailed public health information related to the COVID-19 pandemic as required by the international health regulations.

It is not clear if, and how the draft resolution would be discussed at the virtual meeting since the WHO leadership opted for a truncated agenda, a move that has been seen as an effort to silence its critics.

The showdown on Monday, where countries will push for the draft resolution to be taken up, is largely seen to target China which has come under scrutiny over the pandemic that has devastated the global economy.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 27 -- Even as the world grapples with the pandemic unleashed from Wuhan, China is back to the business of great power politics - building military infrastructure, conducting naval exercises and sinking the fishing boats of other nations. While the rest of the world has come to its knees, in no small part due to China's behaviour, Beijing is busy reaping the dividends of this global disorder.

If, at one level, it is using this coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to project itself as a global leader by supplying medical kits and expertise to nations in dire need, thereby trying to distinguish itself from an inward-focused Donald Trump administration, at another level, it is waging an information war in Europe, seeking to create internal rifts within the European Union.

It is extraordinary to witness the full play of great power politics at a time which, according to most liberal institutionalists, should have been a case study of greater global coordination. Global pandemics were widely viewed as non-traditional security threats which would lead to greater cooperation among major powers, and not as arenas of contestation among major powers for relative gains. And international institutions were supposed to help the international community navigate these security challenges.

But the state of the world today should disabuse us of all these fallacies. If anything, the fault lines between the United States (US) and China have been accentuated because of the crisis. Historically, China and the US have tried to work together to manage various global crises in the past. But not this time. Trump's "America First" approach has meant antagonising even close allies by diverting medical supplies, outbidding the original buyers, or forcing American companies to stop exporting hospital-grade N95 masks.

The lack of leadership shown by Washington has made China a necessity for many nations even in the West which had to import faulty Chinese medical kits for lack of any alternative. While a large part of the world remains furious with China for its initial concealment of adequate information, they are forced to take Chinese help. This has allowed China to expand its influence under the garb of helping the world during this pandemic, a crisis which would have been much less severe had the country behaved responsibly initially. Europe is now pushing back strongly with French President Emmanuel Macron questioning China's handling of the outbreak, saying things "happened that we don't know about" and British foreign secretary Dominic Raab suggesting that "hard questions" would have to be asked about how the outbreak started "and how it couldn't have been stopped earlier." Yet, the ability of these nations to take on China directly remains severely limited.

As a result, the world will continue to transition to a phase where the jostling between China and the US will get exacerbated and the biggest loser will be global governance. The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) held its first session on the pandemic, some four months after the deadly contagion emerged as the biggest security challenge since World War II. After assuming the presidency of the UNSC last month, China's Ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, made it clear that Beijing does not plan to discuss the pandemic situation in the Council during its presidency as there was no need to panic, even adding that the world is not far from the defeat of Covid-19 "with the coming of spring." Washington and Beijing remain divided on the scope of the joint resolution with the US insisting that the UNSC resolution should be explicit about the origin of the virus in Wuhan, China, much to Beijing's annoyance.

But more serious has been how the World Health Organization (WHO) has dealt with this once-in-a-lifetime crisis. Far from being the nodal agency to coordinate a global response to this pandemic, it seems to have made itself subservient to Chinese interests, losing credibility in the eyes of its other stakeholders. WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus was forced to declare an international public health emergency only at the end of January after calling it off just a week earlier under Chinese pressure. Tedros repeatedly defended China's handling of the crisis with the WHO even tweeting in mid-January that "preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission".

Tedros suggested at the end of January that "WHO doesn't recommend limiting trade and movement". This has generated an intense backlash in Washington which is WHO's largest single funder with President Trump not only accusing the UN agency of being "very China-centric" but also following it up by halting US funding "while a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization's role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus." Though Trump's move to cut funding has led to political bickering in the US, senior members of the US Congress have also called for a Congressional investigation into the WHO's handling of the crisis, ostensibly in cahoots with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

Great power politics has continued unabated even when many expected greater global solidarity. The international order was getting fragmented and major power rivalry was beginning to shape the global contours before the present crisis. That process has been galvanised by the Covid-19 crisis. Where on the one hand, the CCP stands exposed for its shenanigans during the pandemic, the vulnerabilities of the US and the West in general too are out in the open.

Nations like India should be prepared to navigate the externalities of this challenging environment.

Harsh V Pant is professor, King's College London and distinguished fellow, Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 8 -- The tragic crash at the Kozhikode airport on Friday --- an Air India Express plane with 190 on board overshot the runway and fell into a gorge --- has turned the spotlight on the challenges pilots face while operating from table-top runways and the hazards of overshooting during take off and landing, three commercial pilots HT spoke to said on the condition of anonymity.

Eighteen people, including the two pilots, were killed in the crash.

"The most obvious challenge of a tabletop runway is the fact that on a normal runway if you run out of space you would still be on the ground. On a tabletop, you may find yourself on ground several hundred feet below," said one of the pilots cited above.

A report on the 2010 Mangalore air crash, prepared by a three-star officer, noted tabletop airports require extra skill and caution while carrying out flight operations.

Tabletop runways, located on a plateau or a hill, can also create optical illusions for pilots when they move from the instruments to the visual segment of the flight especially during bad weather, said a second pilot.

"It can be tricky as the pilot may get the illusion of not being on the correct flight profile. Add-ons like heavy rain, wet runway and pilot fatigue can complicate things further," he said.

Tabletop airports have limited space at the ends of the runway, and several international airlines had stopped flying bigger aircraft into Kozhikode due to safety issues over the length of the runway. However, pilots flying smaller aircraft are not immune to the hazards.

"The runway is at a height which is higher than the surrounding areas and the weather conditions also differ. Sudden changes in wind pattern on approach is a common phenomenon which a pilot has to tackle. On an approach till such time you hit the tabletop you may be under the influence of some winds which vary suddenly when you reach the table making the approach management that much more difficult," said a third pilot.

Possible variation in instrument indication when the transition to the tabletop happens is another key challenge.

"For example, the radio altimeter which calls out the height of the aircraft may call out 500 feet and a second later may call out 100 feet because you have entered the table zone. This transition to the table top is also when the winds may change which at times becomes a little tricky to manage," the third pilot said, adding that the degree of difficulty increases manifold during the monsoons.

The Air India Express flight from Dubai was a repatriation flight carrying Indian citizens back to the country under the Vande Bharat Mission, meant to bring home stranded people from other countries amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

Wing Commander Deepak Vasant Sathe (retd), the captain of the aircraft, was a top notch Indian Air Force fighter ace who learnt his trade flying the unforgiving Soviet-origin MiG-21 fighter planes during his 22-year military career.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 29 -- US President Donald Trump on Thursday signed off on an executive order that seeks to restrict protection to social media companies and underlines the need to seek "transparency and accountability" from these platforms. The order is centered around the argument that social media companies that selectively remove or restrict access to content engage in editorial conduct and should not be shielded by limited liability protection extended to them for users' posts.

Trump, who has often complained about liberal-leaning Silicon Valley companies targeting conservatives by fact-checking them or removing their posts, issued the order days after Twitter started selective fact-checks of his posts and labeled two of them about mail-in voting "potentially misleading".

To make his point, Trump's order also targeted China.

These tech companies, he said, instead of censoring China for promoting aggression and disinformation profited from it.

"One United States company, for example, created a search engine for the Chinese Communist Party that would have blacklisted searches for "human rights," hid data unfavorable to the Chinese Communist Party, and tracked users determined appropriate for surveillance. It also established research partnerships in China that provide direct benefits to the Chinese military," the US President said. He did not name Google.

Trump also referenced the social media campaign launched by Beijing after he held China responsible for the coronavirus pandemic and more.

Companies had accepted advertisements paid for by the Chinese government that spread false information about its mass imprisonment of religious minorities. "They have also amplified China's propaganda abroad, including by allowing Chinese government officials to use their platforms to spread misinformation regarding the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to undermine pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong," his order said.

White House officials, according to Bloomberg, complained that Twitter did not originally append fact checks to China Foreign Ministry Spokesman Lijan Zhao, who without evidence wrote that "it might be" the U.S. military that brought the coronavirus to China. Twitter has since added the fact-check link to his tweets.

Trump later followed up on the China angle of his order, telling reporters that China could have stopped the coronavirus from stopping but did not. He has promised to have a dedicated briefing on China tomorrow.

At his briefing, Trump said the choices that Twitter makes when it chooses to suppress, edit, blacklist, shadow, ban are editorial decisions, pure and simple and should be treated as such. They are editorial decisions.

"In those moments, Twitter ceases to be a neutral public platform, and they become an editor with a viewpoint, he asserted.

Trump also asked a Attorney General-led Working Group to initiate discussions with counterparts in the states that would look at the 16,000-plus complaints of online platforms censoring received from people by the White House's Tech Bias Reporting tool launched in May 2019. This group would also collect material about algorithms to suppress content or users based on their political views and differential policies allowing for otherwise impermissible behavior committed by accounts linked to the Chinese Communist Party or other autocratic regimes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 17 -- Vipin Narang, associate professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology:

With the Indian Army now sustaining fatalities in the tense border confrontation with China, the key question is what China's objective is. Regardless of the tactical details and the legal and linguistic gymnastics over whether China has entered Indian "territory", there is no question that the scope, scale and swath of Chinese pressure is unprecedented and strategic. There are many hypotheses but few definitive answers: Is this about Indian infrastructure development along the DSDBO [Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie] road? Article 370? To settle the border unilaterally on their terms through fait accompli? General assertiveness East and West? Something else? Without any definitive statements from the Chinese, we are left with much speculation. And it is when the Chinese say nothing that one should worry. The objective may become clear in due time, but one thing is clear now: The PLA came to play and they came to stay, and they are intent on making India pay.

Rajiv Bhatia, former ambassador , distinguished fellow for foreign policy studies at Gateway House:

China's recent intrusions aim to serve three purposes: First, to stop or slow down India's border infrastructure development, second, to restrict New Delhi to South Asia, thus reducing its ambitions for a global role, and three, to weaken the traction the Quad partnership has been gaining of late. Kathmandu and Islamabad are happy to lend a helping hand to Beijing on the second objective mentioned above. Our response has to be firm and resolute.

Nitin Pai, director of The Takshashila Institution, an independent think tank:

For Beijing, border transgressions are a cheap instrument to apply pressure on India's political leadership. The Chinese side doesn't tell you "why", "why now", and indeed what their claim actually is. By keeping New Delhi guessing as to its intentions, Beijing puts the Indian government on the back foot on lots of issues. For instance, we are now asking whether it is to pressure India to stay neutral in the WHO investigation on the origins of Covid-19, whether it is to retaliate against FDI restrictions, to coerce India on the 5G issue, to counter the Modi government's move to change the status of Jammu and Kashmir, or indeed in response to purely military developments.

Christopher Clary, assistant professor of political science at the University at Albany, State University of New York:

China has a set of fuzzy claims all along its boundary with India, and the American scholar M Taylor Fravel has found that China historically has escalated militarily when it perceives steps taken by others erode the likelihood of China ever securing its territorial claims. In this case, Indian road- and bridge-building in the area, especially combined with Ladakh's change to union territory status, may have led China to conclude a sharp signal might be necessary to arrest developments weakening its hold on disputed areas in eastern Ladakh.

Harsh V Pant, head of the strategic studies programme at Observer Research Foundation:

China's actions along the LAC, which have gradually escalated in tone and tempo over the last few weeks, are a reflection of its growing military capabilities and its attempts to dictate the terms of engagement to India. First, this puts into perspective New Delhi's inability to put its own house in order by highlighting the power differential between the two Asian powers. Simply put, China is doing this because it can today and might not tomorrow. Second, this is an attempt by China to show India its place at a time when India's cachet has been rising globally and China's declining on account of the backlash because of its mishandling of Covid-19. Finally, this is a pre-emptive move by China to make it difficult for India to consolidate New Delhi's hold over strategically important Ladakh

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- Chinese President Xi Jinping has called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

The early Friday phone conversation between Xi and Trump was held in the backdrop of Covid-19 cases in the US surging past China's and Beijing's late night decision on Thursday to close down its borders to foreigners amid fears of a second wave of infection coming in from abroad.

China's decision to ban foreigners from entering the country was preceded by the call to limit incoming international flights to one every week from every country.

Data from the Johns Hopkins University said Friday the US had 82,404 confirmed Covid-19 cases by Thursday evening.

China's national health commission (NHC) reported 81,340 confirmed cases, and 3298 deaths.

The pandemic has spread to at least 175 countries and territories, more than 532,700 cases have been reported worldwide since last December and the death toll is now above 24,000 with over 122,600 recoveries.

During the phone call, Xi told Trump that bilateral relations were at a critical juncture and both nations stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation and that cooperation is the only correct choice for both sides.

According to Chinese state media, Xi "called for joint efforts from both sides to bolster cooperation in areas such as epidemic containment and develop a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation".

"Working together brings both sides benefits, fighting hurts both. Cooperation is the only choice," he said.

The Chinese president urged Ttump take "substantive actions" in improving bilateral relations.

"China has always shared information on the Covid-19, including the genetic sequence of the virus, at the earliest time possible, with the World Health Organisation and countries including the US in an open, transparent and responsible manner since the start of the pandemic," Xi said.

"The country has also shared its experience on epidemic containment and medical treatment and done its best to support and help countries in need of assistance," Xi was quoted as saying.

Soon after the conversation, Trump tweeted that he had a "very good conversation" with Xi and called the pathogen "coronavirus" instead of the "China virus", which had infuriated China.

"Just finished a very good conversation with President Xi of China. Discussed in great detail the CoronaVirus that is ravaging large parts of our Planet. China has been through much & has developed a strong understanding of the Virus. We are working closely together. Much respect!"

Trump and other US politicians have repeatedly to call the disease "the Chinese virus," in the face of strong protestations from Beijing, which called it attacks which are racist and stigmatises China.

A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in turn tweeted that the virus, which emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year, originated in the US and was planted in the city by the US military.

In context of reports on racist attacks that Chinese have faced, Xi told Trump China hopes for the U.S. side to take practical and effective measures to safeguard the safety and health of Chinese citizens includes students in the US.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 30 -- India's position on the border standoff with China was backed on Thursday by Australia, which said it opposed attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) as that could increase the risk of instability.

Australian high commissioner Barry O'Farrell conveyed his country's position to external affairs minister S Jaishankar during a meeting, at which the two sides discussed developments across the Indo-Pacific region amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Australian side urges restraint along the LAC and supports continued moves towards de-escalation, said a statement from the Australian high commission.

"As I told the external affairs minister of India today, Australia opposes any attempts to unilaterally alter the status quo, which only serve to increase tension and the risk of instability," O'Farrell was quoted as saying in the statement.

"It is important that the bilaterally-agreed principles and norms that have helped prevent escalation or miscalculation in the border areas over many decades continue to be observed," the statement added.

India has repeatedly said in recent weeks that it is opposed to any unilateral efforts to change the status quo along the LAC, along which tens of thousands of Indian and Chinese troops continue to be deployed.

There has been growing convergence between India and Australia on security issues and the role of China in the Indo-Pacific in recent months. The two sides elevated their ties to a comprehensive strategic partnership and signed an agreement for reciprocal access to military logistics during a virtual summit last month.

Australia, which is set to be invited to join the Malabar naval exercise conducted by India, Japan and the US, has also backed India's calls for reform of international bodies such as the World Health Organisation (WHO) and sought a probe into the origins of the pandemic.

During a meeting of the US and Australian defence and foreign ministers in Washington on Tuesday, the two countries envisaged a key role for India in defence cooperation and post-Covid-19 recovery efforts in the Indo-Pacific.

The Australian mission's statement further said that "Australia remains vigilant about strategic trends inimical to our vision of the region" even as it focuses on the health and economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis.

Australia envisages an Indo-Pacific that is an open, free, rules-based region that is "resilient to coercion" and supported by inclusive institutions, the statement said. "Territorial disputes and competing claims should be resolved peacefully by the claimant countries, and in ways consistent with international law," it added.

Australia also continues to be deeply concerned by China's actions in the South China Sea that are "destabilising and could provoke escalation", the statement said. On July 23, Australia lodged a note with the UN Secretary General refuting China's "unlawful maritime claims in the South China Sea".

It added: "It rejects China's claim to historic rights and internal waters, its assertion of certain maritime zones, and its contention there is wide international recognition of its South China Sea sovereignty claims."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 24 -- Defence minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday said he was assured by the Russian leadership that all ongoing contracts for military supplies will proceed as scheduled and be completed speedily despite the impact of the Covid-19 crisis.

Singh's remarks, made during a media interaction in Moscow, came against the backdrop of reports that India is pushing Russia to advance the delivery of S-400 missile defence systems following a tense stand-off with Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).

Russia, which accounts for more than 60% of the military hardware used by the Indian armed forces, has called for the easing of tensions between China and India. The tensions spiked after 20 Indian soldiers were killed in a violent face-off in Ladakh's Galwan Valley on June 15. "I have been assured that ongoing contracts will be maintained, and not only will they be maintained, but they will also be completed quickly and in less time," Singh said, describing his talks with Russian deputy prime minister Yury Borisov as "very positive and productive".

"All our proposals have received a positive response from the Russian side. I am fully satisfied with my discussions," he said, without giving details of the proposals.

Singh arrived in Russia on Monday - the first trip abroad by an Indian leader since foreign travel was restricted four months ago due to the pandemic - with a high-level delegation to participate in the Victory Day parade on June 24. He is scheduled to hold several meetings with Russian leaders, though no talks are planned with his Chinese counterpart Wei Fenghe, who is also in Moscow for the parade.

India plans to seek the advanced delivery of the S-400 missile defence systems, currently due by mid-2021. India and Russia signed a $5.4-billion deal in 2018 for five systems. New Delhi is also expected to ask Moscow to cut delays in supplying spares for key Russian-origin platforms such as tanks, combat jets and helicopters.

New Delhi's request could potentially place Moscow in a difficult position due to its relations with Beijing. It is becoming increasingly tricky for Russia to maintain good ties with India and China, Alexander Gabuev, a China expert at the Carnegie Moscow Centre, told Bloomberg.

"It's a very important test overall of Russia's ability to balance its relationships amid growing dependency on China, which is becoming increasingly assertive and pushing its partners to choose sides," Gabuev said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Sept. 29 -- China has said it abides by the Line of Actual Control (LAC) as proposed by Premier Zhou Enlai to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in a letter dated November 7, 1959 - the first time in decades that it has clearly spelled out its stand on the notional Sino-India boundary by reiterating a position that New Delhi has consistently rejected since it was first made 61 years ago.

Beijing's position, in an exclusive statement to HT amid the ongoing border friction in eastern Ladakh, is a reiteration of the long-existing differences on the boundary question and a sign that the ongoing military standoff is unlikely to be resolved soon.

Also read: Eye on China, India goes for Heron tech upgrade, missile-firing Guardian drones

In the statement in Mandarin, the Chinese foreign ministry, while blaming the Indian Army for the ongoing tension since May and for the June 15 clash in eastern Ladakh's Galwan valley, said the clash was an "unfortunate" event.

"Firstly, China-India border LAC is very clear, that is the LAC on November 7, 1959. China announced it in the 1950s, and the international community including India are also clear about it," the ministry said on Friday.

"However, ever since this year, the Indian Army has continued to arrive and illegally cross the border, unilaterally expanding the scope of actual control. This is the source of tension on the border issues. The key to disengagement between the two armies is India's withdrawal of all illegal cross-border personnel and equipment," it added.

It's the first time in recent years that Beijing has said in unequivocal terms that it still goes by the 1959 LAC. It did, however, make a passing reference during the 2017 Doklam crisis, when the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying spoke of the "1959 LAC" while blaming Indian troops for a scuffle with Chinese soldiers near Pangong lake in Ladakh in August that year.

Also read| Brahmos, Akash and Nirbhay: India rolls out its missiles to counter Chinese threat

India has repeatedly and consistently rejected China's allegations that Indian troops crossed over to the Chinese side of the LAC in eastern Ladakh, asserting that New Delhi has always taken a responsible approach towards border management and maintaining peace and tranquillity in the border areas.

The Indian ministry of external affairs did not respond to requests for a comment on the fresh Chinese statement.

The November 7, 1959 date mentioned in the Beijing statement was in reference to a letter written by Zhou to Nehru - the two leaders under whom the two countries experienced the best and the worst of bilateral diplomatic ties. "In order to maintain effectively the status quo of the border between the two countries, to ensure the tranquillity of the border regions and to create a favourable atmosphere for a friendly settlement of the boundary question, the Chinese government proposes that the armed forces of China and India each withdraw 20km at once from the so-called McMahon Line in the east, and from the line up to which each side exercises actual control in the west," Zhou wrote.

Also read: How Chinese propaganda is using the 1962 war to shape public opinion

A year later, during his high-profile visit to New Delhi in 1960, Zhou had used the phrase "LAC" during a press conference. "There exists between the two counties a line of actual control up to which each side exercises administrative jurisdiction," he said as part of a six-point proposal to maintain peace at the border.

Zhou went on to say that both sides should keep to the ".line of actual control and should not put forward territorial claims as pre-conditions, but individual adjustments may be made".

In 1962, when India and China fought a war between October and November, Nehru rejected the definition. "There is no sense or meaning in the Chinese offer to withdraw twenty kilometers from what they call 'line of actual control," he said. The Chinese Premier responded to Nehru, defining the LAC - again as per November 7, 1959.

The LAC was "basically still the line of actual control as existed between the Chinese and Indian sides on 7 November 1959: To put it concretely, in the eastern sector it coincides in the main with the so- called McMahon Line, and in the western and middle sectors it coincides in the main with the traditional customary line which has consistently been pointed out by China", Zhou said in reply to Nehru.

The phrase LAC was used in the 1993 Sino-India "Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and tranquillity along the LAC in the India-China Border Areas." At New Delhi's insistence the expression wasn't qualified in terms of whether it was the 1959 one.

Former Indian ambassador to China, Gautam Bambawale said the ".significance (of the statement) is that they are telling India that the LAC is the line of November 7, 1959, as explained by Zhou Enlai to Nehru in his letter. That's it. They are going by that." Bambawale added: "We have never accepted it. There were several pockets of disagreements and the largest number of pockets (of disagreements) were in Ladakh. Obviously, we did not accept the offer." He added that New Delhi has conveyed this to Beijing in "no uncertain terms".

A leading China-hand, Bambawale had also served as ambassador in Bhutan, the only other country, other than India, with which Beijing has a land-territorial dispute.

Bambawale said following the Chinese understanding of the LAC, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is attempting to hold on to the ground positions right up to it as per the 1959 LAC.

It is clear that the current aggression at the border shown by the Chinese since May is to attempt to control territories up to where Beijing defines its LAC.

Officials in diplomatic circles, who asked not to be named, told HT that India had pointed out its disagreements with the 1959 LAC even during meetings of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) on India-China Border Affairs established in 2012 as a mechanism to consult and coordinate the management of India-China border areas.

Little is known about the differences in perceptions on the LAC in the western sector, the most troublesome. Maps have only been exchanged for the middle sector until now.

One of the officials above told HT that the LAC clarification process for the western sector broke down "an hour into the meeting" in 2002. Since then, the entire process - which was then an Expert Group headed by a director general in MEA and deputy director general in the Chinese foreign ministry -- has been stalled. "The western section was drawn by Indian surveyor (WH) Johnson, who privately assigned more than 30,000 square kilometres of land in the Aksai Chin region of China to British India. This is the historical origin of the territorial dispute between China and India in the western section," Wang Dehua, a South Asia expert at Shanghai Municipal Centre for International Studies, said.

"China hopes India will give more concessions in the western sector while Beijing could give more concessions (to India) in the eastern sector," Wang added.

The Chinese foreign ministry statement blamed New Delhi for the tension, saying: ".the right and wrong of the Galwan Valley conflict is very clear. We didn't want to see what had happened. We hope the media doesn't hype this unfortunate event". The ministry did not respond to the question on the number casualties that PLA suffered during the brutal hand-to-hand clash with Indian army soldiers on June 15.

The ministry's statement referred to the recent foreign ministers' and military talks held between India and China.

"Since the bilateral meeting between the foreign ministers of China and India in Moscow on September 10, the two sides have actively engaged in dialogue and consultation based on the five-point declaration," it said.

Referring to commander-level talks, it said "constructive measures to stabilise the border situation were taken. We hope the two sides walk in the same direction and push the frontline troops to disengage as soon as possible". Asked to comment on reports arguing Beijing is escalating tension with neighbours to divert attention from a badly hit economy, the ministry said though hit by the pandemic, the economy is reviving.

"Due to Covid-19, China's economy has been affected but it has regained growth and has contributed to the recovery of the global economy, the statement added.

On relations with neighbours, the ministry said: "The relationship between China and its neighbouring countries is generally good. China has always insisted on resolving differences between neighbouring countries through friendly consultations."

Sameer Patil, a fellow for international security studies at Gateway House, said the statement indicated that China was clearly adopting a maximalist position that disregarded all the developments that have taken place since 1959, including the bilateral boundary talks, mechanisms and agreements on peace and tranquillity on the LAC.

"When the Special Representatives mechanism was set up, this wasn't their position. Even though this matter [China's stance on the LAC of 1959] may have been known, it was not reiterated when important bilateral mechanisms and arrangements for handling the border dispute were set up," he said.

"This reflects China's obdurate attitude towards the border dispute. Reiterating this maximalist position amid the five-month-long standoff shows China has no intention of going in for an early solution to the problem," Patil added.

(With inputs from Rezaul H Laskar)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 6 -- India and Italy on Friday signed 15 agreements covering trade and investment, shipbuilding and energy, and unveiled a broad-ranging action plan to enhance their partnership by cooperating on connectivity, climate change and counter-terrorism.

The signing of the agreements coincided with an hour-long virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Italian counterpart Giuseppe Conte, during which the leaders pledged to work jointly on common challenges such as the Covid-19 pandemic.

The two sides are keen to take their economic partnership to the next level in new areas such as green technology, renewable energy and advanced manufacturing, officials said. "The focus was on economic ties and Italy is very keen to diversify its supply chains and its outgoing investments, [and] to have a more substantive economic partnership with India," said Sandeep Chakravorty, secretary (Europe West) in the external affairs ministry.

Both countries agreed to work closely on concluding a migration and mobility partnership agreement and a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on defence cooperation at the earliest, Chakravorty said. The mobility pact is crucial for India's plans to enhance access for its skilled professionals in European countries.

The much-delayed India-European Union (EU) free trade agreement figured in the meeting, officials said. A joint statement issued after the meeting said PM Modi and Conte stressed the need for "India and the EU to actively re-engage towards an early resumption of negotiations for mutually beneficial India-EU trade and investment agreements".

Also read: 'Outcome of election won't affect ties' - MEA on US presidential election

Among the 15 agreements signed on Friday was an MoU between Italy's Cassa Depositi e Prestiti SpA and India's National Investment and Infrastructure Fund to promote co-financing, two MoUs between Fincantieri and Cochin Shipyard Limited covering design, shipbuilding and manufacturing, and repairs and refits of ships, two cooperation agreements between Snam and Adani Entreprises to promote energy transition and to set up a CNG compressors factory in India, and an MoU between Snam and Indian Oil Corporation to cooperate on gas infrastructure development.

The 2020-24 action plan for an enhanced bilateral partnership is based on four pillars - political dialogue at the bilateral level and coordination in multilateral forums, economic engagement, partnership in science and technology, and cultural cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. The two sides will create a mechanism chaired by the foreign ministers to follow up the action plan yearly.

PM Modi and Conte, the joint statement said, condemned all forms of terrorism and backed a comprehensive approach to prevent and combat terrorism. They agreed to enhance the exchange of expertise and capacity building to counter-terrorism.

They also emphasised the need to expand defence engagement through greater two-way collaboration and technology cooperation, and co-development and co-production of military hardware. They also agreed to consolidate defence ties to enhance the effectiveness of UN peacekeeping activities.

The joint statement said PM Modi and Conte stressed the importance of the Indo-Pacific as a "fundamental area for connecting Asia and Europe", and said both sides will "support all connectivity initiatives based on internationally recognised norms and standards, good governance, rule of law, inclusiveness, transparency and level playing field".

The meeting, the latest in a string of virtual engagements by PM Modi after his successful summits with Australia and the EU, was part of New Delhi's enhanced focus on Europe against the backdrop of a global rebalancing in the post-Covid-19 scenario. Leading EU players, such as Germany and France, have also signalled a greater interest in the Indo-Pacific region.

Both countries are keen to put behind the 2012 killing of two Indian crew members of a fishing boat off the coast of Kerala by Italian marines guarding an oil tanker Enrica Lexie, an incident that took bilateral ties to an all-time low.

"Barring the brief hiatus caused by Enrica Lexie incident for some time, the two countries have always enjoyed a cordial relationship since they established political ties in 1947," said a person who declined to be named.

India sees Italy, the third-largest EU economy after Brexit with robust manufacturing, technological and design capabilities, as a strong partner for the Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat (self-reliant India) initiatives.

Italy is currently India's fifth largest trading partner in the EU, and bilateral trade was worth 9.52 billion Euros in 2019. India, however, ranks 16th as country of origin for Italian imports, and experts believe there is potential for considerable growth.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 28 -- China has reported 42 new cases of Covid-19 including 22 local transmissions, recording the sharpest increase in several weeks, national health authorities said on Wednesday.

Tuesday's tally was sharply up from 16 on Monday, with all the 22 new local cases reported in the past 24 hours from the remote Xinjiang region's Kashgar prefecture.

The national health commission (NHC) and Xinjiang health authorities said the local infections were asymptomatic cases that were re-categorised as confirmed ones.

All were reported in Shufu county of Kashgar, the Xinjiang health commission said, adding that 19 new asymptomatic cases were also reported on Tuesday.

By Tuesday night, the autonomous region had completed Covid-19 testing for all 4.75 million people in Kashgar following the recent local cases, state media reported.

Apart from the confirmed and asymptomatic cases, the remaining population had tested negative for the disease, Li Linyu from the Kashgar prefectural health commission told a press conference.

Li said investigations have shown the new cases have no relation to the cluster in the regional capital of Urumqi in July and source tracing for the new cases in Shufu was underway.

Experts have told Chinese state media that the origin of the latest flare-up in Kashgar remains to be determined.

An official from the prefecture told the tabloid Global Times that none of the asymptomatic patients had any contact with cold-chain products or with wild animals.

A virologist told the tabloid that it is not certain if the virus that caused the Kashgar outbreak was local or imported.

"More epidemiological surveys need to be done to find out, such as contact with people from other countries, or international flights," the tabloid reported.

As of Tuesday, the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases on the mainland had reached 85,868. Of them, 298 patients were still being treated, including four in severe condition.

Altogether 80,936 patients had been discharged after recovery, and 4,634 had died of the disease on the mainland, the NHC said in its daily report on Wednesday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 13 -- China is scrambling to control a new wave of Covid-19 outbreak, locking down some 28 million people across two provinces, carrying out mass-scale nucleic acid tests and appealing to citizens not to travel ahead of the Chinese New Year (CNY) holidays in February.

Several provinces and cities across China have put in place travel restrictions as health authorities work overtime to contact-trace and isolate suspected cases who have travelled out from the locked down regions.

More than 28 million residents in four cities in the provinces of Hebei and Heilongjiang have been put under home quarantine with intercity travel suspended and intracity movements restricted.

China has recorded the biggest daily jump in Covid-19 cases in more than five months with 115 new confirmed cases reported for Tuesday in the mainland compared with 55 a day earlier.

This was the highest daily increase since July 30.

The increase in new infections comes as a World Health Organization team is slated to arrive in China on Thursday to probe the origins of the Covid-19 disease, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019.

The team will fly from Singapore to Wuhan on Thursday.

The new infection numbers - though fewer than daily numbers in many Covid-hit places in the world - are a source of worry for the Communist Party of China-led government, which has repeatedly trumpeted its success in controlling the pandemic since it emerged from a Chinese city in late 2019.

Officials said that new clusters have been triggered through community transmission.

The national health commission (NHC) spokesperson, Mi Feng said the new outbreaks are characterised by long duration, wide coverage, rapid transmission, older patients, and high proportions in rural areas.

In some places, community transmission and multi-generation transmission, Mi told a press conference on Wednesday, adding that the situation was complex and severe.

The worst affected Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing, has put three cities - Shijiazhuang, Xingtai and Langfang - into lockdown as part of the efforts to keep the virus from spreading further.

The northeastern province of Heilongjiang province on Wednesday declared a Covid-19 emergency, putting the city of Suihua and its 5.2 million residents, under lockdown.

Tieli, a city of about 300,000 people that borders Suihua, according to agency reports, said on Wednesday it will not allow any people or vehicles to leave for three days as part of new prevention measures.

The total number of confirmed cases in mainland China now stands at 87,706, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,634.

Meanwhile, China is administering domestically developed vaccines to specific groups with high infection risks, including medical workers, airport staff and people handling cold-chain imported products.

"Over 1 million people in Beijing had received the first dose of vaccine as of 11 am Monday. The city is expected to complete administering the first dose of the jab among specific groups by Friday," Xinhua, China's official news agency, said in a report on Wednesday.

The WHO's director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has said that a WHO team in China is working with producers of the Sinovac and Sinopharm vaccines for potential emergency use listings.

"I'm pleased that a WHO team is in China currently working with producers of the Sinovac and Sinopharm vaccines to assess compliance with international quality manufacturing practices ahead of potential emergency use listing by WHO," Tedros said at a media briefing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

Click here for the complete coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Also Read: Nizamuddin markaz trail widens; coronavirus cases in India hit 2,000

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy.

Union home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled.

The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the six-storey building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups of people.

Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors."

Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe.

In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and also cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 27 -- Six people, including a foreigner, had died due to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) during treatment at hospitals in Delhi, Haryana and at a quarantine facility after being rescued from the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters, known as the Markaz, in Nizamuddin during the lockdown in March-end, the Delhi Police have told a Delhi court, in a charge sheet filed in May.

Various agencies had mounted a rescue operation to remove over 2,300 people from the Markaz after several who had allegedly attended a religious congregation there returned to their respective home states and were tested positive for the virus. Seven deaths, six of which were in Telangana alone, were also reported.

The deaths prompted the authorities to take measures to prevent the spread of the virus and file a criminal case against the Tablighi Jamaat chief Maulana Saad and six other office bearers, for defying a series of government directives, which curbed religious and large gatherings, issued to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the national capital. Charges of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and criminal conspiracy were added to the case after the deaths of some of the attendees. No arrests have been made in the case, so far.

Advocate Fuzail Ayubi, counsel for the Markaz, said that the assumption of the investigating agency to charge his clients for 304 (culpable homicide not amounting to murder) is completely "Misplaced" "The section 304 could not have been applied here in these circumstances and the assumption of the investigating agency is completely misplaced," he said.

According to the charge sheet filed in the case in the Saket court, the city police have said that during investigation it was found that six persons who were part of the religious congregation at the Markaz had lost their lives at the Lok Nayak hospital, a quarantine centre in Sultanpuri and AIIMS, Jhajjar.

"As per the certificates issued by the concerned doctors, their deaths had occurred due to corona virus infection," the charge sheet read.

While Yousuf Sahibu (36) from Tamil Nadu died on March 31 at AIIMS, Jhajjar, and Modokulov Maksat (38), from Kyrgyzstan died at the same hospital on April 13. Two persons from Tamil Nadu-Majeeth Mustafa (68) and Thathkir Pichaikani (64) died at the Lok Nayak Hospital in Central Delhi, on April 9 and March 29 respectively.

Another Tamil Nadu resident Mohammad Mustafa,60, had also died during treatment at the quarantine centre in Sultanpuri on April 22, the charge sheet says. The casualties also include a Delhi resident, Mohammad Aslam Abbasi (74) who died at the Lok Nayak hospital on March 31.

The police have filed charge sheets against more than 900 foreigners and charged them for allegedly attending the religious congregation organised in March by the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters, in violation of their visa conditions and the Indian government's guidelines on the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak.

In the charge sheet filed, the police said that the foreigners accepted that they had attended the religious congregation for the purpose of professing and propagating the principles and doctrines of the Tablighi Jamaat and had remained at its headquarters (Markaz) for some period.

"In order to ascertain their visit to Banglewali Masjid, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Delhi the register maintained at the Banglewali Masjid was taken into police possession, which further confirms their visit, including their name, country, passport number, period of stay and date of expiry of visa," the police said.

The police also added that in order to substantiate the legitimacy of their visit to India, passports of 723 foreigners and Identity Cards of 23 Nepal nationals have been taken into possession through seizure/handing over memos.

"Some of the accused foreign nationals were unable to provide / produce their passports. Despite efforts their passports could not be taken over till now. Hence, passport numbers of these foreign nationals have not been mentioned against their respective names and country of origin in the list of accused persons," it added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 17 -- (Bloomberg) -- Facebook Inc. Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said that as the social network gets more aggressive in policing misinformation about the coronavirus, even politicians, celebrities and those posting in private groups aren't exempt from the rules.

Earlier this month, the company said it would remove false content and conspiracy theories about Covid-19 that health authorities flagged as harmful. On Monday, Sandberg said Facebook -- which has a policy of not fact-checking political ads -- would apply the rules even to the platform's most powerful voices. "We are taking down any harmful misinformation on the coronavirus," she said in an interview on Bloomberg Television.

Also read: Facebook promises $20 million to fight COVID-19

So far, Facebook hasn't reported any major takedowns, even as some politicians downplay the potential severity of the virus, and some celebrities spread conspiracy theories about its origins. The kind of content that would be taken down is more severe, such as posts that give people false information on how to protect themselves against the virus, Facebook said. Sandberg said Facebook is sharing high-quality information with celebrities, like the proper technique for hand-washing, in the hopes that they will share it with their fans.

Medical misinformation tends to thrive in Facebook's private groups, which are more difficult to monitor. But Sandberg said even those communities would be subject to the rules "as soon as we can find it.

Sandberg's interview coincided with the announcement of a multimillion-dollar donation by her and other technology executives to a local food bank in the San Francisco Bay Area, where school closures are threatening hungry families.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy. home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled. The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups. Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors." Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe. In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 3 -- The number of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) infections in the national capital jumped on Thursday by 141 - the biggest single-day increase yet - with nearly 92% (129) of them linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, a religious group that is now feared to be driving the outbreak in the country despite an unprecedented lockdown that has forced people to stay indoors for three weeks.

The number of fatalities rose by two - both of these patients had also been to the Nizamuddin building - and the country's overall number of confirmed cases rose 2,520, also soaring by a record number over Wednesday's figure of 2006.

The national surge, too, was largely driven by Tablighi Jamaat-linked infections from states such as Tamil Nadu, where all 75 new infections reported the same origin. In all, about 9,000 members linked to the gathering in Delhi have been quarantined or are being sought out to be isolated after they attended events at the Delhi building that is believed to have turned into a hotbed of the infection this month.

"The home ministry along with states and Union territories launched a massive effort and about 9,000 Tablighi Jamaat workers and their primary contacts were identified and quarantined. Among these, 1,306 people are foreigners," said Punya Salila Srivastava, joint secretary in the Union home ministry, during a daily briefing on Thursday.

Srivastava said that 2,346 people were evacuated from Tablighi Jamaat's six-storey complex in Nizamuddin since March 29. Of these, 250 were foreigners and 1,804 people were shifted to different quarantine centres, while 334 positive cases were hospitalised, the official said.

Earlier in the day, Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said that the number of cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat could shoot up since the government has decided to test all of the 2,346 people linked to the building.

The government has begun action at several levels against the missionary group, booking its leader Maulana Mohammad Saad under sections that punish offences that could lead to the worsening of an epidemic and for criminal conspiracy.

Union home minister Amit Shah said on Thursday the government has blacklisted 960 foreigners for their involvement in activities with the group while they were in India on tourist visas. Their visas have also been cancelled.

The home minister added that the state director generals of police and Delhi Police commissioner have been directed to take necessary legal action against the overseas Tablighi Jamaat members as they violated the provisions of Foreigners Act, 1946 and Disaster Management Act, 2005.

On Thursday, the Delhi Police mailed 24 questions to the group's head, the first step in launching its formal investigation. The questions are related to the gathering of over 2,000 people at the six-storey building and Saad's alleged violation of the orders that prohibited an assembly of large groups of people.

Saad's counsel, Fuzail Ayyubi, said, "We are preparing a reply. There are about two dozen questions. The maulana is not absconding. He is in self-quarantine, as advised by doctors."

Ayyubi also said that Saad has released an audio message urging all his followers to comply with the lockdown directions and be safe.

In a minute-long video released on social media groups, Saad asked his followers to remain indoors and also cooperate with the government.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 10 -- India and Nepal have decided to start flights under a bilateral air bubble arrangement, people familiar with developments said on Thursday, marking another step by the two sides to normalise ties hit by a border row earlier this year.

"Initially, we are starting with one daily flight from each side between Delhi and Kathmandu. From the Indian side, it will be Air India which had a daily flight between the two capitals in the pre-Covid-19 period," one of the people cited above said on condition of anonymity.

Flights between the two countries and cross-border movement of people through several checkpoints were suspended following the outbreak of Covid-19. The movement of essential supplies and cargo, however, had continued as Nepal is largely dependent on imports from India.

The move follows a string of visits to Nepal by senior Indian officials to reset ties that were hit after Kathmandu issued a new political map in May that included Indian territories, including the strategic Kalapani region.

Following visits by Research and Analysis Wing chief Samant Goel and Indian Army chief Gen MM Naravane, foreign secretary Harsh Shringla travelled to Kathmandu last month for wide-ranging talks with the Nepalese leadership to take forward bilateral ties, especially in connectivity and trade. The two sides also agreed to respect each other's sensitivities and handle the border issue through existing mechanisms.

The people cited above said the creation of a bilateral air bubble arrangement had been proposed to Nepal by the Indian side some time ago, and Kathmandu had cleared the move after Shringla, during his recent visit, highlighted the importance of people-to-people connectivity in the special relations between the two sides.

"We are starting the air bubble arrangement with Indian and Nepalese nationals and holders of Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) and Person of Indian Origin (PIO) cards of all nationalities, and all valid Indian visa holders, except tourist visas," said the person cited above.

The air bubble arrangement will follow all medical protocols as is done with other countries that have similar arrangements, and this includes reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test report of 72 hours prior to the travel, the people said.

India currently has air bubble arrangements with 22 countries, including the US, the UK, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman, Tanzania, the Netherlands, the Maldives, Japan and Bangladesh.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 2 -- A Covid-19-positive health worker from Delhi's All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) has urged former Congress president Rahul Gandhi to take up with the government the issue of risk allowance for nurses and doctors as they face health concerns on the frontline of the fight against the outbreak.

"We are exhausted but we are fighting on the frontline without any fear. We will win. You and the government are with us. I have complete faith that we will fight this war against the coronavirus and win. I think you will agree that we are fighting as an army," Vipin Krishnan, who has been working in AIIMS for the past two years, told Gandhi during a video interaction. "Yes, you are a nonviolent army," Gandhi said in his response.

Krishnan was joined by three other Indian origin health workers - Anu Ragnat from New Zealand, Narendra Singh from Australia and Sherlylmol Puravady from the United Kingdom - in sharing their experiences with Gandhi while fighting the pandemic.

The video was released on Wednesday, the National Doctors' Day.

Krishnan, who belongs to Kerala and, along with his wife, is in quarantine after both tested positive for Covid-19, also raised concerns over compensation to the families of the Covid warriors who died while treating patients, saying the government should do something for them.

"Two nurses from south India died in Delhi. One X-ray technician, a retired doctor from AIIMS and a sanitation worker also passed away. However, they are yet to receive the compensation of Rs 1 crore announced by the Delhi government," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Gurugram, March 11 -- Members of the district rapid response team on Wednesday visited the Indian Army's quarantine facility at Manesar, where 83 evacuees - 74 Indians and nine of Indian origin - from Italy arrived early morning.

"The evacuees have been screened at the airport and in the camp, as informed by the health staff deployed at the camp," a member of the response team said.

"Evacuees were assigned barracks, considering the safety measures. They were also counselled to take precautionary measures that would help in preventing the Covid-19 contagion to spread. The evacuees would be examined daily," the team member, who interacted with the doctor at the camp, said.

According to the district health department, since the evacuees have been brought to Haryana, therefore, it was mandatory for them to visit the camp.

Rajiv Arora, state's additional chief secretary, said, "We are in contact with the team at the army camp. However, the army will be taking care of the evacuees, from their screening to sample testing."

Of the 83 evacuees, 40 are male, 26 female, 16 children, and one infant. A team of doctors and staff members will monitor the evacuees. If any individual is suspected to be infected, he/she will be shifted to an isolation facility.

The evacuees will be allowed to leave after 14 days with their detailed documentation sent to the district or state surveillance units for further surveillance. Those found infected will be shifted to the isolation ward at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for further medical exams and recovery.

In February, more than 200 evacuees from Wuhan were also shifted to the quarantine facility.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 22 -- Two of the world's closest neighbours, India and Nepal, are locked in a cartographic, diplomatic, and to an extent, a political stand-off. The dispute is over the ownership of nearly 330 sq km of land called Kalapani near Nepal's western tri-junction with India and China.

The dispute was triggered in November 2019 when India issued a new map to indicate the changed status of Jammu and Kashmir into a Union Territory. Nepal raised objections because the Kalapani area was shown as being in India. Indian maps have always shown it that way; therefore, there was no change in the map. This was followed by Nepal's objections to the inauguration of a road from Darchula to Lipu Lekh Pass, aimed at strengthening India's defence supply lines as well as facilitating smooth passage for pilgrims to Kailash Mansarovar in Tibet. Nepal said this road is an encroachment on its sovereignty. There have been street protests, parliament has agitated, and now the Nepal government has issued its map showing Kalapani as its territory. New Delhi has reiterated that the area belongs to India, and would be willing to resolve the dispute through diplomatic negotiations after the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) crisis is over.

Nepal's claims are rooted in the Sugauli Treaty signed with the British in March 1816. In this, Nepal renounced "all claims to or connextions (as in original text) with the countries lying to the west of river Kali." (Art.V). The land east of the Kali thus remained with Nepal. This claim is reinforced by some old revenue records and gazette notifications.

India accepts this position, but its claim arises from the ambiguity in the treaty on the identification of the Kali river and its origin. According to India, the river originates from Lipu Lekh and then merges into other streams and tributaries to become the Mahakali. Nepal's contention is that Kali originates from Limpiyadhura and the stream originating from Lipu Lekh is called Lipu Khola. Hence the dispute. The area between these two streams is Kalapani. The treaty underwent some revisions to accommodate Nepal in the Terai (southern part) and was finally endorsed by the British government on November 15, 1860.

The maps issued by the British between 1816 and 1860 generally favour the Nepali position. But, the maps issued afterwards endorse India's position. It is possible that the British administration changed this position through proper surveys or subsequently decided to manipulate this position, to serve its larger strategic and commercial interests in using the Lipu Lekh pass for access to Tibet. Independent India was handed over access to Kalapani and Lipu Lekh by the British.

Blaming India for any encroachment is baseless. It must be borne in mind that much before the British came, or the Gurkha kings annexed Kumaon and Garhwal regions - then surrendered under the Sugauli Treaty - Indians were using this route for the pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar. The route has deep spiritual and civilisational significance for India. China accepted Lipu Lekh as one of the cultural and commercial transit points with India under its 1954 Peaceful Co-Existence Agreement. This was reiterated in 2015 in a joint statement during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to China.

Nepal has endorsed India's position for nearly 150 years. It used Indian maps showing Kalapani, Limpiyadhura and Lipu Lekh in India. Objections to this were raised in the 1980s, but were ignored by the royal regimes. Since 2000, the two surveyed the length of their boundary to resolve outstanding issues, except in two areas, including Kalapani. It is mutually agreed that these issues will be resolved through diplomatic negotiations.

Why then has the Nepal government turned up the heat on the Kalapani issue? Prime Minister KP Oli faces serious internal opposition at the moment, including from within his ruling Nepal Communist Party. This is largely on account of his governance failures and lack of action on combating the pandemic. He has consolidated his nationalist image since 2015 by fighting India's ill-advised diplomatic intervention on the constitution issue and the counterproductive economic coercion (partial economic blockade) that followed. He perhaps hopes that this face-off with India on Kalapani will give him a new lease of political life.

The strategic community in India apprehends that Nepal is also being prompted by China to get India out of Kalapani. Indian Army chief General MM Navrane's indirect reference in an Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses lecture may be recalled here. This apparently conflicts with China's endorsement of the Indian position in 1954 and 2015. However, China is seldom straight in diplomacy. It is unhappy with India's growing strategic proximity to the United States. It has also objected to India's defence infrastructure upgradation projects all along the border. The Darchula-Lipu Lekh road is one such project. Needling India and alienating Kathmandu from New Delhi serves China's broader purpose. This explains why is it is playing an active role in preserving the unity of the Nepal Communist Party and protecting the Oli regime.

Prolonging this stand-off is not in the interest of either Nepal or India. It will be exploited by the third parties to their advantage. India and Nepal, keeping in mind their mutual stakes and concerns, should through resilient and mutually accommodative diplomacy, resolve this.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 23 -- Two of the world's closest neighbours, India and Nepal, are locked in a cartographic, diplomatic, and to an extent, a political stand-off. The dispute is over the ownership of nearly 330 sq km of land called Kalapani near Nepal's western tri-junction with India and China.

The dispute was triggered in November 2019 when India issued a new map to indicate the changed status of Jammu and Kashmir into a Union Territory. Nepal raised objections because the Kalapani area was shown as being in India. Indian maps have always shown it that way; therefore, there was no change in the map. This was followed by Nepal's objections to the inauguration of a road from Darchula to Lipu Lekh Pass, aimed at strengthening India's defence supply lines as well as facilitating smooth passage for pilgrims to Kailash Mansarovar in Tibet. Nepal said this road is an encroachment on its sovereignty. There have been street protests, parliament has agitated, and now the Nepal government has issued its map showing Kalapani as its territory. New Delhi has reiterated that the area belongs to India, and would be willing to resolve the dispute through diplomatic negotiations after the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) crisis is over.

Nepal's claims are rooted in the Sugauli Treaty signed with the British in March 1816. In this, Nepal renounced "all claims to or connextions (as in original text) with the countries lying to the west of river Kali..." (Art.V). The land east of the Kali thus remained with Nepal. This claim is reinforced by some old revenue records and gazette notifications.

India accepts this position, but its claim arises from the ambiguity in the treaty on the identification of the Kali river and its origin. According to India, the river originates from Lipu Lekh and then merges into other streams and tributaries to become the Mahakali. Nepal's contention is that Kali originates from Limpiyadhura and the stream originating from Lipu Lekh is called Lipu Khola. Hence the dispute. The area between these two streams is Kalapani. The treaty underwent some revisions to accommodate Nepal in the Terai (southern part) and was finally endorsed by the British government on November 15, 1860.

The maps issued by the British between 1816 and 1860 generally favour the Nepali position. But, the maps issued afterwards endorse India's position. It is possible that the British administration changed this position through proper surveys or subsequently decided to manipulate this position, to serve its larger strategic and commercial interests in using the Lipu Lekh pass for access to Tibet. Independent India was handed over access to Kalapani and Lipu Lekh by the British.

Blaming India for any encroachment is baseless. It must be borne in mind that much before the British came, or the Gurkha kings annexed Kumaon and Garhwal regions - then surrendered under the Sugauli Treaty - Indians were using this route for the pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar. The route has deep spiritual and civilisational significance for India. China accepted Lipu Lekh as one of the cultural and commercial transit points with India under its 1954 Peaceful Co-Existence Agreement. This was reiterated in 2015 in a joint statement during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to China.

Nepal has endorsed India's position for nearly 150 years. It used Indian maps showing Kalapani, Limpiyadhura and Lipu Lekh in India. Objections to this were raised in the 1980s, but were ignored by the royal regimes. Since 2000, the two surveyed the length of their boundary to resolve outstanding issues, except in two areas, including Kalapani. It is mutually agreed that these issues will be resolved through diplomatic negotiations.

Why then has the Nepal government turned up the heat on the Kalapani issue? Prime Minister KP Oli faces serious internal opposition at the moment, including from within his ruling Nepal Communist Party. This is largely on account of his governance failures and lack of action on combating the pandemic. He has consolidated his nationalist image since 2015 by fighting India's ill-advised diplomatic intervention on the constitution issue and the counterproductive economic coercion (partial economic blockade) that followed. He perhaps hopes that this face-off with India on Kalapani will give him a new lease of political life.

The strategic community in India apprehends that Nepal is also being prompted by China to get India out of Kalapani. Indian Army chief General MM Navrane's indirect reference in an Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses lecture may be recalled here. This apparently conflicts with China's endorsement of the Indian position in 1954 and 2015. However, China is seldom straight in diplomacy. It is unhappy with India's growing strategic proximity to the United States. It has also objected to India's defence infrastructure upgradation projects all along the border. The Darchula-Lipu Lekh road is one such project. Needling India and alienating Kathmandu from New Delhi serves China's broader purpose. This explains why is it is playing an active role in preserving the unity of the Nepal Communist Party and protecting the Oli regime.

Prolonging this stand-off is not in the interest of either Nepal or India. It will be exploited by the third parties to their advantage. India and Nepal, keeping in mind their mutual stakes and concerns, should through resilient and mutually accommodative diplomacy, resolve this.

SD Muni is professor emeritus, Jawaharlal Nehru University, and a former ambassador

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 25 -- Back in the autumn of 2012, a senior faculty member at the Mhow-based Army War College published a paper on the China's war zone campaign (WZC). Beijing would, the army officer argued, seek to coerce smaller adversaries into acceding to China's demand through graded threat of force or actual use of force till its ends are met.

The officer, then Brigadier Manoj Mukund Naravane, wrote that the political objective of this Chinese concept is unveiled by "occupation of certain un-held tract of land or high value targets'. This would be done through elite forces.

The first would be the domination-cum-deterrence (DCD) phase where the People's Liberation Army (PLA) would focus on building up its presence in the territory in question to deter the enemy. In the second phase, Gaining Initiative by Striking First (GISF), it would deploy rapid reaction units to strike first to wrest the initiative from the enemy. The last stage is the Quick Battle Quick Resolution where the PLA would use a dedicated division level force. But the PLA, the senior army officer said in his seminal paper published in Scholar Warrior, a journal published by the Delhi-based think tank Center For Land Warfare Studies, expects to achieve its objective in the first two phases.

As the Indian Army Chief now, General Manoj Mukund Naravane is faced with a WZC situation along the 3,488 kilometre long Line of Actual Control (LAC) with PLA opening multiple fronts in western and eastern sectors while the world including India battles the Covid-19 pandemic that has its origins in central China's Wuhan city. The Chinese aggressive manoeuvres also entail the PLA moving support elements in depth areas of eastern Ladakh.

Although Gen Naravane didn't refer to it in his 2012 paper, national security planners say the key to the Chinese WZC concept is deception coupled with state of the art intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities.

The top army officer was clear that the only way to counter the WZC strategy is to thwart Chinese designs in the initial two, DCD and GISF, stages.

Beijing did have the initial advantage when it moved soldiers to Galwan Valley and Pangong Tso in eastern Ladakh. The Chinese army had built roads right up to their claim line and could move in troops quickly, once it decided to activate them.

This advantage now stands neutralised with Indian force levels building up over the past weeks. The Indian Army is also staring at the aggressor with troops holding their positions and not allowing the Red Army to brow beat them at Galwan Valley and Pangong Tso.

Top government officials told Hindustan Times that the security establishment did realise that India's northern borders would remain turbulent for some time to come after New Delhi decided to upgrade its border infrastructure in 2014.

For decades, India had been debating the extent and pace of creating border infrastructure along the Line of Actual Control with China. Beijing, meanwhile, kept building railway tracks and roads.

This meant that the Chinese PLA patrols along the border often went uncontested.

This started to change after India matching up the build up to a degree and earmarking its claim line through regular patrols. And this friction is expected to continue unless both sides exchange maps of their respective positions in both the eastern and the western sector.

The situation in the middle sector is far better after both sides exchanged maps in 2002. So both sides now know the exact disputed territory. The western sector maps were shared but never exchanged at the behest of Chinese; the eastern sector maps were not even shared.

While China openly covets Arunachal Pradesh as its territory, its long term game in eastern Ladakh could be to cut through Galwan-Murgo axis to provide an all weather alternative to the Karakoram highway, which enters Pakistan through Khunjerab Pass and not Karakoram pass north of Indian positions of Daulet Beg Oldi.

However, with the Indian Army digging into its positions to face the aggressor, the long drawn out mobilization may not work for the PLA as the law of diminishing returns comes into play like in the protracted 1979 Sino-Vietnam war. Status quo ante is the only viable option as it leaves both sides with a win-win situation.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Feb. 9 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

UP residents head to Uttarakhand to look for missing kin

Unable to contact their family members, who are missing after the devastating flash flood in Uttarakhand's Chamoli district, several people from various districts of Uttar Pradesh have started leaving for the neighbouring state to search for them. Read more

iPhones, cash for best video suggestions for Congress' Assam manifesto

The Congress in Assam is seeking ideas and suggestions in the form of short videos to help prepare its manifesto for the upcoming state polls. It is offering iphones and cash as rewards for the best suggestions. Read more

WHO identifies two 'most likely' scenarios of Covid-19 transmission to humans

A team of experts investigating the origin of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan has identified two most likely scenarios that caused the transmission of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) to the human population. Read more

'He will hit one or two 100s': Laxman lauds Kohli's batting in 2nd innings

India captain Virat Kohli displayed a solid batting performance on the final day of the first Test against England in Chennai. Despite being under pressure while chasing a target of 420, and seeing wickets continue to tumble on the other end, Kohli showcased immense maturity to bat on and keep one end safe. Read more

Kangana Ranaut claims she's better at stunts than Tom Cruise, hours after calling herself a better actor than Streep

Hours after calling herself a better actor than three-time Oscar winner Meryl Streep, Kangana Ranaut has claimed that she is a better stunt performer than Tom Cruise. Kangana often gets triggered when a behind-the-scenes video of her, riding a wooden horse on the sets of Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi, is brought up. Read more

Kiren Rijiju shares video of his performance for Army jawans. Netizens love it

Sports minister Kiren Rijiju has shared a video on Twitter recently that has garnered much appreciation from netizens. The video featuring Rijiju himself shows his performance dedicated to the jawans of the 62 Engineer Regiment of Indian Army. Read more

Sasikala's grand return to Tamil Nadu, garlands MGR statue ahead of polls

Sasikala returned to Tamil Nadu after spending 4 years in prison in a disproportionate assets case. She was released from prison on January 27, but spent some days in a Bengaluru hospital for Covid-19 treatment. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Gurugram, March 11 -- Members of the district rapid response team on Wednesday visited the Indian Army's quarantine facility at Manesar, where 83 evacuees - 74 Indians and nine of Indian origin - from Italy arrived early morning.

"The evacuees have been screened at the airport and in the camp, as informed by the health staff deployed at the camp," a member of the response team said.

"Evacuees were assigned barracks, considering the safety measures. They were also counselled to take precautionary measures that would help in preventing the Covid-19 contagion to spread. The evacuees would be examined daily," the team member, who interacted with the doctor at the camp, said.

According to the district health department, since the evacuees have been brought to Haryana, therefore, it was mandatory for them to visit the camp.

Rajiv Arora, state's additional chief secretary, said, "We are in contact with the team at the army camp. However, the army will be taking care of the evacuees, from their screening to sample testing."

Of the 83 evacuees, 40 are male, 26 female, 16 children, and one infant. A team of doctors and staff members will monitor the evacuees. If any individual is suspected to be infected, he/she will be shifted to an isolation facility.

The evacuees will be allowed to leave after 14 days with their detailed documentation sent to the district or state surveillance units for further surveillance. Those found infected will be shifted to the isolation ward at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for further medical exams and recovery.

In February, more than 200 evacuees from Wuhan were also shifted to the quarantine facility.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- New Delhi

It is a concept that has been around since the 1950s when it originated in Germany (although some put its year of origin even earlier); in the decades since, there has been enough research to show that its cons far exceed its pros; yet it has lingered on.

It, of course, is the open office, and the coronavirus disease, Covid-19, may have finally killed it.

As the coronavirus pandemic spread across the globe in February, most workplaces around the country (and the world) began to implement rules among employees to avoid clusters, maintain physical distance, wear masks, sanitise hands. and avoid biometric entry. Many put in place strict deep cleaning protocols. And finally, all suddenly discovered the merits of WFH (work from home).

Once the lockdown is lifted and at least some employees look to rejoin work -- many will work from home; for instance, India's largest software services firm Tata Consultancy Services has said that up to 75% of its global workforce will work from home by 2025 -- one of the most important questions facing organisations is simply this: Can the open office plan, marked by a lack of cubicles such that all employees are required to sit or work in clusters, still make sense in a world ravaged by the ongoing pandemic?

The straightforward answer? No

The open office was aimed at improving collaboration and proficiency among employees. By the turn of the century, and after a few decades of cubicles, the open office became the norm. Different types of furniture, which demarcated different spaces of work, was a distinct feature of the open office floor plan: hubs for private meetings, longer tables around which larger groups could gather for meetings or scribbles, single or two-seater sofas for more private conversations and glass-walled meeting rooms that also offered the same transparency that marked the rest of the office. Work desks became workstations where clusters of employees would be seated, often sharing resources such as lamps and telephones, and that great luxury of the modern workplace -- coffee machines.

In a post-Covid-19 world, this translates into zero social distancing, not to mention multiple shared surfaces. In other words, heightened risk of transmission of Sars-Cov-2. Sorry, but that's how everyone thinks now.

"We are looking at a complete 180-degree shift [in offices]. The whole premise of how offices have been designed has been about collaboration and people coming together. Now the premise about people coming to office is about social distancing. So the whole focus will be on how to get people to interact in such a way. The communal spaces that the open office plan allowed for will not be possible anymore. It won't be possible for three people to sit on a sofa and have a discussion," said Aparna Piramal, author and columnist on business and design.

Neetish Sarda, founder of Smartworks, a firm that offers co-working spaces across nine cities in India, said that his company instituted workplace measures on March 20 itself, five days before the nationwide lockdown was announced. The measures, which included disinfecting all surfaces and floors, temperature checks using an infrared thermometer at entry points, placement of sanitizer bottles at "high touchpoints" and emphasis on hand wash/sanitization while entering office spaces,mandatory masks , sanitising packages, physical distancing , and preventing sharing of dishes or drinks and eatables, will also be enforced once the lockdown is lifted, he said.

Will companies redesign the office space altogether?

US-based furniture maker Steelcase recently released a report-cum-catalogue titled Navigating What's Next: The post-Covid workspace has some thoughts on that. "Planning for now also means retrofitting the workplace, based on a common-sense approach that adheres to governmental and global health guidelines, including physical distancing, adding barriers, cleaning and safety measures," it said.

"Work environments in the future will require reinvention as science-based evidence and emerging technologies offer new solutions. Planning paradigms of the past were driven by density and cost. Going forward they need to be based on the ability to adapt easily to possible economic, climate and health disruptions," the report added.

Some of the more immediate suggestions it offers includes reconfiguring desks, or pulling them apart to reduce face-to-face orientation, which can be achieved for instance, by turning workstations through 90-degree angles which would prevent workers from working directly across or behind one another. It also suggests using open spaces for meetings of more than five people as well as leveraging flexible furniture with movable whiteboards and screens to create boundaries.

Shields between people - such as those made of material like plexiglass or plastic - will make a comeback, Carol Bartz, former CEO of Yahoo! Inc., recently told a magazine. "I think people are going to want protection, plexiglass or whatever. There will also be more teleconferencing, absolutely less flying - you will teleconference with customers," the longtime Silicon Valley chief executive told Marketwatch in an interview.

Bimal Patel, director of Ahmedabad-based HCP Design, Planning and Management Private Limited - the architecture firm mandated to develop New Delhi's Central Vista - said that it was too early to think of lasting design changes.

"The most interesting thing that has emerged out of the present crisis is not so much this idea that we may need to make lasting [design] changes in the long run but that a lot of people, particularly in the service industries like our own, have discovered the potential of working online. We [at HCP] have discovered that there is quite a lot of stuff that we can manage to do (without coming into the office). [Of course,] when we do come, it will be because we need to sit around a table, and draw on the same drawing, or stand around a drawing and discuss it. There is work that we all need to do that will bring us close together."

In the short run, he said, the important thing for firms to figure out is how many people can actually stay away from the office so as to reduce the number of people coming in to work.

Though Patel may not agree with this, his remark highlights a larger question -- forget open offices, do we even need offices?

Around the world too, organisations are beginning to rethink work schedules of employees to stagger their return, and enable more people to work from home. Global commercial real estate services firm Cushman & Wakefield is testing a design concept called the Six Feet Office to help employees stay six feet apart. This includes signage that helps people recognise distance, usage of disposable desk covers, and ensuring that people walk only clockwise through the office space to minimize bumping into each other.

A PricewaterhouseCoopers pulse survey among 305 US companies published on April 27, found that more than three-quarters (77%) were putting new safety measures in place, while others said they were taking steps to promote physical distancing, such as reconfiguring workspaces (65%). More than half the companies (52%) were planning on changing shifts and alternating crews to reduce exposure, while 49% of the companies said they were planning to make remote work a permanent option for roles that allow it.

Indian furniture maker Godrej Interio has a four-person team, called the Ergonomics and Workspace Research Cell, whose mandate is to study issues commonly faced in offices - like noisy colleagues - and publish findings that eventually guide their product design team. When the global pandemic hit and offices around the globe and India began to close down, it began to study the challenges of working from home.

"Our aim is to reach 10,000 [respondents] so the research is still ongoing. We asked questions like, what are the issues people face; how can we help them stay productive? Our focus is on the health and well-being of people," said Sameer Joshi, an associate vice president in the marketing division of Godrej Interio who leads the team. Based on the findings, a "work from home" range of 40 furniture items will be rolled out once factories open, Joshi said.

"We are getting a lot of interest from corporates to supply furniture for home. So we're taking these learnings and quickly adapting [them] to reconfigure [existing] home furniture [models]. Indian homes are denser, there's often no space for a separate office. Same piece of furniture is used by multiple users, unlike the office. The solution has to be flexible enough so that it adapts to different users," Joshi said.

At a time when the world stares at yet another economic recession, it is crucial to ask whether firms will make such additional investments in office spaces or infrastructure to enable people to work from home. Piramal said it would be in their own interest to do so.

"For the first time, many organisations will have to think of their employees being in a kind of life and death situation [inside the office]. In most industries, you don't think about this, unless you're in the manufacturing space or in the armed forces. So, if you view it from that perspective, then certain investments have to be made. [Of course] somebody has to bear that cost. Maybe that cost may come out of employee salaries," she said.

Or they may simply come out of the savings companies hope to make from rent payments.

(With inputs from Abhishek Behl)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- The United States on Thursday called for "complete transparency" in the reporting of coronavirus data at the UN Security Council's first meeting on the pandemic, in an unmistakable reference to China, which it did not name but has previously accused of concealing the true extent of its outbreak.

China hit back calling for the need to oppose "stigmatization" of the crisis and "racial discrimination" in a clear reference to US efforts to pin the epidemic on China, calling it the "Chinese virus" or the "Wuhan virus", which is said to have fueled a spate hate crimes against Asian Americans.

The Security Council had been largely missing from action as the coronavirus tore through the world. China, which held the body's rotating presidency for March, did not allow a debate or a meeting arguing the pandemic was outside the mandate of the Security Council; it was backed by Russia and South Africa.

The UNSC finally met Thursday, virtually, at the request of nine of the 10 non-permanent members of the body, but failed to even consider two resolutions that it had expected to take up this week. The UN general assembly passed a resolution last week calling for "intensified international cooperation".

The UN's top decision-making clearly remains divided on its mandate and role in dealing with the pandemic that had killed more than 97,000 people worldwide and infected more than 1.6 million, with the United States and China, two of the body's five permanent members, hit the hardest.

"The United States reiterates today the need for complete transparency and the timely sharing of public health data and information within the international community," said Kelly Craft, the US ambassador to the UN.

She added that "accurate, science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics, and spread of the virus" was the most effective way to tackle the epidemic.

While the start of the epidemic in Wuhan, China last December is well documented, its spread around the world has been as a consequence of a combination of factors, with the urgency, or the lack of it, of the response of respective nations playing a key role; how soon they initiated mitigation measures, when they close their borders or shut down travel from affected areas.

The Trump administration has been criticized at home for responding late and inadequately, despite the president's claims to the contrary. And it has been seen to be trying to deflect responsibility by pinning it on China and, lately, the WHO, accusing it of aiding Beijing hide the extent of the outbreak. Trump has he re-evaluating US contribution to the WHO, which is the highest of all at more than $450 million.

Trump began calling the virus the "Chinese virus" and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo named it the "Wuhan virus". Trump has since stopped after he was widely criticized for fanning racial backlash against Asian Americans, who have been subjected to verbal abuse and whose businesses have faced boycott calls.

Calling for the international community to "act with solidarity" against the pandemic, Chinese ambassador to the UN Chen Xu, focussed on the Trump administration. "All parties should jointly oppose stigmatization and politicization of public health issue," he said. "The virus is common enemy for all mankind, which respects no borders and hurts all ethnic groups. Instigating racial discrimination and xenophobia, and creating divisions and confrontations deliberately should be abandoned."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 10 -- At the UN Security Council's virtual meeting on the coronavirus pandemic late on Thursday, the United States called for "science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics and spread of the virus".

"We cannot stress enough how important these methods are," Ambassador Kelly Kraft told the security council at its first closed-door meeting to discuss the pandemic that has killed 90,000 and infected 1.5 million people across 200 countries.

Ambassador Kelly Craft's reference on the origin of the virus echoes a point that US President Donald Trump and his administration has frequently made, variously labelling the Sars-C0V-2 pathogen the "Chinese Virus" to underscore its origin in the Chinese city of Wuhan and message that Beijing should have acted faster to warn the world.

China has blocked the pandemic from being discussed by the UN Security Council for all of March when it held the UNSC president's post, arguing that the pandemic was not within its mandate.

Washington, on the other hand, insisted that any council action refer to the origins of the virus, much to the annoyance of China. US President Trump had set the tone for his administration's stand at Thursday's council meeting this week when he put the World Health Organisation on notice, calling it "China centric" and giving the US bad advice.

"The United States reiterates today the need for complete transparency and the timely sharing of public health data and information within the international community. The most effective way to contain this pandemic is through accurate, science-based data collection and analysis of the origins, characteristics, and spread of the virus," Ambassador Kelly Craft said early in her remarks on the disease.

China's UN Ambassador Zhang Jun, according to news agency Reuters, told the Security Council that it should reject any acts of stigmatization and politicisation.

The UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who briefed the council about the pandemic, described it as the "gravest test" since the UN was founded 75 years ago.

The secretary-general reiterated that the United Nations faces "its gravest test" since the organization was founded 75 years ago from the pandemic and concluded saying: "This is the fight of a generation - and the raison d'etre of (the reason for) the United Nations itself."

The council had met on Thursday at the request of nine of the elected members. After the meeting the council issued a short statement, agreed by consensus, which expressed support for Guterres' efforts concerning "the potential impact of Covid-19 pandemic to conflict-affected countries."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- In a first, a Parliamentary standing committee will scrutinise the working of the transparency watchdogs, the Central Information Commission (CIC) and the state information commissions (SICs). The move has irked the right to information activists saying it "usurps" the powers of the state legislatives.

As the information commissions are statutory bodies, the CIC is required to submit annual reports to the Parliament and the SICs to state legislatives through its administrative wings, the Ministry of Personnel and Training in Centre and Services Department in the states. However, these annual reports are rarely discussed in Parliament or state legislatures even though members have raised questions over the efficacy of the information law through short duration discussion and zero hour, where a member can raise an issue approved by the Chair.

Rajya Sabha secretary general Utpal Kumar Singh has listed 12 issues for examination by the Parliamentary standing committee in the current financial year (2020-21), which includes a review of the working of the Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions. Others issued listed in agenda include reviews of working of virtual courts, Guardianship and Adoption laws and functioning of Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanisms.

Committee chairperson and BJP leader Bhupendra Yadav was not available for comments. A Rajya Sabha official privy to the development said the committee decides on the agenda after taking inputs from all members, which include 10 MPs from Rajya Sabha and 20 from Lok Sabha.

Also read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

"The committee has decided to review the information commission as there were lots of media reports about their functioning," he said.

The committee has powers to summon any official and seek suggestions from the non-government organisations to review the performance of any organization including the information commissions," officials said.

A report by Satark Nagarik Sangathan (SNS), released on eve of 15 years of RTI on October 9, 2020, said that around one-third of information commissions in India were headless, one-fourth of information commissioner posts were lying vacant and Jharkhand and Tripura information commissions were defunct.

The report said nine states, such as Uttar Pradesh, Telangana and Rajasthan, does not have a chief information commissioner, whose appointment under the RTI law is a statutory requirement. Since then, Rajasthan has appointed the chief information commissioner.

The Centre on November 10, 2020, filled the vacant post of chief information commissioner, since August 2020, with appointment of Yashwardhan Kumar Sinha.

Another report filed by Transparency International India on the same day said that around 33 million RTI applications were filed with various government departments across the country in the past 15 years, showing the widespread use of the watershed law that has empowered citizens to raise governance questions with public authorities. Only about 9 per cent of these RTI applications resulted in a second appeal, showing that over 90 per cent of the applicants were satisfied with the government response which, transparency law activists said, is the RTI's biggest achievement.

"We have no problem with the review of the chief information commission by a Parliamentary Standing Committee as the legislature has powers to review," said Anjali Bhardwaj of SNS. "We want the committee to give terms of reference of the review and the exercise should not be used to weaken the RTI Act. Earlier, the Central government had weakened the RTI law by bringing new service rules for information commissioners".

In October 2019, the Centre had notified rules downgrading information commissioner post from equivalence to election commissioners to a secretary in the government. The new rule also reduced the term of an information commission from five to three years and gave powers to the Centre to remove them, which Bhardwaj said had undermined the spirit of the RTI Act in name of rationalisation.

Venkatesh Nayak of the National Campaign for People Right to Information (NCPRI) asked how could Parliament review the functioning of the state information commissions as they come under the purview of the state governments and state legislatures.

"This is another attempt to usurp the powers of the state legislature, to which state information commissions submit their annual reports," Nayak said. Agreeing with him, Bhardwaj said the standing committee should take transparency and federalism into account while reviewing the functioning of the information commissions.

The importance of the RTI law for India could be gauged from Supreme Court 2019 judgment which said that the RTI has the potential to bring about good governance which is an integral part of a vibrant democracy. "Attaining good governance is also one of the visions of the Constitution. It also has a vital connection with the development," the court said.

The RTI is a Central law, which was adopted completely by the states without any substantial change. However, through rules, the state governments have brought in certain changes for appointing information commissions and functioning of the state information commissions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 8 -- Here are today's top news, analysis, and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

PM Modi hails demonetisation on anniversary, Congress observes betrayal day

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday hailed his government's demonetisation move four years ago, claiming that it gave a boost to transparency. In a tweet on Sunday, Modi said that the move helped reduce black money, increase tax compliance and formalisation and gave a boost to transparency and that the outcomes have been beneficial for the country's progress. Read more

PM Narendra Modi to initiate projects worth Rs 614cr in Varanasi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will inaugurate and lay the foundation of 30 projects worth Rs 614 crore in Varanasi via video conference on Monday, a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader said on Sunday. Read more

Kamala Harris' ancestral village celebrates her win with crackers, rangoli

A village in southern India also erupted with joy as Kamala Harris became the first woman vice president-elect of the United States. Harris traces a part of her ancestral roots to India. Read more

'Babar has done better': Mohammad Yousuf weighs in on the Virat Kohli-Babar Azam debate

When it comes to the finest batsmen in the world, the names Virat Kohli and Babar Azam are right up there. There was a time when Kohli, the India captain, used to be compared with Australia's Steve Smith, but lately, his comparison has shifted away from the former Australia captain and moved more towards Babar, Pakistan's limited-overs captain. Read more

Supernovas' Chamari Atapattu reveals eating these Indian dishes and defeating Trailblazers in Women's T20 Challenge

The last-ball thriller by Supernovas in the nailbiting match with the Trailblazers at the Women's T20 Challenge in Sharjah, UAE, garnered massive praises for Sri Lankan women cricket team captain Chamari Athapaththu. The left-handed opener Atapattu smashed five fours and four sixes to notch up 67 runs off 48 balls aggressively. Read more

Bengaluru cinemas-theatres face revenue loss, forced to close due to lack of footfall amid Covid-19

The Covid-19 pandemic has left a substantial impact on the film industry in 2020, film theatres in Bengaluru have been forced to close down due to a lack of revenues. Read more

Charlie Hunnam says he had Covid-19 earlier this year: 'I just lost my sense of taste and smell'

Actor Charlie Hunnam says he had contracted coronavirus "earlier this year". The 40-year-old actor said he had the virus at a time when loss of taste hadn't "really come to light as a symptom of mild Covid". Read more

Jennifer Lawrence dances in pyjamas, Spike Lee pops champagne with New Yorkers to celebrate Biden-Harris win

Hollywood celebrities such as Jennifer Lawrence, Chrissy Teigen, John Legend, Spike Lee and multiple others took to the streets to celebrate Joe Biden and Kamala Harris' US elections win on Saturday. While some danced in the streets, others joined the crowd to cheer for their favourite candidate. Read more

'Biden govt will be weak...': Decoding new US administration's India view

After 4 days of suspense, Democratic party leader Joe Biden was announced the winner of the 2020 US Presidential election. While there is excitement in many quarters in India regarding Vice President-elect Kamala Harris, who is of Indian origin, there are some concerns too. Watch here

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday gave in to mounting international pressure for a probe into the origin of Covid-19 and a review of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic. President Xi Jinping told the World Health Assembly that China had acted with 'openness, transparency and responsibility' when the disease, which has impacted billions of people across the world, first broke out.

President Xi, who had been invited to speak at the opening ceremony after the European Union-drafted resolution to push for a probe was supported by more than a 100 countries, said Beijing supported calls for a comprehensive review of the global response but felt this exercise should be carried out after the world gets a grip on the situation. The world's immediate priority should be saving people.

"China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to COVID-19 after it is brought under control to sum up experience and address deficiencies," President Xi told the assembly, the UN global health body's policy making body.

China had previously opposed calls for such investigations from Washington and Canberra.

The health assembly is expected to formally take up the resolution backed by over 120 countries tomorrow. "It is a formality now. No one is objecting to it now," a diplomat in Geneva told Hindustan Times.

President XI's argument at the assembly mirrored the one presented by World Health Organisation director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus after a barrage of criticism, much of it emanating from the United States in the initial days.

Tedros has been blamed for backing Beijing's narrative and showering praise on President XI for his handling of the disease around the same time that there was growing evidence of efforts to play down the spread of the disease in January. He was seen standing with Beijing again when the United States restricted flights from China.

There is no need for measures that "unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", the WHO chief said on February 3.

At Monday's World Health Assembly, President Xi reciprocated, telling the 194-member body that the WHO's contribution under Dr Tedros had been applauded by the international community.

"At this crucial juncture, to support WHO is to support international cooperation and the battle for saving lives as well," President Xi said.

The draft resolution that had been pushed by Australia and the European Union had proposed an inquiry into the animal to human transmission of the Sars-CoV-2

President Xi's comments, made during a video speech to the World Health Assembly, come as a resolution pushed by the European Union and Australia calling for a review of the origin and spread of the coronavirus disease picked up momentum.

By the time the truncated virtual meet started, the 54-nation Africa Group also extended support. This includes Ethiopia, home to Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus who made history in 2017 when he was elected WHO chief.

Tedros was not just the first African to hold the post but also the first WHO chief not to be a medical doctor. The former Ethiopian minister holds a masters in immunology of infectious diseases and a Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in community health.

Tedros, who spoke minutes after President XI, said the inquiry would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and provide recommendations for future preparedness.

"We all have lessons to learn from the pandemic. Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience. WHO is committed to transparency, accountability and continuous improvement," Tedros said.

The review must encompass responsibility of "all actors in good faith," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday gave in to mounting international pressure for a probe into the origin of Covid-19 and a review of the World Health Organisation's response to the pandemic. President Xi Jinping told the World Health Assembly that China had acted with 'openness, transparency and responsibility' when the disease, which has impacted billions of people across the world, first broke out.

President Xi, who had been invited to speak at the opening ceremony after the European Union-drafted resolution to push for a probe was supported by more than a 100 countries, said Beijing supported calls for a comprehensive review of the global response but felt this exercise should be carried out after the world gets a grip on the situation. The world's immediate priority should be saving people.

"China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to COVID-19 after it is brought under control to sum up experience and address deficiencies," President Xi told the assembly, the UN global health body's policy making body.

China had previously opposed calls for such investigations from Washington and Canberra.

The health assembly is expected to formally take up the resolution backed by over 120 countries tomorrow. "It is a formality now. No one is objecting to it now," a diplomat in Geneva told Hindustan Times.

President XI's argument at the assembly mirrored the one presented by World Health Organisation director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus after a barrage of criticism, much of it emanating from the United States in the initial days.

Tedros has been blamed for backing Beijing's narrative and showering praise on President XI for his handling of the disease around the same time that there was growing evidence of efforts to play down the spread of the disease in January. He was seen standing with Beijing again when the United States restricted flights from China.

There is no need for measures that "unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", the WHO chief said on February 3.

At Monday's World Health Assembly, President Xi reciprocated, telling the 194-member body that the WHO's contribution under Dr Tedros had been applauded by the international community.

"At this crucial juncture, to support WHO is to support international cooperation and the battle for saving lives as well," President Xi said.

The draft resolution that had been pushed by Australia and the European Union had proposed an inquiry into the animal to human transmission of the Sars-CoV-2

President Xi's comments, made during a video speech to the World Health Assembly, come as a resolution pushed by the European Union and Australia calling for a review of the origin and spread of the coronavirus disease picked up momentum.

By the time the truncated virtual meet started, the 54-nation Africa Group also extended support. This includes Ethiopia, home to Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus who made history in 2017 when he was elected WHO chief.

Tedros was not just the first African to hold the post but also the first WHO chief not to be a medical doctor. The former Ethiopian minister holds a masters in immunology of infectious diseases and a Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in community health.

Tedros, who spoke minutes after President XI, said the inquiry would come "at the earliest appropriate moment" and provide recommendations for future preparedness.

"We all have lessons to learn from the pandemic. Every country and every organisation must examine its response and learn from its experience. WHO is committed to transparency, accountability and continuous improvement," Tedros said.

The review must encompass responsibility of "all actors in good faith," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 16 -- India provided support for a slew of connectivity and cross-border development projects and extended currency swaps and financial support in the region spanning from Bangladesh to the Maldives, even as China invested more than $4 billion in the neighbourhood this year. China's investments and contracts remain cloaked in opacity, with virtually no official figures available, though reliable estimates showed $1.93 billion, or almost half of its investments and construction contracts in India's neighbourhood, had gone to its traditional ally Pakistan.

India's support for connectivity and development projects in the neighbourhood picked up pace soon after the border standoff with China emerged in the open in May, and New Delhi has pumped in hundreds of millions of dollars for key schemes and to extend financial support to the governments of countries such as Sri Lanka and the Maldives that were impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Indian side provided currency swap facilities of $400 million each to Sri Lanka and the Maldives to bolster economic revival. India also provided a soft loan of $250 million to the Maldives as budgetary support.

Another $500 million, including a grant of $100 million, was provided for the Greater Male Connectivity Project, which is set to be largest infrastructure project in the Maldives with 6.7 kilometre-long bridge and causeway links between the national capital and three islands.

New Delhi also handed over 10 broad gauge locomotives to Dhaka, launched the first cross-border container train service and began shipping goods from Kolkata to Tripura in the northeast via Bangladesh's Chattogram port.

Also read: India slips a spot in UN's human development index, ranks at 131 now

Some eight railway projects are being implemented for Bangladesh under lines of credit, including the $78-million Kulaura-Shahbazpur rail line and the $389 million Khulna-Mongla rail line that are expected to be completed in 2021. During their virtual summit on December 17, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Bangladesh counterpart Sheikh Hasina are set to launch the revived Chilahati-Haldibari railway link, which was snapped during the 1965 war with Pakistan.

Last month, work was launched on the third integrated check post on the Nepal border, which is being built at Nepalgunj at a cost of almost $20 million to streamline and boost cross-border trade. In August, India provided $5 million under a border area development programme to Myanmar, where the country's total development cooperation is worth almost $1.4 billion.

According to figures collated by the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), which closely tracks China's investments and construction projects around the world, Chinese investments in India's neighbourhood this year included $1.93 billion in Pakistan, $1.25 billion in Bangladesh, $450 million in Sri Lanka and $280 million in Myanmar.

The investments in Bangladesh, Myanmar and Sri Lanka were all under China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), according to AEI.

Amit Bhandari, a fellow at Gateway House who tracks China's economic activities in the region, said the figures could be significantly higher, given the lack of transparency regarding such investments, especially by Chinese state-run firms.

"Recent estimates showed 60 per cent of the FDI in Pakistan, more than 40 per cent in Myanmar and more than 30 per cent in Sri Lanka came from China, which has a bigger cheque book to throw around. Such large investments in what aren't vibrant economies are aimed at generating geo-political influence but also lead to badly designed projects that make problems worse. For instance, rates for power generated by China-backed projects in Pakistan are 20 per cent to 50 per cent more than in India," he said.

Also read: WHO's team to go to China in January for Covid-19 origin probe

India, Bhandari said, had improved its performance but is yet to match China in implementing big-ticket projects. Experts also have concerns about the pace of work on India-backed projects despite the external affairs ministry streamlining its development partnership administration by creating sections that focus on specific projects and regions.

For instance, though the 130-kilometre-long India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline was launched in September 2018, the ground-breaking for the construction of the pipeline to supply fuel from Numaligarh Refinery in Assam to Dinajpur in Bangladesh was done only on December 4 this year.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- US President Donald Trump and his administration's consistent attacks on the World Health Organisation chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus have set up a face-off at the proposed annual meeting of the World Health Assembly on May 18.

Trump, who has long accused the Tedros-led WHO of playing into China's hands over the coronavirus disease, this week suspended funding to the global health body. By then, the Ethopian microbiologist who was elected to lead the WHO in 2017 with support from Xi Jinping's China, had already galvanised support from African and most Non-Aligned countries.

To be sure, diplomats based in Geneva where the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly take place told Hindustan Times that the three-hour long video conference would end up in an anodyne resolution calling for a global fight against the spread of Covid-19 with all member nations uploading their statements. Even the most hard-hit European countries and the UK have desisted from criticising the WHO director general at this point, saying this isn't the time to play politics but fight the virus.

Also Read: Geostrategic paralysis in face of Covid-19 could open a role for India | Opinion

However, every representative of the 194-member body is expected to scrutinise the US statement as President Donald Trump has led the attack against Dr Tedros Ghebreyesus, accusing him of playing into the hands of the Chinese government and downplaying the threat posed by the deadly virus that has claimed 157,000 lives worldwide.

President Trump on Sunday went a step ahead when he warned of consequences to the Xi Jinping regime if it was found that China had deliberately suppressed facts about the origin and spread of the virus that originated from Wuhan province.

The US charges against WHO were largely summed up by the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the US Congress, which in a letter on April 9 to Dr Ghebreyesus made it clear that the organisation was "no longer serving the needs of the world and instead taking its cues from China."

Also Read: Reforming the World Health Organization | Opinion

While India has not formally taken a stand against Dr Ghebreyesus over its assessment that the focus should be Covid-19 and not WHO director general, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was first to indirectly question the body during a G-20 meeting last month when he wondered if a 20th century body would be able to handle the new-age diseases.

The US position is in contrast to the stand taken by African Union and countries and Non-Aligned Movement. Dr Ghebreyesus hails from Ethiopia, which has been a member of the movement for nearly 40 years.

The US is unhappy that as late as January 14, 2020, the WHO denied that there was community transmission in Wuhan despite warnings of human-to-human transmission by a non member Taiwan the previous month.

The WHO, the Trump administration believes, was late to declare Covid-19 as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) January 30, 2020.

By this time the disease had infected almost 10,000 people. In fact, Dr Ghebreyesus congratulated the Chinese government for taking extraordinary measures to contain the outbreak.

The WHO, despite declaring Covid-19 a PHEIC and extensive evidence of transmission through travel, did not warn any country against travel, to or from China. Between December 31 and January 31, as many as 430,000 people flew on direct flights from China to the US.

Covid-19 was only declared a pandemic on March 11 after it had raced around the world, sickening nearly 120,000 people in 110 countries and killing close to 4,400.

However, much to the chagrin of Donald Trump and US lawmakers, WHO routinely praised China for its efforts to combat the spread of Covid-19 contrary to the accusations that Beijing had underreported the threat and gagged professionals such as doctors and journalists for speaking about the severity of the disease.

Even though the World Health Assembly in Geneva may end up in a very diluted outcome. diplomats expect that there would be increasing pressure on China to respond to criticism that it hasn't been transparent enough about the disease and the WHO, for the steps that it should have taken.

At the UN Security Council meeting that belatedly discussed the pandemic last week, the US drove home the point by calling for "complete transparency" in the reporting of coronavirus data, a clear reference to China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 8 -- The chorus for transparency and investigation into the outbreak of the coronavirus disease is growing louder in the run up to the truncated session of the World Health Assembly 10 days later.

The disease, which originated in China late last year, has killed more than a quarter of a million people across the world in a little over four months. China has been blamed by many countries for not giving the world a heads up about the disease that could have minimised its spread. Questions have also been asked of the World Health Organisation that has been accused of being overly deferential to China.

The loudest criticism of China and WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has come from the United States President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Michael Pompeo. Last month, the US suspended funding to the WHO to drive home the point.

But the United States isn't the only one upset about China and WHO's role.

Over the last week and more, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen also lent the grouping's backing to calls for an investigation into the origin of Covid outbreak.

Also Read: China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

This week, the European Union declared that it would move a resolution at the World Health Assembly for a timely review of the international response to the coronavirus pandemic including the World Health Organisation's performance.

Diplomats in Washington and Geneva suggest that the resolution, which was being drafted in consultation with a large number of countries, presented a huge test for China in the run up to the global health body's annual meeting.

Beijing has been under fire over its early handling of the virus, which has pushed the global economy toward recession as it spreads around the world. Cases have been reported in more than 210 countries and territories since they were first identified in China in December 2019.

British defence secretary Ben Wallace too questioned the role of China in the Covid-19 outbreak, asserting that China needs to be open and transparent about what it learnt, its shortcomings also successes.

Ben Wallace's remarks are seen in context of British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab's statement in April that underscored the need to ask "hard questions" about how the coronavirus came about and how it could have been stopped.

Swedish Health Minister Lena Hallengren made it clear last month that her government wanted the origin of the virus probed besides an investigation into the WHO's role in the pandemic.

It is in this context, diplomats in Washington said, that China appeared to have started approaching governments in countries for support in face of public criticism. This strategy was outed in Germany where Chinese diplomats approached German government officials to request them to make "positive public statements" on China's handling of the disease. Officials in Berlin had declined the request.

Beijing has had to battle accusations that it had attempted to cover up the outbreak of the disease and told the world about the disease much too late. For instance, questions are being asked why Chinese authorities stopped flights from Wuhan to the rest of the country after the Covid-19 outbreak but allowed international flights. Or why it clamped down on research by Chinese scientists into the origins of the virus.

Authorities had reprimanded doctors including Li Wenliang, who later passed away, for sharing warnings about the coronavirus infection risk in WeChat groups in late December.

Criticism about this approach to censor information reignited on Friday after a line that referred to the coronavirus disease being detected in China and spreading to the world was removed from an article written for a Chinese daily by 27 European ambassadors to commemorate the 45th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and China.

But there have been several instances of Chinese diplomats posted around the world launching attacks on the media for what they describe as efforts to politicise the Covid-19 outbreak.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 26 -- In handing over the reins of Tokyo 2020 Organising Committee to seven-time Olympian Seiko Hashimoto, Japan will be hoping for some lady luck - besides her vast experience in sports, public life and administration - to a competition mired in crisis.

In exactly a month's time, Hashimoto, who until now was serving as minister of state for the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games in the Japanese Cabinet, will have her first big task at hand: conducting a safe and secure torch relay. The Olympics torch relay will start from Fukushima Prefecture on March 25 and travel to 47 prefectures in 121 days before culminating at the grand opening ceremony at the National Stadium in Tokyo on July 23. With several prefectures in Japan still under a state of emergency due to a spike in cases, strict Covid-19 counter-measures have been announced for the relay.

Taking over as new head of the Games, after her predecessor, 83-year-old former Japanese Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori resigned over sexist remarks, Hashimoto has brought positivity. International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach described her as the 'prefect choice' for the position as Tokyo enters the extremely difficult home stretch for the once-deferred Games scheduled from July 23 to August 8 this year.

Hashimoto's name has origins in Olympic flame. Her tryst with the Games began with her birth in 1964 in Hokkaido, just five days before the opening of Tokyo Summer Olympics -- the first Games in Asia and an event where Japan presented a new image of itself as a peace-loving and resilient nation after world war trauma.

Awe-struck watching the opening ceremony of Tokyo 1964 at the National Stadium, Hashimoto's father decided to name his new born Seiko, which is derived from "Orinpikku Seika" or Olympic flame in Japanese.

"I think for my whole life, the Olympics has been part of it. My father had the dream that his child would become an Olympian in the future. So, he gave me the name 'Seiko'. From then on, the Olympics has become my lifework," said Hashimoto in an interview published by Tokyo 2020 Paralympic Games.

When it came to the Olympics there was no stopping Hashimoto. She competed in speed skating at four Winter Olympics, from 1984-1994 and became the first Japanese woman to win an Olympic medal in Winter Games by finishing third in women's 1,500-metre speed skating at the 1992 Games in Albertville, France. If that wasn't enough, Hashimoto then took to cycling and participated in three Summer Olympics between 1988 and 1996.

First elected to the House of Councillors in 1995 Hashimoto charted out a successful career in politics, becoming a strong voice for women's empowerment in Japan. In that sense, she has moved forward with urgency and put plans in place to boost the presence of women on the Tokyo 2020 Board to 40 per cent, a move welcomed by the IOC.

Public mood in Japan is against hosting the Games, opinion polls say. A survey also showed more than half of Japanese firms want the Games to be either cancelled or postponed.

Hashimoto knows the difficulties of the task at hand. "How can we get through the Covid-19 situation? What are the significance and values of hosting Tokyo 2020? These are the questions I am facing now. With the Tokyo Olympic Games and Paralympic Games, I wish to show people the beauty of the athletes' motion and the beauty rooted deeply within them," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- China will hold its most important political event, the annual session of its rubber-stamp Parliament in the third week of May after postponing it for more than 10 weeks because of the Covid-19 outbreak, official media announced Wednesday.

The reconvening of the Two Sessions, as it is known here, on May 21 signals that China has effectively brought the outbreak in control.

The decision to allow thousands to come to Beijing from across China is a show of confidence by the Chinese government as it tries to show to the world its success in containing the virus.

Official news agency, Xinhua said China would begin its annual Two Sessions meeting on May 21, when thousands of delegates to the National People's Congress (NPC), the legislature, as well as to the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), the top political consultative body, gather in the capital for around 10 days.

The sessions are usually held early March.

The upcoming session, however, could be shortened, a separate state media report said, quoting Parliamentarian delegates.

During the choreographed meeting, about 3,000 national legislators from across China gather in Beijing to review work reports from the Communist Party of China-led central government as well as the country's highest courts and the budget including for national defence for the year ahead.

The announcement was made as Beijing health authorities said on Wednesday that the Capital's emergency response level to Covid-19 would be lowered from the first to the second level from Thursday.

On Wednesday, the Chinese mainland reported reports 22 new confirmed Covid-19 cases, with 21 imported cases, and 26 new asymptomatic ones in the past 24 hours.

No deaths from the disease has been reported from the disease for nearly two weeks, health authorities said.

China-Australia spat

Meanwhile, the ongoing diplomatic tussle between China and Australia seem set to deepen with Prime Minister Scott Morrison saying it was "entirely reasonable" for the world to ask for an international assessment into the origins of the pandemic.

The coronavirus first emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year before spreading to rest of China and the world: Until Wednesday it had killed more than 2 lakh people, sickened over 3 million and battered the world economy to its worst state in several decades.

Morrison's call for an international inquest has been aggressively opposed by Chinese diplomats who have said Australia should stop resorting to "petty tricks".

On Wednesday, the Chinese embassy in Canberra, said on its website that details of a call between the Chinese envoy and Australian officials had first been "obviously leaked by some Australian officials" and it needed to set the record straight.

"The Embassy of China doesn't play petty tricks, this is not our tradition. But if others do, we have to reciprocate," an embassy spokesperson said in the statement.

Chinse state media has strongly criticised Australia's stand.

Hu Xijin, the editor-in-chief of the nationalistic Global Times said on Chinese social media that Australia was always making trouble.

"It is a bit like chewing gum stuck on the sole of China's shoes. Sometimes you have to find a stone to rub it off," Hu wrote.

China is Australia's largest trading partner and Canberra has accused Beijing of economic coercion after the Chinese ambassador threatened a boycott of Australian goods and universities by Chinese citizens.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 12 -- Global money laundering watchdog - Financial Action Task Force (FATF) - has claimed that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by the terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking assistance, according to report released by it.

It warns that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as fund their terror operations.

"In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF says in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

Tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens, the report adds.

Many countries are reporting an "overall" increase in banknote withdrawals, which the FATF claims is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," the FATF states.

Some of the countries have also reported an increase in fundraising scams where criminals posing as international organizations or charities circulate emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fundraising campaigns (purportedly for research, victims and/or products), according to the report.

The health crisis, the Paris-based body says, is also impacting the government and private sectors' abilities to implement anti-money laundering measures and counter terrorist financing as well as international cooperation. Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extradition are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter terror financing (AML/CFT) 'on-site' inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections. Several countries, according to the report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators. In fact, some Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs) in lower capacity countries are either significantly "reducing their operations" or even "shutting down completely". There is also reporting of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to suspension of trials and hearings.

"There are reports that diversion of law enforcement and security resources to Covid-19 responses in high-risk, poorly resourced countries, may embolden terrorists and terrorist financiers in their activities," FATF states.

While banks worldwide are trying to follow anti-money laundering measures, several countries have flagged that there is increased activity in non-banking sectors like online gambling, the insurance sector, dealers in precious metals and stones and securities, while there is decreased activity in other sectors like real estate and casinos.

The movement of migrant workers in various countries - India is one of them - will particularly cause disruption for money value transfer service sector due to confinement measures and company shutdowns.

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," FATF notes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

DRDO develops UV disinfection tower to fight Covid-19

In its latest contribution to the fight against coronavirus disease Covid-19, the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has pitched in with an ultra-violet disinfection tower that can be used for sanitising places such as airports, shopping malls, metro stations, hotels, factories and offices, two officials said on Monday. Read more

'Better to not try your luck...': Mumbai Police's witty Covid-19 message

In another attempt to drive home Centre's message to stay at home during the Covid-19 lockdown, Mumbai Police took inspiration from the game of Ludo. In a tweet, the Mumbai Police posted an image of the board game with all the tokens housed in their respective 'homes'. Read more

Admit patients without asking for Covid-free certificate: Bengal govt to private hospitals

West Bengal recorded 17 coronavirus disease (Covid-19) related deaths between Friday and Sunday - the highest toll in 72 hours in the state - as a worried state government ordered all private hospitals and clinics to admit all patients without seeking certificates showing that they have not contracted SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease, or face strict penal action. Read more

Women Jan Dhan account holders start getting second instalment of Rs 500 from today

Women Jan Dhan bank account holders started getting the second instalment of Rs 500 from Monday as part of the Rs 1.7 lakh crore Prime Minister Jan Kalyan Yojana package announced by Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman on March 26. Read more

Global markets drop, spooked by China-US row over Covid-19

Shares took a turn for the worse on Monday as tensions between the Trump administration and China over the origins and handling of the coronavirus pandemic rattled investors. Read more

Gautam Gambhir picks all-time India Test XI, chooses Anil Kumble as skipper

Former Indian cricket team batsman Gautam Gambhir revealed his choices for an all-time India Test XI and he decided to go with Anil Kumble as the skipper of the side ahead of MS Dhoni and Virat Kohli. Read more

The Taste with Vir: Covid is a crisis not Armageddon

I am always a little intrigued by the casual ease with which politicians discuss the fate of the hospitality industry. When the industry does pop up in their consciousness it is nearly always in the context of safety. Read more

Mi 10, Xiaomi's 108-megapixel camera phone to launch in India on May 8

Xiaomi on Monday said its Mi 10 smartphone will launch in India on May 8. The company earlier this morning had resumed taking prepaid orders and delivery to "Green" and "Orange" zones during the Lockdown 3.0. Read more

Watch| 'Delhi should have minimum relaxations': Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 13 -- The global money-laundering and terrorist financing watchdog has warned that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking aid.

In a report released last week, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) cautioned that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as funding their terror operations. "In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF said in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

The report said FATF members highlighted that tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens. Many countries are reporting an overall increase in cash withdrawals, which FATF said is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe-haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," it said.

It added some of the countries have also reported an increase in fund-raising scams involving criminals, who have posed as international organisations or charities and circulated emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fund-raising campaign (purportedly for research, victims and/or products).

The FATF said the health crisis is also impacting the abilities of governments and private sectors in implementing anti-money laundering measure as well as international cooperation.

Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extraditions, are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter-terror financing (AML/CFT) on-site inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections.

Pakistan last month got a four-month reprieve for meeting a deadline set by the FATF to counter terror financing as the multilateral watchdog announced a temporary suspension of its activities because of the Covid-19 crisis. Several nations, according to report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators. There are reports of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to the suspension of trials.

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," the FATF said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 26 -- The Trinamool Congress (TMC) has announced a minimum income scheme for the poorest families of Bengal in its election manifesto for the upcoming state elections, as has the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) in Tamil Nadu. The Congress, in Kerala and Assam, has also talked about a minimum income guarantee scheme, and the Bharatiya Janata Party too has promised a variant of income assistance in its election manifesto.

Political parties of all hues, across states, are embracing the idea of a basic minimum income for citizens. It may be tempting to dismiss this as hollow election propaganda. But it is no coincidence that different parties have all converged on this one core idea. View this along with the other recent nativistic policy announcements by the governments of Haryana and Jharkhand to reserve jobs in their states for local citizens, and there emerges a larger pattern.

"Household income" is perhaps the most critical political, economic and social issue in the country today. The jobs and income situation is staggeringly dismal. In the absence of any other concrete and immediate solution to boost incomes or create new jobs, political parties are seeking to address this issue by providing income assistance to citizens in the form of cash and/or in the form of job reservations.

The idea of a basic minimum income in India has so far been discussed primarily as an economic idea to reform government welfare delivery and make it more efficient in the form of cash transfers. This is a misplaced positioning of the idea.

The notion that no family should fall below a certain minimum income threshold, which can guarantee a life of dignity and respect in society is, foremost, a political-philosophy construct. A basic minimum income is not an efficiency tool for governance to replace in-kind welfare with cash assistance. It is a doctrine for a harmonious society where the gap between the haves and the have-nots does not become so enormously large that it threatens to erupt into violence and cause social disorder. Politics is the medium to resolve the contests of such forces and hence, the idea of a basic minimum income in a society should primarily be championed by political leaders.

In India, the idea of a basic minimum income was first articulated to the mass public and championed politically during the 2019 elections, when the then Congress president, Rahul Gandhi, unveiled the Nyuntam Aay Yojana (Nyay) initiative. Under Nyay, the woman head of the poorest 20% of India's families would get Rs.6,000 a month as income assistance for her family directly in her bank account or through some other easily accessible window.

The logic behind the numbers of Nyay was that in today's India, a family needs a basic minimum income of Rs.12,000 a month to lead a life of dignity and respect, which represents the 20th percentile of the household income distribution in India. The poorest one-fifth of India's households, on average, earn only Rs.6,000 a month. Hence, the gap between their average current earnings and what it takes to live a life of dignity is Rs.6,000 ( Rs.12,000- Rs.6,000) a month. Nyay was envisaged as a federal scheme to be funded by both the Centre and the states and implemented by the states.

A cheeky counter-factual would be that had India elected the Congress in May 2019, and had a functioning Nyay scheme by April 2020, when the pandemic hit, millions of families may not have had to struggle to eat or millions of migrants may not have been desperate to walk back to their homes for food and income. A sudden lack of income was the biggest damage inflicted on families by the lockdown and Nyay would have provided the required safety net.

A Nyay-type programme is perhaps even more critically required in post-Covid-19 times where economic recovery is extremely skewed in favour of the wealthy and exacerbates India's already large income inequality. The finance minister took great pride in announcing a positive headline Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in the October to December 2020 quarter. But, even in the shorter month of February 2021, 28 million families, with absolutely no other source of income, pleaded for work at paltry minimum wages under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS).

This was the highest demand for MGNREGS work in the last seven months, just when India's economy was apparently recovering strongly. Clearly, these 28 million families did not experience any of the robustness of the economic recovery that the government waxed eloquent about. A recent report indicated that 75 million more Indians may have slipped back into poverty post-Covid, just when the financial markets have blessed the richest Indians with even greater wealth.

The basic income proposals announced by the various parties may vary in its details from Nyay but the idea is the same. However, in a post-Goods and Services Tax (GST) era, states have very little fiscal autonomy or the money to be able to fund and implement their own income schemes on a large-scale. Hence, any version of an income scheme designed and funded only by the state without assistance from the Centre will be limited in its impact.

The very idea of a minimum basic income is to set an income floor and provide a cushion for people that slip below it. The resurgence in Nyay-type ideas is neither mere populism nor a coincidence. It is a manifestation of the ominous income inequality that threatens to rupture our social disorder.

I recall a meeting in 2019 when Rahul Gandhi told some of us, "Political parties will soon have to address income inequality with a concrete plan such as a minimum income threshold", which laid the origins for Nyay. Similar to his early warning about Covid-19, his call for a political embrace of a minimum income initiative has proved to be prophetic.

Praveen Chakravarty is a political economist and senior office-bearer of the Congress

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- China on Thursday reported the first Covid-19-related death in eight months as it logged the highest single-day tally of 138 new infections since March last year for Wednesday.

More than 28 million people are under lockdown in the north of the country and one province has declared an emergency, as daily Covid-19 numbers climb after months of reporting only a handful of cases.

The National Health Commission (NHC) did not share details about the latest death, except to say that it occurred in Hebei province, the worst-hit province in the latest resurgence of cases, where the government has placed several cities under lockdown.

The last death from Covid-19 in China was recorded on May 17 last year.

The Chinese mainland reported 138 new confirmed cases and 78 asymptomatic ones on Thursday for the previous 24 hours.

Of all the confirmed cases, 81 come from Hebei, including 75 in its capital city Shijiazhuang. The province has 16 active severe cases in hospitals.

In a sign of the new wave spreading across the country, northeastern Heilongjiang declared an "emergency state" on Wednesday, telling its 37.5 million residents not to leave the province unless absolutely necessary and saying public gatherings would be cancelled.

The death comes as China readies for the arrival of an expert team of scientists from the World Health Organization (WHO), who will start a politically sensitive investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The team is expected to arrive in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the new coronavirus was first detected in late 2019, directly from Singapore on Thursday.

Peter Ben Embarek, the WHO's top expert on animal diseases that cross to other species who went to China on a preliminary mission last July, is leading the 10 independent experts, a WHO spokesperson said.

Hung Nguyen, a Vietnamese biologist and part of the 10-member team, told Reuters that he did not expect any restrictions on the group's work in China, but cautioned against finding firm answers.

Embarek said the group would start with a two-week quarantine at a hotel due to China's border requirements.

"And then after the two weeks, we would be able to move around and meet our Chinese counterparts in person and go to the different sites that we will want to visit," he said.

"The idea is to advance a number of studies that were already designed and decided upon some months ago to get us a better understanding of what happened," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 23 -- India on Monday briefed the envoys of a select group of countries, including the US and Russia, on the Pakistani origins of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who attempted to carry out an attack in Jammu and Kashmir last week.

The group of envoys, which also included the heads of mission of France and Japan, were provided a "detailed information docket" with details of the planned attack and a list of items and ammunition recovered from the terrorists that "clearly indicated their Pakistani origins", said a person familiar with developments who spoke on condition of anonymity.

The envoys were briefed on how the terrorists sneaked into India through an underground tunnel in Samba sector, and how preliminary investigations by police and intelligence agencies and markings on AK-47 rifles and other items have led India to conclude the terrorists belonged to Pakistan-based JeM.

ALSO READ | Nagrota encounter: India pulls up Pakistan envoy on J&K plot

The briefing by foreign secretary Harsh Shringla on the attempted attack at Nagrota in Jammu and Kashmir that was foiled on November 19 also focused on the "implications of the incident on security, diplomacy and the battle against terrorism", the person said.

While the envoys of at least three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council were invited for the briefing, the Chinese ambassador was not among those present, people familiar with developments said.

On November 20, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said security forces in Jammu and Kashmir had foiled a plan by JeM to "wreak major havoc and destruction" by killing four members of the group and seizing a large cache of weapons and explosives. The four terrorists were gunned down during a gun battle on the Jammu-Srinagar highway a day earlier.

India had summoned Pakistan's charge d'affaires Aftab Hassan Khan on November 21 and warned New Delhi is "committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard its national security". India also demanded that Pakistan should desist from its policy of supporting terrorists and dismantle the terror infrastructure on its territory.

ALSO READ | Nagrota attack: MEA expresses 'serious concern', says attempt to derail DDC election

Monday's briefing was the first of several to be conducted by the external affairs ministry for small groups of envoys in view of the Covid-19 situation. Several secretaries in the ministry will brief heads of missions from countries in their areas of jurisdiction.

"The idea is to share information on the attempted attack as widely as possible with the international community," said a second person.

The envoys were told during the briefing that the incident of November 19 was part of Pakistan's ongoing terror campaign in Jammu and Kashmir and that in 2020 itself, there were some 200 incidents of terrorist violence while 199 terrorists had been neutralised.

Details of JeM's involvement in similar incidents in the past were also shared with the envoys.

"In terms of the bigger picture, it is clear the terrorists were planning the biggest terror attack in India since the Pulwama suicide bombing of February 2019 and the implications can be guessed," said the first person.

"This is part of ongoing efforts to sabotage the district development council elections in Jammu and Kashmir and carry out a terror attack aimed to coincide with the anniversary of the 2008 Mumbai terror strikes," the person added.

The envoys were also sensitised to India's concerns regarding Pakistan's sustained efforts to destabilise the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and to subvert local elections and democracy, the people said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 24 -- India on Monday briefed the envoys of a select group of countries, including the US and Russia, on the Pakistani origins of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who attempted to carry out an attack in Jammu and Kashmir last week.

The group of envoys, which also included the heads of mission of France and Japan, were provided a "detailed information docket" with details of the planned attack and a list of items and munitions recovered from the terrorists that "clearly indicated their Pakistani origins", said a person familiar with the development who spoke on condition of anonymity.

The envoys were briefed on how the terrorists sneaked into India through an underground tunnel in the Samba sector, and how preliminary investigations by police and intelligence agencies and markings on AK-47 rifles and other items have led India to conclude the terrorists belonged to Pakistan-based JeM.

The briefing by foreign secretary Harsh Shringla on the attempted attack at Nagrota in Jammu and Kashmir that was foiled on November 19 also focused on the "implications of the incident on security, diplomacy and the battle against terrorism", the person said.

While the envoys of at least three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council were invited for the briefing, the Chinese ambassador was not among those present, people familiar with the development said.

On November 20, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said security forces in Jammu and Kashmir had foiled a plan by JeM to "wreak major havoc and destruction" by killing four members of the group and seizing a large cache of weapons and explosives. The four terrorists were gunned down during a gun battle on the Jammu-Srinagar highway a day earlier.

India had summoned Pakistan's charge d'affaires Aftab Hassan Khan on November 21 and warned that New Delhi is "committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard its national security". India also demanded that Pakistan should desist from its policy of supporting terrorists and dismantle the terror infrastructure on its territory.

Monday's briefing was the first of several to be conducted by the external affairs ministry for small groups of envoys in view of the Covid-19 situation. Several secretaries in the ministry will brief heads of missions from countries in their areas of jurisdiction.

"The idea is to share information on the attempted attack as widely as possible with the international community," said a second person.

The envoys were told during the briefing that the incident of November 19 was part of Pakistan's ongoing terror campaign in Jammu and Kashmir and that in 2020 itself, there were some 200 incidents of terrorist violence while 199 terrorists had been neutralised.

Details of JeM's involvement in similar incidents in the past were also shared with the envoys.

"In terms of the bigger picture, it is clear the terrorists were planning the biggest terror attack in India since the Pulwama suicide bombing of February 2019 and the implications can be guessed," said the first person.

Forty Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers were killed in the Pulwama attack.

"This is part of ongoing efforts to sabotage the district development council elections in Jammu and Kashmir and carry out a terror attack aimed to coincide with the anniversary of the 2008 Mumbai terror strikes," the first person added.

The envoys were also sensitised to India's concerns regarding Pakistan's sustained efforts to destabilise the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and to subvert local elections and democracy, the people said.

...

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 25 -- As India goes into a 21-day lockdown to keep around 1.3 billion people at home, it's important to note that not even China where the novel coronavirus first emerged in late December and then rapidly spread tried to put all of its 1.4 billion people behind locked doors.

It locked down one province, Hubei, with around 60 million people, and implemented tough restrictions on movement and banned mass gatherings and closed down schools and tourist spots in the rest of the country.

Beijing, the sprawling capital of more than 21 million, for example, was never under a lockdown - it put in place restrictions on residential communities including not allowing outsiders from coming into apartment complexes, made wearing masks mandatory and urged people not to mingle.

(Those restrictions are still in place as of Wednesday though signs of normalcy are now more evident on the streets of Beijing.)

Beijingers, and the residents of other regions and cities in China were not stopped from stepping out, buying essentials, and returning home.

Follow coronavirus live updates here.

Public transport including the subways and buses and taxis operated.

The delivery systems including couriers operated unhindered too - only residents had to step out of their homes to pick up delivery as courier personnel were not allowed inside apartment complexes or homes.

But in Wuhan, a city of 11 million, it was a different story.

In that city, where the virus first emerged last year, communities were sealed off, internal transport was suspended and people were not allowed outside their homes.

How did Wuhan sustain the lockdown for weeks?

Thousands of volunteers who signed up to help communities were deployed.

At the peak of the lockdown, one member of each family was allowed to step out of their homes to pick up the deliveries of essentials, which were brought to the gate of the community by registered volunteers.

According to official statistics quoted by news agency Xinhua, the city has 1.5 million registered volunteers.

"From medical aid, food, and goods assistance and psychological support to transport and community services, thousands of volunteers responded quickly after the city was locked down to curb the spread of the deadly virus," Xinhua reported earlier this month.

Until the first week of March, the Communist Party of China's (CPC) Youth League had trained thousands of volunteers to ".serve as deliverymen, drivers, coordinators and community workers in grocery stores, neighborhoods, designated hospitals and makeshift hospitals to receive infected patients".

By that week, 7148 communities in Wuhan had implemented "closed-door management".

Clothed in protective clothing and armed with loudspeakers, community workers were deployed daily across Wuhan to publicly announce new information about the rapidly evolving epidemic situation.

Besides volunteers, a developed online system in China helped locked up residents in Wuhan - and the not-so-locked up all over China - to buy what they wanted on the internet.

However, the system of deploying community workers and volunteers at a short notice will be difficult to emulate in India as it is, maybe uniquely, a Chinese phenomenon - drawing its origins and nourishment from the authoritarian nature of the Chinese system.

"As the coronavirus spreads around the world, other countries must be careful about looking to China for examples of how to manage it. Cities in other countries do not have a political culture that would allow them to replicate what China has done, or the same governance structures," Toby Lincoln, an expert on Chinese urban history with the University of Leicester recently wrote for the London-based New Statesman.

Lincoln wrote that Chinese urban governance - and the current coronavirus lockdown - is overseen by local residents' committees.

"These have their origins in the 1950s, when the CPC established control over cities. Urban districts were sub-divided into residents' committees, made up of several hundred households, and residents' small groups, composed of fewer still. They were staffed by CPC officials and local volunteers, and were responsible for keeping order, putting up propaganda posters, and running political campaigns," wrote Lincoln.

The implementation of that tried - and now seriously tested -- granular tradition was aided in China, and especially in Wuhan, by the seriousness of the epidemic situation.

"At the individual level, the Chinese people have reacted to this outbreak with courage and conviction. They have accepted and adhered to the starkest of containment measures - whether the suspension of public gatherings, the month-long 'stay at home' advisories or prohibitions on travel," the WHO-China Joint Mission report said after completing its two-week mission in February.

It's important to remember that Wuhan has reported more than 50000 cases and over 2500 deaths - by far the most in China - until now.

The residents knew they were up against a deadly outbreak which had not only severely disrupted their lives but had the potential to ravage it further.

There was no other option for Wuhan but to be locked down.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 20 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order? That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "premeditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyberattack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure, and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack.

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef.

South China Sea

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China.

Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea.

Senkaku Islands

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation. Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral security dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Hong Kong

China has never been happy with the "one country, two systems" principle put in place for governing the special administrative region of Hong Kong when it was returned by the UK in 1997. After Hong Kong was roiled by protracted and widespread protests last year over the administration's efforts to push a bill that would allow people to be extradited to mainland China for trial, Beijing moved amid the Covid-19 crisis to draft a national security law for the region that analysts say will undermine the semi-autonomous region's systems. The draft law, submitted to a standing committee of the National People's Congress this week, covers secession, subversion of state power, terror activities, and foreign interference.

India, in line with its policy of not speaking on the domestic and internal politics of China, has not publicly commented on the protests or the new draft law.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- The annual Rath Yatra scheduled to be held on June 23 at the Jagannath Temple in Odisha's Puri district will not take place this year in view of the Covid -19 pandemic, the Supreme Court ordered on Thursday.

The order was passed after a plea by an NGO, Odisha Vikas Parishad, pointed out the public health risk involved if more than one million devotees congregate for the event at a time when Covid-19 cases are rising.

"Having regard to the danger presented by such a large gathering of people for the Rath Yatra, we consider it appropriate in the interests of public health and safety of citizens who are devotees to restrain the respondents (state and district authorities and managing committee of Jagannath temple) from holding the Rath Yatra this year", the bench headed by Chief Justice of India (CJI) SA Bobde ordered.

The court also directed that no such Rath Yatra should be allowed in any other part of Odisha.

"We direct that there shall be no Rath Yatra anywhere in the temple town (Puri) of Odisha or in any other part of the state this year. We further direct that there shall be no activities secular or religious associated with the Rath Yatra during this period", the order read.

The Rath Yatra lasts for 10 to 12 days and involves a procession of chariots containing the deities Lord Jagannath, his brother Lord Balabhadra, and sister Devi Subhadra.

On May 7, the Union home ministry granted permission to the Odisha government to carry out the construction of chariots for conducting Rath Yatra subject to the condition that no religious congregation takes place while it is constructed.

The central government had also left it to the discretion of the Odisha government to decide whether or not to hold the Rath Yatra based on the conditions prevailing at the relevant point of time.

The Odisha government, on June 1, issued guidelines extending the lockdown in all Covid-19 containment zones in the state until midnight of June 30. It allowed reopening of prohibited activities in a phased manner in areas outside containment zones, though religious places continue to remain closed for the public till June 30. Even in areas which are not containment zones, social, political, sports, entertainment, academic, cultural and religious functions and other large congregations remain closed.

All the temples, including the Jagannath temple in Puri, are closed across the state for devotees since March 22 in view of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The petitioner pointed out that despite the restrictions, all the rituals leading to the Rath Yatra, such as Askhay Trutiya (the day on which the construction of the chariots start) and Snana Purnima were allowed to be performed by the state government, leading to the conclusion that the government may allow the Rath Yatra on June 23.

When the case came up for hearing on Thursday, the bench, which also comprised justices Dinesh Maheshwari and AS Bopanna, made it clear at the outset that it was inclined to stay the festivities.

Solicitor general Tushar Mehta, representing the central government, said that the issue was sensitive and sought a day's time so that government could study the issue and get back to the court with a response but the bench disagreed.

"This is a very serious matter. We will pass an order today. Lord Jagannath will forgive us," CJI Bobde remarked.

The petitioner also referred to the Tablighi Jamaat Muslim congregation in mid-March at the Nizamuddin area in Delhi that led to a spurt in Covid-19 cases across the country.

The Odisha government, represented by senior counsel Harish Salve, did not oppose the prayer in the petition but requested the court that whatever order it passes should be clear and precise leaving no room for any confusion.

As the hearing drew to a close, the CJI, on a lighter note, alluded to the origins of the English word juggernaut. "It is derived from Jagannath and it means something which cannot be stopped," he said.

"But the court has stopped it today," Mehta responded.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 12 -- The global money-laundering and terrorist financing watchdog has warned that the stimulus measures and international financial assistance announced by various countries to mitigate the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic are likely to be exploited by terrorists and criminals by posing as genuine businesses seeking assistance.

In a report released last week, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) cautioned that terrorists and criminals will use this economic downturn to move to new cash-incentive and high-liquidity lines of business in developing countries - both for laundering of proceeds as well as funding their terror operations.

"In an economic downturn, criminals may seek to invest in real estate or troubled businesses to generate cash and mask illicit proceeds. Criminal groups can also introduce illicit proceeds into the financial system by restructuring existing loans and lines of credit. In addition, corporate insolvency proceedings can free up illicit cash contained in businesses whilst masking the funds' origins," FATF said in the first such report since the pandemic forced worldwide shutdowns in February-March this year.

The report said FATF members have highlighted that tax evasion and related crimes may increase as individuals and companies facing economic difficulties look to reduce their fiscal burdens.

Many countries are reporting an overall increase in cash withdrawals, which FATF said is likely to be used by criminals/terrorists to cover their illicit funds with "redeposit funds" when the markets stabilise. "Banknotes can be used to purchase safe-haven assets (e.g. gold), which are less easily traceable," the report said.

It added some of the countries have also reported an increase in fund-raising scams involving criminals, who have posed as international organisations or charities and circulated emails requesting donations for Covid-19 related fund-raising campaign (purportedly for research, victims and/or products).

The FATF said the health crisis is also impacting the abilities of governments and private sectors in implementing anti-money laundering measure as well as international cooperation.

Formal cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance and extraditions, are already impacted by the crisis due to limitation or suspension of court operations, and the delayed execution of orders caused by travel restrictions.

The anti-money laundering/counter-terror financing (AML/CFT) on-site inspections have been postponed or substituted with desk-based inspections.

Pakistan last month got a four-month reprieve for meeting a deadline set by the FATF to counter terror financing as the multilateral watchdog announced a temporary suspension of its activities because of the Covid-19 crisis.

Several countries, according to report, have even suspended their decisions to impose monetary penalties on the violators.

In fact, some Financial Intelligence Units in lower capacity countries are either significantly "reducing their operations" or even "shutting down completely", the report said. There are also reports of delay or postponement of prosecutions due to the suspension of trials and hearings.

"There are reports that diversion of law enforcement and security resources to Covid-19 responses in high-risk, poorly resourced countries, may embolden terrorists and terrorist financiers in their activities," the FATF said.

While banks worldwide are trying to follow anti-money laundering measures, several countries have flagged an increased activity in non-banking sectors like insurance, online gambling, precious metals, and stones and securities amid a decreased activity in others like real estate and casinos.

The movement of migrant workers in various countries, including India, will particularly cause disruption for the money value transfer service sector due to confinement measures and company shutdowns, (the report said?).

"Should the current economic situation further deteriorate, there is a risk that financial institutions may re-prioritize their AML/CFL efforts and focus on broader prudential and stability measures," the FATF said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 28 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi has told chief ministers to carefully study the situation in each district and zone, and assess the kind of activities that can be permitted without the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) spreading. He also said the key is to balance life and livelihood. The Indian Council of Medical Research asks all states to return rapid test kits sourced from China.

Need to save lives, spur economy: PM

India is focusing on a two-pronged strategy aimed at saving lives of its citizens while also restarting economic activities that have come to a virtual standstill due to the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) outbreak, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told chief ministers in a video conference on Monday.

Five Oppn-ruled states seek Rs 2.25L cr to tide over crisis

Five opposition ruled states have sought close to Rs 2.25 lakh crore from the Centre to overcome stress on state finances due to the national lockdown, which some chief ministers want to extend beyond May 3 in close to 330 Covid-19 affected districts.

CMs call for extension of curbs in hot spot districts

Most state governments recommended an extension of the lockdown in Covid-19 hot spots, a relaxation of rules to bring back stranded workers, and financial help to cope with a debilitating economic crisis in a meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday.

Covid-19: What you need to know today

The death toll around the world has crossed 200,000 but there's a growing opinion that the actual number could be higher.

ICMR tells states not to deploy rapid kits of China firms

Six days after it decided to evaluate rapid test kits (RTKs) used to test for Covid-19 antibodies after states reported huge variations in results, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on Monday asked all states to which it sent the kits, sourced from China, to return them .

Need for refined rapid kits, better staff training for accurate results

Inaccuracy in results from China-made rapid kits led India to suspend antibody testing for coronavirus disease last week. On Monday, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) asked for states to return the kits, citing problems with them highlighted in its own assessment.

Govt appeals against discrimination, says recovered patients don't spread infection

Patients who recover from Covid-19 do not transmit the infection, the health ministry clarified on Monday, appealing to the people to stop discriminating against those who have fought off the disease as health-care workers engaged in treating cases.

'Mild-symptom patients can be isolated at home'

Covid-19 patients who are pre-symptomatic or show mild symptoms can be isolated at home as long as they have enough space to avoid contact with other residents, according to a new Union health ministry guidelines issued on Monday. Whether a person can is fit for home isolation will be decided by the treating doctor and surveillance officer. According to existing guidelines, all positive cases are isolated and treated at a facility.

Action against 3 IRS officers for tax hike report

The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) initiated an inquiry on Monday and moved to punish three Indian Revenue Service (IRS) officers for their roles and complicity in preparing and circulating a report that suggested raising the income-tax rate up to 40% to fund economic revival in the aftermath of the coronavirus pandemic,a finance ministry official said.

Once lockdown ends, govt plans Make in India boost

After the extended 40-day Covid-19 lockdown that ends May 3, the government plans to aggressively push its Make in India programme by offering domestic and foreign manufacturers policy and fiscal incentives to manufacture locally even as it increases import duty to make imports expensive, two government officials familiar with the plan said.

States gear up to bring back stranded migrants

Days after Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh started taking back stranded workers, the Rajasthan government issued guidelines to bring back stranded workers from other states and Odisha announced that it will have similar guidelines in place by the end of April.

In touch with those from state stranded elsewhere: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar

Ensuring the relief and rehabilitation of hundreds of thousands of migrants from Bihar employed in other states is high on the list of priorities of chief minister Nitish Kumar. On the prospects of the workers returning home, Kumar said that when curbs on public movement are lifted after the extended lockdown ends on May 3, the host governments in other states must undertake health screening of Bihar migrants before letting them travel.

This Pune medical officer stays by the deceased in their final journey

What is it like to oversee and ensure the burial and cremation of those dead from Covid-19? Pune Municipal Corporation's (PMC) Assistant medical officer, Dr Kalpana Baliwant has been doing in these unprecedented times in a city besieged by the pandemic.

China warns Australia of total boycott if it pursues virus probe

Chinese citizens could avoid Australian products and universities if Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't stop calling for an international enquiry into the coronavirus origins, a top Chinese official has said in what is fast developing into a testy diplomatic exchange between the two countries.

Vaccine could be ready in 12 months: Bill Gates

Billionaire philanthropist Bill Gates is funding production of the seven most promising ideas for a vaccine as he refocuses his work on the coronavirus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 4 -- Being the nerve centre of Sufi culture in India and the home of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, after whom the area was named, congregations are a daily affair at Nizamuddin Basti. Every year, thousands gather here in the Islamic month of Rabi-ul Awwal to observe the urs (death anniversary) of the Auliya on the 17th and 18th of the month (to fall sometime in November this year, as per the Christian calendar). Besides the urs, hundreds pay obeisance at the dargah (resting place) of the Sufi saint every day at the locality which announces its existence by the blue dome, or the Neela Gumbad, on the intersection of Mathura Road and Zakir Hussain Marg.

Besides its Sufi character, Nizamuddin is also a backpacker's and gourmand's delight with several small lodges; eateries churning out qorma, nahari, paaya and biryani; and small shops that sell attar (perfumes), skull caps, kurtas, and Islamic books. It also has one of the first branches of the famous Old Delhi Mughlai restaurant, Karim's. Residents of nearby colonies also visit the various meat shops in the area for their daily supply.

It is said that Auliya's basti never stands still. However, over the last three days, hundreds of potential Covid-19 patients were evacuated from the Markaz, the headquarters of the Tablighi Jamaat, located just a few metres away from the Dargah. A congregation of indeterminate length held last month at the Markaz has now emerged one of the biggest spreaders of the Sars-Cov-2 virus.

Farid Nizami, the 48-year-old caretaker of 13th-century dargah, says he has been getting queries from across the world and from those who live in the surrounding area about the rise in Coronavirus cases caused by a religious gathering of members of the Tablighi Jamaat in mid-March. "The moment the name of Nizamuddin occurs anywhere, people immediately associate it with the dargah. I am having to explain to everyone over and again that this incident has nothing to do with the Dargah," he said, adding that the mausoleum had for the first time in its history last month shut its doors to the thousands of pilgrims who visit it every day -- the moment the Prime Minister announced the March 22 "janta curfew" to control the spread of the virus.

"The members of the Jamaat have nothing to do with the Dargah, or with sufism. Their religious traditions are different and they hardly ever even visit the dargah," Nizami added.

The spread of Covid-19 at the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters situated in the same Nizamuddin Basti, however, has caused worry among the residents of the 700-year-old settlement around the mausoleum of the Sufi saint.

Abdur Rahmaan (56), a local resident, said: "Ever since the government began alerting us on Coronavirus cases, we have been spreading awareness among the people of this basti about social distancing. However, for the past few days we have been facing a lot of discrimination when we go out to get grocery and other essential commodities from nearby markets. People feel that we are carrying the virus and refuse to supply us with any goods we need."

The settlement around the dargah, where a thriving population of those claiming lineage to Hazrat Nizamuddin and his disciples dwells, has been at the centre of cultural activities in Delhi since the 13th century.

"Every dynasty that ruled Delhi since has built in this area, because of the proximity to the saint's grave," said Ratish Nanda, CEO of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, which has been carrying out development efforts in the basti for at least a decade. A large number of royal tombs came up in the vicinity, including Humayun's tomb, which is one among the three Unesco world heritage sites in Delhi. The presence of a 16th century heritage park, Sundar Nursery, which was redeveloped three years ago, is yet another attraction for tourists.

"Like every other urban village in Delhi, the Nizamuddin basti has grown organically, and has several segregated communities who came to the area at different points in time." added Nanda.

There are about 400 families in the area who trace their descent to the saint. Then there was a wave of refugees from West Punjab who came here in 1947. Nizamuddin still remains one of the first ports of call for a Muslim immigrant in Delhi. During the 1982 Asian Games, a large population of labourers came to the area and continued to stay here long after the games were over.

Nizamuddin is also a cultural hub. "Many things that are deeply connected to the idea of India found their origins in Nizamuddin," said heritage enthusiast Sohail Hashmi. "While the Chisti saint Nizamuddin Auliya decided to stay here, it is through his closest disciple, the poet, musician and scholar, Amir Khusrao, that Sufi thought is transmitted into the language of Delhi. It is he who begins the musical tradition of Qawaali, drawing in elements from folk music in Delhi and Punjab. The beginning of the langar tradition also took place in the hospice of Nizamuddin," adds Hashmi.

The Qawali tradition at the Nizamuddin Dargah continues to draw about 1,500 visitors every Thursday night. The mausoleum is visited by thousands of pilgrims from across the world on the birth and death anniversaries of Nizamuddin and Khusrao as well.

Being a space of cultural significance, literary figures such as the 17th century poet Abdul Rahil Khan-i-Khana and the 19th century poet Mirza Ghalib also came to be buried there. "Thousands of people come here every year to celebrate Ghalib in seminar, mushairas, and ghazal programs," said Aqil Ahmad, secretary of the Ghalib academy, a cultural and educational institution established in 1969 in West Nizamuddin, consisting of a research centre, art gallery, and a calligraphy training centre.

In was in the 1920s that the Tablighi Jamaat was given land by the Nizamuddin Dargah to build their headquarters.

Speaking about how the present controversy about the Jamaat gathering might be affecting the health and reputation of people at Nizamuddin, Nanda said "presently our only concern is the well being of the 20,000 residents of the basti and to identify anyone who will need hospitalisation".

"Thereafter much needs to be done to reiterate that the mammoth Tablighi Jamaat headquarters that now overshadows the basti, has in fact little association with pilgrims to the dargah or with the local residents," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 25 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

83 killed after being hit by lightning in Bihar, PM Modi tweets on the disaster

In Bihar, at least 83 people lost their lives while 30 others were injured in thunderstorms and lightning that struck several parts of the state on Thursday. The lightning also killed more than 15 cattle in Khagaria district. Large scale damage to property has also been reported from various districts. Read more

'The result is before people': Patanjali's fresh defence of Coronil after states slap ban

Patanjali Ayurveda Limited CEO and Yoga Guru Ramdev's associate, Acharya Balkrishna issued a clarification on Thursday amid accusations that the Ayurvedic product Coronil, produced by the Haridwar-based firm, was not approved as an alternate medicine to treat coronavirus disease by the government. Read more

Vande Bharat Mission- 4th phase to begin from July 4

The government has firmed up plans to launch the fourth phase of Vande Bharat Mission to repatriate Indian citizens stuck in foreign destinations from July 3, according to news agency ANI. Read more

CBSE CTET 2020 exam postponed, check details at ctet.nic.in

The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) has postponed the Central Teacher Eligibility Test (CTET), which was scheduled to be conducted on July 5. The new examination dates for CBSE CTET 2020 will be announced after the situation becomes more conducive for the examination to be held. Read more

US economic recovery looks to be weakening in some states with Covid outbreaks

The US economic recovery is showing incipient signs of weakening in some states where coronavirus cases are mounting.The ebbing is evident in such high-frequency data as OpenTable restaurant reservations and follows a big bounce in activity as businesses reopened from lockdowns meant to check the spread of Covid-19.Read more

1983 World Cup: Five interesting facts from India's campaign

Whenever the future generations will talk about India's rise to the zenith of world cricket, they will always go back to the year 1983. The Indian cricket team did achieve several firsts before 1983 and did put in some world class performances against much stronger opposition. Read more

Manoj Bajpayee on Sushant Singh Rajput's death: 'I hadn't achieved anything till the age of 34'

Sushant Singh Rajput's Sonchiriya co-star Manoj Bajpayee has said that he had achieved nothing till the age of 34, which is how old Sushant was when he died last week. Manoj also said that he will always remember Sushant as a man who embraced his small-town origins. Read more

Amazon, Flipkart, others to add 'country of origin' label on online goods

Amazon India, Flipkart and other e-retailers will soon be highlighting Chinese goods sold in India online. Essentially, the e-retailers will be adding a 'country of origin' label to the goods sold online in the country. However, it remains uncertain when the e-commerce companies will start adding the 'country of origin' label to their product listings on their respective platforms. Read more

Michael Jackson: The King Of Pop and fashion icon

Michael Jackson, better known as the King Of Pop is considered on of the greatest entertainers in the history of music, and although the last few years of his life were embroiled in controversy, the singer-songwriter still holds a place in the hearts of many, even 11 years after his death, on 25 June, 2009. Read more

12-year-old Kerala boy's model train made from paper wows Railway Ministry. Watch

For ages, trains have fascinated children of all ages. From choo choo-ing with a model steam engine to creating a full track complete with a station, many kids tend to have extra love towards trains. But Adwaith Krishna, a 7th standard student has taken his fascination for trains to another level. Read more

Donald Trump clarifies 'slow down testing' remark as Covid cases rise in USA

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- Being the nerve centre of Sufi culture in India and the home of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya, after whom the area was named, congregations are a daily affair at Nizamuddin Basti. Every year, thousands gather here in the Islamic month of Rabi-ul Awwal to observe the urs (death anniversary) of the Auliya on the 17th and 18th of the month (to fall sometime in November this year, as per the Christian calendar). Besides the urs, hundreds pay obeisance at the dargah (resting place) of the Sufi saint every day at the locality which announces its existence by the blue dome, or the Neela Gumbad, on the intersection of Mathura Road and Zakir Hussain Marg.

Besides its Sufi character, Nizamuddin is also a backpacker's and gourmand's delight with several small lodges; eateries churning out qorma, nahari, paaya and biryani; and small shops that sell attar (perfumes), skull caps, kurtas, and Islamic books. It also has one of the first branches of the famous Old Delhi Mughlai restaurant, Karim's. Residents of nearby colonies also visit the various meat shops in the area for their daily supply.

It is said that Auliya's basti never stands still. However, over the last three days, hundreds of potential Covid-19 patients were evacuated from the Markaz, the headquarters of the Tablighi Jamaat, located just a few metres away from the Dargah. A congregation of indeterminate length held last month at the Markaz has now emerged one of the biggest spreaders of the Sars-Cov-2 virus.

Farid Nizami, the 48-year-old caretaker of 13th-century dargah, says he has been getting queries from across the world and from those who live in the surrounding area about the rise in Coronavirus cases caused by a religious gathering of members of the Tablighi Jamaat in mid-March.

"The moment the name of Nizamuddin occurs anywhere, people immediately associate it with the dargah. I am having to explain to everyone over and again that this incident has nothing to do with the Dargah," he said, adding that the mausoleum had for the first time in its history last month shut its doors to the thousands of pilgrims who visit it every day -- the moment the Prime Minister announced the March 22 "janta curfew" to control the spread of the virus.

"The members of the Jamaat have nothing to do with the Dargah, or with sufism. Their religious traditions are different and they hardly ever even visit the dargah," Nizami added.

The spread of Covid-19 at the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters situated in the same Nizamuddin Basti, however, has caused worry among the residents of the 700-year-old settlement spread around the mausoleum of the Sufi saint.

Abdur Rahmaan (56), a local resident, said: "Ever since the government began alerting us on Coronavirus cases, we have been spreading awareness among the people of this basti about social distancing. However, for the past few days we have been facing a lot of discrimination when we go out to get grocery and other essential commodities from nearby markets. People feel that we are carrying the virus and refuse to supply us with any goods we need."

The settlement around the dargah, where a thriving population of those claiming lineage to Hazrat Nizamuddin and his disciples dwells, has been at the centre of cultural activities in Delhi since the 13th century.

"Every dynasty that ruled Delhi since has built in this area, because of the proximity to the saint's grave," said Ratish Nanda, CEO of the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, which has been carrying out development efforts in the basti for at least a decade. A large number of royal tombs came up in the vicinity, including Humayun's tomb, which is one among the three Unesco world heritage sites in Delhi. The presence of a 16th century heritage park, Sundar Nursery, which was redeveloped three years ago, is yet another attraction for tourists.

"Like every other urban village in Delhi, the Nizamuddin basti has grown organically, and has several segregated communities who came to the area at different points in time." added Nanda.

There are about 400 families in the area who trace their descent to the saint. Then there was a wave of refugees from West Punjab who came here in 1947. Nizamuddin still remains one of the first ports of call for a Muslim immigrant in Delhi. During the 1982 Asian Games, a large population of labourers came to the area and continued to stay here long after the games were over.

Nizamuddin is also a cultural hub. "Many things that are deeply connected to the idea of India found their origins in Nizamuddin," said heritage enthusiast Sohail Hashmi. "While the Chisti saint Nizamuddin Auliya decided to stay here, it is through his closest disciple, the poet, musician and scholar, Amir Khusrao, that Sufi thought is transmitted into the language of Delhi. It is he who begins the musical tradition of Qawaali, drawing in elements from folk music in Delhi and Punjab. The beginning of the langar tradition also took place in the hospice of Nizamuddin," adds Hashmi.

The Qawali tradition at the Nizamuddin Dargah continues to draw about 1,500 visitors every Thursday night. The mausoleum is visited by thousands of pilgrims from across the world on the birth and death anniversaries of Nizamuddin and Khusrao as well.

Being a space of cultural significance, literary figures such as the 17th century poet Abdul Rahil Khan-i-Khana and the 19th century poet Mirza Ghalib also came to be buried there.

"Thousands of people come here every year to celebrate Ghalib in seminar, mushairas, and ghazal programs," said Aqil Ahmad, secretary of the Ghalib academy, a cultural and educational institution established in 1969 in West Nizamuddin, consisting of a research centre, art gallery, and a calligraphy training centre.

In was in the 1920s that the Tablighi Jamaat was given land by the Nizamuddin Dargah to build their headquarters.

Speaking about how the present controversy about the Jamaat gathering might be affecting the health and reputation of people at Nizamuddin, Nanda said "presently our only concern is the well being of the 20,000 residents of the basti and to identify anyone who will need hospitalisation".

"Thereafter much needs to be done to reiterate that the mammoth Tablighi Jamaat headquarters that now overshadows the basti, has in fact little association with pilgrims to the dargah or with the local residents," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 6 -- China on Wednesday said the US should not use tariffs as weapons after President Donald Trump threatened to impose more trade taxes on Chinese goods as punishment for Beijing's handling of the coronavirus outbreak.

Trump said on Friday that raising tariffs on China was "certainly an option" as he considers ways to retaliate against Beijing for the coronavirus pandemic.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said tariffs in general hurt all parties involved.

"So the US should stop thinking it can use tariffs as a weapon and a big stick to coerce other countries," Hua said at the regular ministry briefing on Wednesday.

The new virus emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year and has spread around the world, infecting some 3.6 million people and killing more than 2,55,000 of them, according to a Reuters tally.

China and the US have been trading barbs and blames on the Covid-19 pandemic, its origins and how each has handled it.

Hua urged the United States not to try to divert attention from its own mismanagement of its coronavirus epidemic by shifting blame onto China.

"What has the US done in the past few months? How did it allow the outbreak to develop to the stage today? Is this how a government should be responsible to its people?" she asked.

Responding to a question, Hua said as of May 1, China has provided more than 5.3 billion masks, 330 million pairs of surgical gloves, 38.85 million pieces of protective clothing, 5.98 million pairs of goggles, and nearly 7,500 ventilators to the US.

"Therefore, the claims about China's so-called concealment of epidemic situation, delay of notification, and profit from epidemic situation are purely nonsense.," Hua added.

"The most urgent task is to control the outbreak in the U.S. and to save as many lives as possible ... Saving lives should take precedence over political self-interest," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, Oct. 9 -- With the ways of living, the ways of celebrating our festivals have also changed due to the pandemic. So as Durga Puja approaches, the thought of not being able to revel in the age-old tradition of sindur khela makes one wonder how will the festival be this year! Durga Puja pandals aren't planning to organise sindur khela in groups. But, where there's a festival, there's a way. And women in Delhi-NCR have already set plans to celebrate this tradition from the comfort of their homes.

The relevance of celebrating sindur khela varies from one community to another. Shampa Sircar Das, a Delhi-based artist, says, "This tradition has its origins in the Durga Pujas that were organised by the zamindars, to usher bonhomie among homemakers. The red vermillion colour symbolises the strength of womanhood or shakti that a woman has and uses to shield her family and the society while facing different challenges."

Talking about her plans of indulging in festive celebrations, Das says, "This year the pandemic has left us with no choice since a majority of puja celebration committees have decided to perform only Ghot Puja (worshipping an urn symbolising the goddess), and a few of them will perform puja with small idols without any usual lavish celebrations. The joy and preparation of wearing a red and white saree and taking along in a thali, flowers, sweets and sindur will become online this year! The final goodbye to Ma Durga on Dashami and the ritual of applying sindur on the Goddess's feet and forehead which is followed by the sheer joy of playing vermilion or sindur with each other will all be done a virtually."

Some denizens have even invited their friends to celebrate sindur khela in a closed complex. "I'll be inviting some close friends of mine and in the garden of my house we will celebrate this ritual with all the fervour. I've also planned what all foods will be served and my music playlist is also ready. I don't want to ruin the spirit of this annual affair due to the pandemic! When Ma is coming all the way for us, we must keep the spirit high," says Sanghamitra Mallick, a Gurugram-based content writer.

"Durga puja in Covid-19 might be dull, but not for me. I'm on my shopping spree! Dhunuchi dance and bhog is planned with my girls on Asthami and Mughlai dinner with family on Navami and sindur khela, all at my house. We would be wearing the new sarees to celebrate the rituals. Pandals are fun but let's dance and celebrate for our soul this time," says Alaknanda Kathak, a Noida-based dancer.

Author tweets @ruchikagarg271

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 8 -- A Canadian minister has denounced China for "intimidation" of people around the world through Beijing's state entities or proxies in order to silence dissent, pressure political opponents and instil general fear of state power.

In a letter to lawmakers, Bill Blair, Minister of Public Safety responsible for the country's internal security, said that "foreign states, including the PRC (Peoples Republic of China), attempt to threaten and intimidate individuals around the world, including in Canada, through various state entities and non-state proxies."

That letter was sent in response to a motion moved by the Opposition calling for the government to outline its plans for participation of the Chinese telecommunications company Huawei in Canada's 5G infrastructure and to table a plan to counter foreign interference.

In the letter, as cited by the outlet National Observer, Blair added that the government is "aware that these tactics can also be used as cover for silencing dissent, including on university campuses, pressuring political opponents and instilling general fear of state power, no matter where a person is located." He mentioned China's Operation Fox Hunt as "one such example."

Operation Fox Hunt was launched under the direction of Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2014 through the Ministry of Public Security to "target Chinese nationals who he sees as threats and who live outside China, around the world," according to Christopher Wray, director of US Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Citing Blair's letter, the outlet Global News said the government was "'particularly concerned' about giving foreign adversaries control over and access to sensitive technologies, critical infrastructure and the personal data of Canadians."

Blair also noted that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Communications Security Establishment, and Canada Border Services Agency, were engaged in combating such foreign interference.

Such interference, the minister said, had worsened after the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic as government agencies had "observed state-sponsored information manipulation" with such "campaigns" aimed at sowing "doubt about the origins of the Covid-19 virus and the means required to counter it; discredit responses to Covid-19 while casting their own as superior."

The motion is expected to come up for discussion in the House of Commons once it reconvenes later this month.

Earlier, according to a report in the daily Global & Mail, in the strongest public denunciation of China's bullying of the community in Canada, a spokesperson for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service had said that the "fear of state-backed or state-linked retribution targeting both them and their loved ones, in Canada and abroad, can force individuals to submit to foreign interference". Together, Canada's spy agency felt, such activities "constitute a threat to Canada's sovereignty and to the safety of Canadians."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 20 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order? That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff:

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the violent brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "premeditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack:

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyberattack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure, and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack, adding that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef. India and Australia have also spoken about working together to shape the post-Covid world order.

South China Sea:

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China. Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea. Last year, Chinese vessels repeatedly operated in areas close to the waters where state-owned ONGC Videsh is engaged in oil and gas production.

Senkaku Islands:

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation. Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral security dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Hong Kong:

China has never been happy with the "one country, two systems" principle put in place for governing the special administrative region of Hong Kong when it was returned by the UK in 1997. After Hong Kong was roiled by protracted and widespread protests last year over the local administration's efforts to push a bill that would allow people to be extradited to mainland China for trial, Beijing has moved amid the Covid-19 crisis to draft a new national security law for the region that analysts say will undermine the semi-autonomous region's systems. The draft law, submitted to a standing committee of the National People's Congress this week, covers secession, subversion of state power, terror activities, and foreign interference.

India, in line with its long-standing policy of not speaking on the domestic and internal politics of China, has not publicly commented on last year's protests or the new draft law.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 14 -- Agra recorded the biggest spike in Covid-19 cases in a day on Monday as 35 people tested positive for the disease and took the district's tally to 138 even as officials attributed the sharp rise to aggressive testing and contact tracing as part of a containment model that the Centre has asked states to emulate.

The Centre on Saturday cited the model while instructing states to learn from it. Officials say the Agra Model has involved a proactive approach in identifying cases, conducting intensive testing, door-to-door surveys and implementing strict quarantine measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19

Officials said the 35 new cases include eight that are linked to the congregation at the headquarters of Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi that last month emerged as a Covid-19 hotspot. They added of the total 138, 60 are liked to the congregation.

"We are witnessing a sharp rise in the number of patients but soon it will start decreasing. The institutional quarantine is the only solution to such types of cases," said district magistrate Prabhu N Singh.

He added they have been shifting those who come in contact with Covid positive cases to quarantine centres before collecting their samples. Singh said they will continue with their model based on massive sampling, social distancing and institutional quarantine.

Officials said the virus has spread to a rural area of Fatehpur Sikri where a person infected 14 members of his family. They added these cases tested positive in a day. The other hotspots include a hospital in Agra where the staff and their contacts alone account for 20 Covid-19 patients.

Chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said some patients were undergoing treatment at the hospital and no new admissions of patients will be allowed there.

The other coronavirus hotspot is Ghatia Azam Khan area, where a private practitioner first tested positive and is later believed to have infected at least five people.

"One should not go by numbers at present because it is the outcome of our surveillance and proactive sampling with 2,264 samples having been tested in Agra till date. The cases coming positive are those whose origins are known to us and is part of Agra containment plan," said Vats.

"Till date, only one death has taken place that too of an aged lady who already had asthma. Other patients testing positive are kept under isolation and are getting cured." He added they are handling the challenge posed by major hotspots including the hospital. "We are aggressively getting their contacts tested."

Vats said the hotspot in Fatehpur Sikri has been sealed. "The in charge of a community health centre has been made the nodal officer for measures to be taken there for containment."

Dr Satish Verma, the chief medical superintendent of Agra's district hospital, said this month samples of 150 suspected Covid-19 patients have been tested daily on an average.

The Agra Model kicked in early in the Covid-19 outbreak cycle when six patients tested positive on March 3. At the time, the entire country had only 30-odd cases. Authorities drew up a list of people with foreign travel and identified their families and close contacts. The neighbourhood where patients lived were declared hotspots, with a three-km radius around them acting like containment zones and a five-km radius areas as the buffer zones.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- India is taking full preparations to lift its lockdown as Centre has designated districts in three categories. With 1,993 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,043 mark with 1,147 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19. The death toll across the globe has now reached 2.3 million people.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 15 -- It is a season that should have marked a happy occasion for Formula One, 2020 being its 70th anniversary, a time to recall its origins when Italy's Giuseppe 'Nino' Farina went from pole to flag at Silverstone in the first ever race in 1950.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has put such celebrations on hold, throwing the season into uncertainty. F1 CEO Chase Carey recently said there is a danger of the season not happening at all if the situation didn't improve.

Seven of the 22 races have already been cancelled, including the Monaco Grand Prix-it will be the first time since 1954 that the race won't wind through the narrow streets of the principality. Azerbaijan, Japan and Singapore joined the list on Friday while many others have been postponed or unlikely to happen.

The return of European top-flight football though has given hope. With the Bundesliga, Serie A and La Liga resuming behind closed doors and Premier League scheduled to restart on Wednesday, professional sport appears to dig deep into its resources and organisational capabilities for a revival.

F1 too is now preparing an initial list of eight races-all in Europe. The season is expected to finally start with the Austrian Grand Prix in Spielberg on July 5 followed by the Styrian GP-named after the Austrian state where the venue is-a week later. Both the closed-doors races will be held at the Red Bull Ring circuit.

Hungary will stage a race in July before the season moves to England with Silverstone hosting two races-British GP and 70th Anniversary GP-on August 2 and 9. It will be followed by races in Spain, Belgium and Italy. Like European football, all races will miss the buzz of the fans, especially at a venue like Silverstone that sees an overall weekend attendance of 350,000.

Though not finalised yet taking the health issues into consideration, F1 then intends to move to Russia, Asia (Vietnam and China) and the Americas (Canada, United States, Mexico and Brazil) to host postponed races. The organisers aim to end with races in Bahrain and Abu Dhabi in late December or early January.

That plan will heavily depend on air travel and quarantine restrictions easing, countries opening their borders and other logistical factors. It could see more European races, to achieve F1's target of 15-18 races this season. That would still be a world of improvement for race drivers stuck to virtual racing.

"We have made significant progress with existing and new promoters on the revised calendar and have been particularly encouraged by the interest that has been shown by new venues in hosting a Formula 1 race during the 2020 season," an F1 statement said on Friday.

There are reports that old venues like Hockenheim (Germany) and Imola (Italy) are close to sealing deals to host races. Imola, which last held a race in 2006 when Michael Schumacher won, have renewed their FIA Grade 1 licence, needed to host a race.

Venues like Portimao (Portugal) and Ferrari-owned Mugello (Italy), which are yet to stage F1, are also in contention with more double-headers like Austria and Britain also not being ruled out. "There is a contingency to have an extended European season with another one or two races if needed," F1 motorsports chief Ross Brawn told F1.com last week. "There are a number of good European tracks where we could add another one or two races on to make sure we have a comprehensive season."

Sticking to Europe is logistically and economically convenient as most F1 teams are based there. Also, with several European countries lifting curbs and border restrictions, visas won't be an issue as the Schengen Area covers 26 countries.

GO EAST

The real expansion of F1 into a global sport only happened in the last 20-25 years as a result of former F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone's 'go east' policy. Asian races introduced under him like Singapore, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi (all night races) have become permanent, even at the cost of traditional races like Germany and France. Other races in Malaysia, India and South Korea have stopped.

In F1's inaugural season, six of the seven races were held in Europe. It began to move out gradually-South America in 1953, Africa in 1958 and Asia in 1976.

Even in 1999, Europe hosted 11 of the 16 races-a share of 68.75 %. But in 2019, Europe only held 10 of 21 GPs, less than 48 percent-also indicating the spread of global wealth.

Asia hosted only one race (Japan) until 1999 when Malaysia was introduced. The number touched five last year-without adding transcontinental Azerbaijan-before Vietnam was included from this year.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has at least temporarily halted the 'look east' approach with four out of the seven races cancelled this year being outside Europe and more likely to follow.

GETTING STARTED

Following a long shutdown, F1 teams are slowly opening their shutters. Reigning champions Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes have started preparations, testing their 2018 car ahead of next month's season opener.

"I didn't feel like I've ever left the water, so that's a positive," Hamilton said, having driven a F1 car after more than 100 days. "Every time you take a big break you always wonder whether you can still drive. So, it's a good feeling to know of course I can, I'm ready, I feel fit."

Racing Point, Ferrari and Renault have scheduled testing in the coming weeks.

NEW NORMAL

The pandemic has forced organisers to introduce new non-racing rules to protect F1 personnel like no podium celebrations, pre-race driver parades or assembling for the national anthems.

"The practices we have had in the past just can't be done," Brawn said. "The podium procedure can't happen, but we're looking at doing something on the grid after the race. We can't present the trophies, as you can't have someone in close proximity presenting a trophy, (but) we have plans and procedures. We're looking at how we can present it on TV."

Teams will be kept in 'bubbles', staying in isolation with no contact with the surrounding community.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 6 -- Hinting towards a faster pace of recovery, India's active Covid-19 caseload has been steadily declining and the recoveries from the viral disease have been on the rise. As of Saturday, there were 148,590 active cases in the country while the number of people who have recovered from the coronavirus disease has gone up to 10,510,796.

The cases worldwide have shot up to 10,510,796 and 2,299,388 fatalities have been recorded due to the disease, according to Johns Hopkins University's virus tracker.

Follow latest updates on Covid-19 here

Here's a look at the Covid-19 situation in countries across the world

India: Covid-19 cases in India are steadily declining with only 11,713 fresh cases recorded in the past 24 hours. The daily toll from the disease fell below 100 on Saturday. With 95 related deaths, a total of 154918 people have died of the disease.

As India is conducting the world's largest vaccination drive, as many as 54,16,849 health and frontline workers have so far been administered the jab in the first phase. Union health minister Harsh Vardhan has said that the vaccination for first recipients among the general public is likely to begin in March.

China: A team of the World Health Organization (WHO) is currently probing the origins of the virus that causes the coronavirus disease in China's Wuhan. "We were asked where we wanted to go. We gave our hosts a list ... and you can see from where we've been, we've been to all the key places," Peter Daszak, part of the WHO expert team, told The Associated Press.

Meanwhile, Mainland China reported 12 new Covid-19 cases on February 5, down from 20 cases a day earlier and the lowest daily increase since December 17, the national health authority said on Saturday. This takes mainland China's infection tally to 89,681, while the death toll remained unchanged at 4,636.

United States: The US, worst-affected country due to the pandemic, has recorded 26,808,454 infections. The death toll from the disease now stands at 2,299,388. As the country suffers a major economic setback, President Joe Biden said he didn't think his proposed increase in the federal minimum wage to $15 per hour will survive congressional negotiations to pass his broader coronavirus-relief bill.

New Zealand: New Zealand health authorities said on Saturday they were investigating a new community coronavirus infection, the fourth in two weeks among people who completed mandatory isolation at an Auckland quarantine facility for returned overseas travellers.

The new case was diagnosed in a person self-isolating at home in Hamilton, who was released from a two-week hotel quarantine on January 30 after testing negative twice for the virus, reported news agency Reuters.

Israel: Israel, which has vaccinated the maximum number of people against Covid-19 in the world, has found it took three weeks for the Pfizer Inc.-BioNTech SE shot to start curbing new cases and hospitalisations, according to news agency Bloomberg.

Improvement in the number of new cases and hospitalised patients occurred 21 days following the vaccination campaign, the scientists said, noting that the real-life effect of vaccines may take longer than what was demonstrated in clinical trials.

United Kingdom: The UK said it plans to offer all over-50s the first dose of coronavirus vaccine by May, the first time that Boris Johnson's government has set a target for the next stage of its vaccination program.

The country is currently in the third national lockdown and Johnson hopes the vaccination rollout will allow ministers to start lifting restrictions from March 8, starting with the reopening of some schools, reported Bloomberg.

(With agency inputs)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 8 -- The Tablighi Jamaat has been in the eye of a storm since last week, when hundreds of Covid-19 affected people across the country were found to have links with a congregation (ijtema) of indeterminate duration at the Jamaat's markaz headquarters in Delhi's Nizamuddin Basti in March.

Started as an Islamic reform movement, the Tablighi Jamaat traces its origins to the Mewat region, where it was founded by Islamic scholar Maulana Muhammad Ilyas in 1926.

Till today, Meo Muslims continue to form the core of the Jamaat movement, with a large majority of Meos subscribing to its tenets.

Meo Muslims are spread across the once contiguous belt of eastern Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. Culturally, this area spanning the three states is known as the Mewat region. Meos embraced Islam in various phases, between the 15th to the 17th century, and some of them continue to follow syncretic practices.

Siddique Ahmed Meo, community historian and author of books on Mewat's history, said the Jamaat's origins in Mewat could be traced back to a time when labourers from Mewat, now officially known as Nuh, commuted to Delhi in search of work.

According to the 2011 Census, the Nuh district's population was about 1.09 million, of which the majority were Meo-Muslims. According to Meo, around 80% of the present-day population of Nuh district is made up of Meo Muslims.

"People from Mewat would travel to Delhi for work and halt for lunch near the masjid in Nizamuddin, before proceeding ahead with the journey. Maulana Ilyas took notice of the labourers and enquired about them one day. Through conversations with the Meos, he realised that while they were Muslims, they did not have a good understanding of Islamic practices," said Meo.

Driven by his interactions with Meos in Nizamuddin, Maulana Ilyas visited Ferozepur Namak in Mewat for the first time in 1925. He started surveying the region and over subsequent visits, he came to the understanding that Meo Muslims needed to be introduced to Islamic practices and brought back into the fold.

"A panchayat was called in Nuh and a charter consisting of names of 103 people was shared. Some 31 proposals aimed at laying the groundwork for the Jamaat were passed in that panchayat. Finally, in 1926, the Jamaat started undertaking trips to reach out to people and spread the message of Islam," said Meo.

He added that more than 90% of the people in Mewat identified themselves as Tablighi and the organisation exercised considerable influence in the region. "The aim of the Jamaat is to ensure that Muslims become better Muslims. It seeks to get Muslims to adopt practices followed by the Prophet Muhammad. All Meos might not go for the chilla (40-day Islamic camp), but they owe allegiance to the Tabligh," said Meo.

Tablighi Jamaat, Meo said, was also involved in various social interventions in present-day Mewat.

"Tablighi Jamaat has been a strong proponent of eradication of practices like dowry in Mewat. Whenever they hold their ijtemas (Islamic congregations), they conduct mass nikah (marriage) ceremonies for people without any involvement of dowry. The Jamaat also seeks cooperation of imams in promoting polio eradication drives or preventing alcoholism and drug abuse in Mewat," said Meo.

Shail Mayaram, author of "Resisting Regimes: Myth, Memory and the Shaping of a Muslim Identity", which discusses the Tablighi Jamaat, said it was a non-political outfit whose foundation was laid in Mewat. "Tablighi Jamaat's aim is not to capture political power. They are only driven by the goal of making Muslims better Muslims. They focus on religious practice, one that is often seen as being conservative in nature," said Mayaram, who is also a professor at the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies.

Mayaram said the Jamaat was hugely popular in Mewat and Meos played an important role within the organisation of the outfit.

"Mewatis have a significant role in the Jamaat administration. Over the years, Mewatis both in India and Pakistan have become closer to the Jamaat," she said.

Mayaram added that the support of the Meos to the Jamaat in the decades after Partition was significantly influenced by excesses that Meos faced during the Partition.

"In my view, the belief in the Jamaat can also be explained by the violence that Mewatis experienced during Partition. It led to a shift in the identities and how they navigated their ways in the changing landscape. The circumstances led to a strengthening of the Jamaat's case in the region," said Mayaram.

According to several local residents, Tablighi Jamaat supports two madrasas - one each in Nuh and Ferozepur Jhirka. It has a markaz (centre) in Nuh which coordinates activities with the centre in Delhi. Arshad, a Nuh resident, who owes allegiance to the Jamaat, said two congregations take place in Nuh every year where members of the Jamaat come together. "Earlier, the jalsa (gathering) would be a one-day affair. Since last year, a three-day gathering has started taking place. There is no fixed schedule or venue for the gathering. It takes place in different villages every year," said Arshad, who goes by his first name.

Since the beginning of this year, the Jamaat has not conducted any congregation/gathering in Mewat. "Usually, the congregation happens in April, after the harvest of crops. People are relatively free during this time. There has not been any update on that front this year," said Arshad.

However, hundreds of locals are believed to have been at the congregation in Nizamuddin last month. The police identified at least 270 of them and isolated them in Government Polytechnic College in Malab and Shaheed Hasan Khan Mewati Government Medical College, Nalhar, Nuh earlier this week. According to the health department, at least seven of them had tested positive for Covid-19 by Sunday.

Shahid Ali, an advocate with the Tablighi Jamaat, said that while there was no written count of the members of the Jamaat; most people in Mewat subscribed to the Jamaat. "The organisation has a loose structure and there is no recorded membership, but the Jamaat traces its origin to Mewat due to which it is widely popular in the region. There is no fixed schedule for any congregation or gathering. Members of the Jamaat travel to Mewat for prayers, just as they visit other places across the country and beyond," said Ali.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 30 -- As if the year were short on bad news, and needed more, a report by leading experts says the world could experience pandemics more frequently in future, that some of these will be deadlier than the coronavirus disease (Covid-19), and far too expensive to control unless there is a transformative change in the global approach to dealing with infectious diseases.

The global report on biodiversity and pandemics was authored by 22 leading experts from around the world, and released on Thursday. It is the result of a workshop convened by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) focused on the links between the degradation of nature and increasing pandemic risks.

And for those thinking SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19 is it, there are as many as 540,000 - 850,000 unknown viruses in nature that could infect people, warns the report. Interestingly, the report comes three days after the World Health Organisation (WHO) reported the outbreak of the Mayaro virus disease in French Guiana. With symptoms similar to dengue, this virus too is transmitted through mosquitoes.

The majority (70%) of emerging diseases such as Ebola, Zika, Nipah encephalitis, and almost all known pandemics such as influenza, HIV/AIDS, Covid-19, are zoonotic diseases that are caused by microbes of animal origin. These microbes spill over due to contact among wildlife, livestock, and people, the IPBES report added.

In the workshop, experts agreed that escaping the era of pandemics is possible, but that it requires a seismic shift in approach - from reaction to prevention.

"Covid-19 is at least the sixth global health pandemic since the Great Influenza Pandemic of 1918, and although it has its origins in microbes carried by animals, like all pandemics its emergence has been entirely driven by human activities," said the report.

An estimated 1.7 million currently undiscovered viruses exist in mammals and birds, of which up to 850,000 could have the ability to infect people, the report said.

"There is no great mystery about the cause of the COVID-19 pandemic - or of any modern pandemic", said Dr Peter Daszak, president, EcoHealth Alliance and chair of the IPBES workshop, in a statement.

"The same human activities that drive climate change and biodiversity loss also drive pandemic risk through their impacts on our environment. Changes in the way we use land; the expansion and intensification of agriculture; and unsustainable trade, production and consumption disrupt nature and increase contact between wildlife, livestock, pathogens and people. This is the path to pandemics."

Pandemic risk can be significantly lowered by reducing the human activities that drive the loss of biodiversity, by greater conservation of protected areas, and through measures that reduce unsustainable exploitation of high biodiversity regions. This will reduce wildlife-livestock-human contact and help prevent the spillover of new diseases, said the report.

The report pointed out that it is costlier to control outbreaks once they emerge because of the costs of developing drugs, vaccines and implementing public health measures that could damage the world economy. It is much more cost-effective to prevent these outbreaks, it said.

"It is a known thing that zoonotic viruses, in which viruses jump from animals to humans, are the next threat to humans because they will be new viruses that humans are not exposed to. Once these viruses adapt to human hosts they will start spreading. SARS-Cov-2 virus that causes Covid-19 disease is a classic example before us. You cannot predict which virus will be more invasive that spreads faster," said Dr Shobha Broor, former head, department of microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

Dr Mahesh Sankaran, professor, National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore, said, "India has many features that can potentially come together to create the 'perfect storm' for the spillover of novel diseases in the future - high biodiversity, high population densities and extensive land transformation and fragmentation that has increased the extent of the human-wildlife interface." He said there was a critical need to integrate biodiversity and ecosystem service values into land planning and management, while also investing in restoring and protecting natural land- and waterscapes.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 29 -- The two overriding emotions that India is witnessing these days, thanks to the coronavirus-induced crisis, are fear and happiness. The first stems from the panic that the virus has caused and the harsh impact it has had on the poor and the economy. At the same time, there is a degree of relief at the impact on the environment; air and water bodies are cleaner now, and snow-clad mountains are visible from cities situated in the foothills.

But are these a cause for celebration? Many commentators point out that these developments are only a short-lived reality. When the lockdown is over, it will be business as usual, and we won't slow down to remember this magical interlude.

The last two months, however, have made us intensely aware about the linkages that exist between the destruction of the ecosystem and the systematic plunder of the natural environment to the coronavirus crisis. These observations are not new, but now they are gaining traction because we are collectively facing a crisis. It is known that zoonotic diseases emerge due to anthropogenic activities, linked to unsustainable economic practices of plundering diverse ecosystems through deforestation, mining, and illegal trade in wildlife. The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), like Avian influenza, Ebola, Nipah, and Zika, has origins in excessive human influence on natural environments. The recent exhortation by the acting executive secretary of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, to ban wildlife markets is testimony to this.

A return to business as usual will be suicidal. A balance must now be achieved in how humans and other living beings, as well as natural ecosystems, survive, if not thrive, in each other's company. The concept of "One Health" for humans, animals, and ecosystems can work as a guide to nations.

Originating from the discussions on biodiversity and the health of ecosystems, "One Health" is defined by the World Health Organization as "an approach to designing and implementing programmes, policies, legislation, and research in which multiple sectors communicate and work together to achieve better public health outcomes". The areas of work in which a 'One Health' approach is particularly relevant, the WHO says, is "food safety, the control of zoonoses (diseases that can spread between animals and humans.) and combating antibiotic resistance." We believe that "One Health" should become a key pillar of India's environmental policy.

A recent European Commission report highlights the links between the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the climate crisis. The report noted: "Experts suggest that degraded habitats coupled with a warming climate may encourage higher risks of disease transmission, as pathogens spread more easily to livestock and humans. Therefore, it is important - now more than ever before - to address the multiple and often interacting threats to ecosystems and wildlife to buffer against the risk of future pandemics, as well as preserve and enhance their role as carbon sinks and in climate adaptation."

Realigning the focus of environmental policy with the "One Health" concept will be transformational. It will prioritise the resilience of ecosystems as well as the relationships of humans and other living beings to their ecosystems, rather than focus on solutions like pollution control.

Such transformative change also requires new kinds of partnerships and alliances between actors within the government, civil society, and the private sector. To draw up a plan of action, the involvement of environmentalists, conservationists, and medical doctors will be a must. The ministries of environment, forests, climate change, and health and family welfare would have to work to develop and implement this transformative agenda.

There are some elements of this plan in the Government of India's programmes, but these have to be more emphatically articulated and implemented. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought with it untold misery. But it's given us an unexpected gift - the potential to press the reset button of the planet. We might celebrate the moment by taking photographs of peacocks on our terraces, but we shouldn't lose the opportunity of a large-scale overhaul of our environmental policies.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Oct. 13 -- The Boris Johnson government on Tuesday reiterated its call to people of Indian, Asian, Afro-Caribbean and other racial origins to volunteer for ongoing vaccine trials, including those by the University of Oxford-AstraZeneca.

The non-white community has been disproportionately affected by coronavirus pandemic, prompting the government to launch an inquiry. Currently the community is under-represented in six vaccine clinical trials taking place across the UK.

Officials said that of the 270,000 people who had signed up to the NHS Vaccine Registry (launched in July), only 11,000 volunteers are from Asian and British Asian backgrounds, and just 1,200 are Black, African, Caribbean or Black British.

Thousands of people from different ages and backgrounds are urgently needed to help speed up their development and ensure they work effectively for the whole population, the officials added.

Business secretary Alok Sharma said: "Coronavirus can affect anyone regardless of their background, age or race. To ensure we can find a safe and effective vaccine that works for everyone, we all need to get involved".

"That's why we are urging more people to support our incredible scientists and join the 270,000 people who have already signed-up so we can speed up efforts to find a vaccine to defeat this virus once and for all." he added.

Maheshi Ramasamy, consultant in Infectious Diseases and Acute General Medicine and principal investigator at the Oxford Vaccine Group, added: "We know that people from Black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds are disproportionately affected by Covid in terms of severe disease and mortality."

"So when we do have a vaccine that we roll out to the general population, it's really important that we can demonstrate to people from these communities that we have evidence that the vaccine works."

The UK government set up a Vaccine Taskforce in May to ensure speedy access to clinically effective and safe vaccines, while working with partners to support international access.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 30 -- The Covid-19 pandemic has tested the limits of healthcare systems across many countries and has caused serious damage to lives and economies around the world. From announcing the name of the disease caused by the novel coronavirus to tracing and studying the origins of the virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) has been active in the global effort against the Covid-19 pandemic.

According to official data from WHO, as on December 30, 2020, a total of 80,453,105 people have been infected with Covid-19 and 1,775,776 people have died due to the disease.

Companies like Pfizer and BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca have developed a potential Covid-19 vaccine candidate. However, the rampant spread of a new Covid-19 strain that emerged in the United Kingdom has again caused concerns among countries.

With more vaccine candidates emerging, here is a look back at some of the important scientific interventions by the WHO in the year ravaged by the pandemic -

Jan 9: WHO announced the spread of a new cluster of pneumonia patients in Wuhan, China and also said that the Chinese authorities have identified a new coronavirus as the possible pathogen.

February 11: The name for the new disease caused by the novel coronavirus was confirmed as Covid-19 by the WHO in accordance with the best practices for the naming of new human infectious diseases.

March 18: An international clinical trial named Solidarity was launched by WHO along with partner agencies intended to develop an effective drug for the disease. The trial involved 12,000 patients in 500 hospitals spread across 30 countries.

April 13: A pool of 130 scientists, funders and manufacturers from around the world, pledged to work with the WHO to speed up the process of finding a Covid-19 vaccine.

May 15: The WHO published a scientific brief about multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and adolescents temporally related to Covid-19.

June 17: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) arm of the Solidarity trials were stopped by the WHO, citing medical evidence that the drug doesn't reduce the mortality of Covid-19 patients who were already hospitalized.

July 1 & 2: More than 1000 researchers and scientists from various countries participated in the second Covid-19 summit of the WHO. The summit decided the treatment based on the different stages of the disease and also discussed criteria to further proceed with various vaccine candidates.

Also read: Where India stands in global Covid-19 spread

July 9: Possible Covid-19 transmission modes such as physical contact, droplets and mother-to-child were given by the WHO in an updated scientific brief.

Aug 3: Covid-19 Preparedness and Response Progress Report was published by the WHO. Progress made in some key areas of global effort against the pandemic and the future challenges were discussed in the report.

Oct 15: Evidence based on interim results that repurposed drugs like remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon were ineffective against hospitalized Covid-19 patients was submitted.

(With inputs from WHO's Covid-19 response timeline)

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 5 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

'Govt without a heart': Shivakumar stings Yediyurappa on Covid-19 response

In what is being seen as an astute political move by Congress, offering to pay fare of the migrants travelling across the country back to their native states, part of the credit should go to its Karnataka unit which made this initial offer to the state government locally on Saturday. Read more.

'Can't take risks': Kerala CM on flying back Indians without Covid-19 test

Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Tuesday said the Centre's plan to bring back Indians stranded abroad without testing them for coronavirus was fraught with risks. Read more.

Flights for stranded Indians to cost Rs 1 lakh from US, Rs 16k from UAE

Around 15,000 stranded Indians are expected to be flown back to India in 64 flights in the first week of the government's mammoth exercise to evacuate stranded Indians from abroad, union civil aviation minister Hardeep Puri said Tuesday. Read more.

In Centre's plan to get Indians abroad home, Aarogya Setu app must

As Centre plans mega evacuation plan, beginning Thursday, for Indians abroad, the ministry of home affairs issued a list of instructions which included a mandatory download of the Aarogya Setu app. Read more.

China must come clean on Covid-19| Opinion

China insists it has been fully transparent and hidden nothing on the killer coronavirus disease (Covid-19), whose international spread from Wuhan has turned into the greatest disaster of our time. So, why is Beijing opposing an independent international inquiry into the origins and spread of the virus? Read more.

Anup Jalota denies marrying Jasleen Matharu, says she is like his 'daughter' and he 'will do her kanyadaan'

In an interview with Bollywood Hungama, Anup said, "Not Again! My marriage to Jasleen is news to me. I and her father are looking for a suitable match for her. I have suggested to them a Punjabi boy living in Canada. Nothing is fixed yet." Read more.

Met Gala 2020: Priyanka Chopra's princess dreams, Kylie Jenner's ripped dress at the red carpet

The first Monday of May is a big day in fashion, this is the day when the Met Gala takes place, and the biggest names in fashion and entertainment strut their stuff on the iconic red carpet. However, this year, on account of the coronavirus pandemic, the Gala was cancelled. Read more.

Fred the doggo must be made for customer service because of the cute looks he is serving

We all know that the first day at a new job can be a little nerve-racking. It can be particularly hard if you work in customer service because customers predominantly only require service when they're unhappy with something. Read more.

Does coronavirus affect children differently?

Covid-19, the disease caused by the Sars-Cov-2 coronavirus appears to have largely spared young children. Most hospitalisations and deaths are among older adults and those with chronic illnesses, like diabetes, asthma, hypertension etc. However, clinicians in the US and Europe are investigating the possible link of a deadly inflammatory syndrome with coronavirus disease. Watch here.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- A top Chinese official on Wednesday dismissed accusations that China did not share all data with the World Health Organization (WHO)-appointed researchers tracing the origin of the Covid-19 virus.

The denial comes a day after the publication of the WHO-China joint report on the origins of Covid-19, following which WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Beijing withheld relevant data from the team of scientists who visited Wuhan in January.

Tedros was quoted as saying the investigation was "not extensive enough" and that experts had struggled to access raw information during their four-week visit to the central Chinese city of Wuhan where the virus first emerged in December, 2019.

Additionally, at least 14 countries, including the US, Australia, Canada, and the Czech Republic, raised concerns over the report released by the WHO on Tuesday into the origin of the coronavirus, citing delays and a lack of full access to data.

Speaking on the report on Wednesday, Liang Wannian, co-leader of the joint study, said Chinese and international researchers had access to the same data throughout the probe period and that the claims about lack of access were not accurate. "Of course, according to Chinese law, some data cannot be taken away or photographed, but when we were analysing it together in Wuhan, everyone could see the database, the materials - it was all done together."

Rejecting complaints about the report being delayed, Liang said "every sentence, every conclusion, every piece of data" needed to be verified by both sides before it could be released. "Throughout, we always upheld the principle of "quality comes first"," said Liang, chief of a Covid-19 experts' committee set up by the China's National Health Commission.

Liang had earlier told state media that to ".accomplish the arduous task of scientific cooperation and exchange, the Chinese side brought together the relevant institutions and hundreds of scientists and did their best to collect and collate data and conduct a preliminary analysis".

Liang said the origin tracing of the virus is a continuous work, adding that further tracing will be carried out around the globe, based on the findings of the study in China.

China was the first country to report Covid-19 cases, so the global tracing of virus origins was first conducted here, Liang said.

Separately, the Chinese foreign ministry on Wednesday called on all parties to respect science and the opinions and conclusions of the WHO report that found it's extremely unlikely the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The WHO said work could also be carried out in laboratories around the world if further evidence was available and needed, ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said, adding that China hopes that other relevant countries will cooperate with the WHO in the same open and transparent manner as China has done.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Jan. 17 -- As India begins its Covid-19 vaccination drive, it must protect against leaving its population with partial or subpar immunity to the coronavirus that may ultimately risk triggering mutations, experts who have tracked the launch of immunisations in the US and the UK have said, advising careful focus on speed as well as accuracy.

Viruses mutate due to what is known as selection pressure and - in addition to evolution within immunocompromised people - this could also happen in case of vaccines if the doses are given in a manner does not to lead to highest efficacy, or if they offer inadequate protection. "We know that the virus mutates... A subpar immune response may give immunological advantage to the virus and it may induce more genetic diversity within the virus," said Maria Elena Bottazzi, the associate dean, National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, in an interview to HT.

Bottazzi was speaking in the context of a debate in the US and the UK on whether to delay the second doses to ensure that vaccine inventories are used up to inoculate as many people as quickly possible - a strategy that may not be scientifically sound.

India has decided not to follow this model, and to give the vaccine at the 28-day intervals recommended by the manufacturers. "Scientifically, it is very clear that you need the doses at the right time to really get a robust immune response with good neutralising antibodies. So if we don't vaccinate people on time, they might end up with a subpar level of immune response and that could be complicating because we know the virus mutates," Botazzi said.

"I understand the anxiety of trying to have as many people vaccinated but I think it should be on the basis of how much inventory we have. Yes, vaccinate as many people as possible but you have to make sure that each individual has the required second dose."

A similar threat is also posed if the vaccines are not as effective. "A partially effective vaccine could drive the evolution of new variants, which would be a serious problem," said John P Moore, leading virologist and professor at Cornell University's Weill Cornell Medicine in an interview over email. Concerns over efficacy have surrounded one of the vaccines that India rolled out on Saturday since Covaxin, made by Bharat Biotech, is yet to reach the clinical trial threshold where it can be determined if and by how much the vaccine is able to offer protection from disease.

At the time of its approval, authorities said that it is likely to be a better option in fighting mutations that have been seen in several countries since it uses a whole virion to train the body to recognise the pathogen, instead of just the Spike protein that most other vaccines mimic for an immune response. "There is no reason why an inactivated virus vaccine would automatically be superior to an adenovirus vector vaccine. Only data can show which is better," said Moore, while adding that such remarks by administration members could be "based on the national origins of the vaccines". "That has happened in the UK too, where the British government speaks very, very highly of the Oxford vaccine," he added.

The two experts also said that it is important to ensure that immunisation programmes avoid controversy that could fuel vaccine scepticism. For instance, the approval to a vaccine without efficacy data "was not a good idea", according to Moore. "It would not happen in the US, or in Western Europe. The Russians and Chinese have done this. I don't think it's a good idea, as it could harm public confidence in what they are being asked to take," he said.

The concerns surfaced on Saturday, when at least two doctors groups - the Tamil Nadu doctors' association and a group of doctors in Delhi's Ram Manohar Lohia hospital - indicated they were reluctant to take Covaxin.

Like Covaxin, the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine (called Covishield in India), dose also elicited some controversy after its trials were found to have been conducted with unplanned dosing and threw up varying efficacy numbers. However, both vaccines have in early clinical stages have proven safety and an ability to trigger an immune response.

When they cleared the Oxford-AstraZeneca dose, regulators in UK said second doses can be delayed by up to 12 weeks in order to focus on reaching as many people as possible for first shots since even those can provide some immunity. The approach, however, was not part of clinical trials.

The authorities were partly driven by the fast spread of the B.1.1.7 variant of the coronavirus (also known as VOC202012/01), which has been linked to higher infectivity. Following its discovery, several other variants have been found - some of which have raised fears that vaccines may be rendered obsolete.

"We are concerned with any mutation that occurs in the spike or particularly in the RBD (receptor binding domain - the portion of the virus responsible for entering a host cell). There is initial data that is giving us optimism that some of this may not alter the ability of producing neutralising antibodies with the vaccines," said Bottazzi, whose team at Baylor is also developing a DNA recombinant vaccine with Hyderabad-based Biological E. The vaccine candidate is in Phase I/II trials.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, June 22 -- US President Donald Trump on Saturday told supporters at an election rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma that he had ordered officials to slow down testing for Covid-19 as it led to more cases.

"You know testing is a double edged sword," Trump said,. "When you do testing to that extent you're going to find more cases. So I said to my people slow the testing down."

His remarks came as Covid-19 cases in the US rose the most in three weeks as infections topped 30,000 for a second straight day on Sunday, adding to concern about a resurgence. Tulsa county, where Trump held the rally, on Sunday reported a record high of 143 cases in the last 24 hours.

The campaign of presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden slammed Trump's admission on testing as an "an outrageous moment" that showed he "is putting politics ahead of the safety and economic well-being of the American people".

Trump unleashed months of pent-up grievances about the coronavirus, which he dubbed the "Kung flu," a racist term referring to its origins in China. He also tried to defend his handling of the pandemic.

But his intended show of political force featured thousands of empty seats and six new coronavirus cases on his own campaign staff, hours before the rally began.

Based on an estimated 1 million RSVPs, the campaign had planned an indoor rally and one outdoors for the spillover crowd. No one showed up for the outdoor event.

Evidently surprised and embarrassed the campaign sought to blame protestors and media for the low turnout.

"Radical protestors, coupled with a relentless onslaught from the media, attempted to frighten off the President's supporters. We are proud of the thousands who stuck it out," Tim Murtaugh, a campaign spokesman, said.

There were sporadic incidents of clashes between Trump supporters and protestors, but not as widespread or of a scale as portrayed by the Trump campaign.

Police used pepper balls in once instance, Tulsaworld, a local news publication, reported. One protester was arrested, but he was demonstrating peacefully.

In a speech lasting almost two hours, the president slammed Biden seeking to tie him to the antiracism protests that have ripped through the country over the past weeks, marked by violence, looting and clashes with law enforcements forces.

On Sunday, White House official Peter Navarro said the Trump administration was preparing for a second wave of Covid-19 . "We are filling the stockpile in anticipation of a possible problem in the fall," he told CNN.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 31 -- A top Chinese official on Wednesday dismissed accusations that China did not share all data with the World Health Organization (WHO)-appointed researchers tracing the origin of the Covid-19 virus.

The denial comes a day after the publication of the WHO-China joint report on the origins of Covid-19, following which WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Beijing withheld relevant data from the team of scientists who visited Wuhan in January.

Tedros was quoted as saying the investigation was "not extensive enough" and that experts had struggled to access raw information during their four-week visit to the central Chinese city of Wuhan where the virus first emerged in December, 2019.

Additionally, at least 14 countries, including the US, Australia, Canada, and the Czech Republic, raised concerns over the report released by the WHO on Tuesday into the origin of the coronavirus, citing delays and a lack of full access to data.

Speaking on the report on Wednesday, Liang Wannian, co-leader of the joint study, said Chinese and international researchers had access to the same data throughout the probe period and that the claims about lack of access were not accurate. "Of course, according to Chinese law, some data cannot be taken away or photographed, but when we were analysing it together in Wuhan, everyone could see the database, the materials - it was all done together."

Rejecting complaints about the report being delayed, Liang said "every sentence, every conclusion, every piece of data" needed to be verified by both sides before it could be released. "Throughout, we always upheld the principle of "quality comes first"," said Liang, chief of a Covid-19 experts' committee set up by the China's National Health Commission.

Liang had earlier told state media that to ".accomplish the arduous task of scientific cooperation and exchange, the Chinese side brought together the relevant institutions and hundreds of scientists and did their best to collect and collate data and conduct a preliminary analysis".

Liang said the origin tracing of the virus is a continuous work, adding that further tracing will be carried out around the globe, based on the findings of the study in China.

China was the first country to report Covid-19 cases, so the global tracing of virus origins was first conducted here, Liang said.

Separately, the Chinese foreign ministry on Wednesday called on all parties to respect science and the opinions and conclusions of the WHO report that found it's extremely unlikely the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The WHO said work could also be carried out in laboratories around the world if further evidence was available and needed, ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying said, adding that China hopes that other relevant countries will cooperate with the WHO in the same open and transparent manner as China has done.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, Jan. 17 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 1 PM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

China 'systematically prevented' probe into Covid-19 origins, says US as WHO team begins work

The United States State Department has released a fact sheet on the activity at Institute of Virology in China's Wuhan, the city where the outbreak was first reported late last year. Read more

India vs Australia: Washington Sundar becomes third Indian to achieve unique feat

At the start of the series, it did not look like Washington Sundar will get a chance in the Test series. Read more

Apple foldable iPhone: Company tests flexible Samsung screen but with its own tech

We have already heard a lot about the 'Foldable iPhone'. As per recent rumours, the firm seems to be testing two kinds of foldable designs as well. While one has a Samsung Galaxy Fold design, the other prototype has a Galaxy Z Flip folding design. Read more

Fabulous Lives' Neelam Kothari, Maheep Kapoor, Seema Khan and Bhavana Pandey are in Rajasthan: 'The squad's back'

The stars of Fabulous Lives of Bollywood Wives - Bhavana Pandey, Neelam Kothari Soni, Maheep Kapoor and Seema Khan - are in Rajasthan and in work mode. All of them shared pictures and videos from the tourist hotspot, Jodhpur. They have gathered there to shoot for the second season of their hit Netflix show. Read more

Mom gets puppy as gift, her reaction is too cute to handle. Watch

An adorable video which shows the reaction of a woman after meeting her tiny new puppy for the first time has created a buzz online. Shared on Reddit, the video is all about love and happiness. Read more

New bride Gauahar Khan slays comfy athleisure look in chic sweater and pyjamas

The newlywed couple Gauahar Khan and Zaid Darbar have been posting a lot of adorable images with each other and their families on social media since they tied the knot in December. Gauahar, who was recently seen in Tandav has been sharing about the way she is spending time after marriage with her fans, it involves a lot of shooting and family time. Read more

Rhino strays into a residential area in Assam's Nagaon

A rhinoceros was spotted in a residential area in Assam on January 16. The rhinoceros had entered a residential area of Kaliabor in Nagaon district. The rhinoceros is suspected to have strayed out from Kaziranga National. Watch more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 12 -- An India-Nepal body overseeing the implementation of development projects funded by New Delhi is set to meet in Kathmandu next week, the first high-level contact between the two sides since ties were hit by a border row that erupted last year.

The joint oversight mechanism, which was launched in 2016 and reviews progress in bilateral projects, is scheduled to hold a meeting on August 17, people familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity.

The meeting between Indian envoy Vinay Mohan Kwatra and Nepal's foreign secretary, Shanker Das Bairagi, who jointly chair the mechanism, is being seen by some quarters in Kathmandu as a positive development after the border row took relations to a new low.

"The mechanism will only focus on the implementation of India-funded projects in Nepal. However, it could help break the logjam in relations," said a person.

A second person described the scheduled meeting of the mechanism as "part of regular interaction between India and Nepal". He added, "This oversight mechanism was set up in 2016 to review ongoing bilateral economic and development projects and meets on a periodic basis."

During its seventh meeting in July last year, the mechanism reviewed the implementation of projects such as cross-border rail links, petroleum pipelines, roads, bridges, integrated border check posts, energy, irrigation, and post-earthquake reconstruction.

The border row erupted late last year after Nepal objected to the inclusion of the Kalapani region, which is claimed by Kathmandu, in a new map showing the union territory of Ladakh that was issued by India. The row was exacerbated in May, when India opened a new road to the Lipulekh region on the border with Tibet, as this area, too, is claimed by Nepal.

Nepal responded by issuing a new map that showed Kalapani, Lipulekh, and Limpiyadhura, which are all controlled by India, as part of Nepalese territory. Kathmandu also said New Delhi has not responded to several requests for talks on the border issue, though India said a meeting couldn't be arranged because of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nepal's foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali told The Kathmandu Post on Tuesday: "We don't have alternatives to talks...We can't hold our entire ties hostage to the differences over the boundary issue."

Gyawali said Nepal is confident its partnership with India will move in a positive direction. "For the time being, the boundary issues can be isolated...Differences over one issue should not overshadow our entire bilateral relations...We believe in constructive engagement, and the upcoming meeting is just one positive step towards that end," he added.

In recent weeks, the two countries have also engaged in a war of words over the origins of historic figures such as Lord Ram and Gautam Buddha.

Nepal on Sunday responded to external affairs minister S Jaishankar's remarks that Gautam Buddha was one of the two greatest Indians for people around the world by saying historical and archaeological evidence shows the founder of Buddhism was born in Nepalese territory. India clarified that Jaishankar had referred to the shared heritage of the two countries.

Last month, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli sparked a controversy with his remarks that the "real" Ayodhya is in Nepal and that Lord Ram was Nepalese. He also said Nepal had "become a victim of cultural encroachment" and its history was manipulated.

Following protests in India, the Nepal government clarified Oli's remarks were "not linked to any political subject" and there was "no intention...to hurt the feeling and sentiment of anyone".

Nischal Pandey, director of the Kathmandu-based Centre for South Asian Studies, was quoted by the Nepalese media as saying: "A weekly war of words between Indian and Nepali officials and subsequent issuance of clarifications does not bode well for bilateral ties."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- The Australian draft resolution at the World Health Assembly calling for an investigation into the sources of the virus is necessary, and India has rightly supported it. China's decision to treat this as an unfriendly act has given the resolution a political hue. It has also drawn attention to China's absurd refusal to not allow the World Health Organization (WHO) or any international scientific team to study ground zero of the outbreak. Given the destruction the virus has wrought, Beijing could only have improved its battered image by allowing an investigation. The United States, which sees Covid-19 through the prism of great power rivalry, did not join in because China was not directly mentioned.

Having a global scientific investigation into the origins of a pandemic should have been a routine affair. That it has now become a geopolitical battleground is a sign that the international health system, particularly WHO, needs reform. Though a United Nations agency, it was unusual in being funded and directed by non-governmental organisations. This is why it proved so inept at navigating global politics or rejecting the unreasonable demands of Beijing. Member-states should lay the ground for a larger debate on how WHO should be overhauled. The world can't afford another pandemic, and this should be the overriding thought of all countries, including China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- The entire Delhi has a high load of coronavirus cases, and all of its 11 districts are under the red zone classification, according to a revised list released by the Centre on Thursday.

The Centre said that recovery rates have gone up, so the districts have now been reclassified under different categories.

According to Centre's guidelines, districts with high load of coronavirus cases or which have a high growth rate of the disease are classified under red zones, while those with considerably fewer cases of the respiratory infection fall in orange zones.

Districts with no coronavirus cases are categorised as green zones.

An order released by the Union health ministry along with the list said that it's a dynamic list and will be updated on weekly basis or earlier. "The states will be communicated for further follow-up action in consonance with the directions issued by the Union Home Ministry. under the Disaster Management Act, 2005," the order further said.

The states have been empowered to add areas/districts to red and orange zones based on field feedback and additional analysis, but they cannot relax the zonal classification as communicated by the Union health ministry.

The National Capital Region (NCR) has a large number of hostpots or 'red zones'. These include Faridabad, Sonipat, and Noida (Gautam Buddh Nagar).

The government in Haryana, which surrounds Delhi from three sides, has said that many of the Covid-19 cases in its NCR districts have their origins in infections emanating from the national capital and the authorities had ordered sealing the districts with Delhi to check spread of the infection.

The worst-affected districts of the state with maximum number of positive cases are Nuh (58), Gurgaon (54), Faridabad (53), Palwal (34), Sonipat (25), Jhajjar (24) and Panchkula (18).

Meanwhile, the district administration in Gautam Buddh Nagar said that the number of coronavirus hotspots has risen to 54. Out of these, 21 are in the green zone, nine are in the orange zone and 24 are in the red zone.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 14 -- India has expressed its "deep displeasure" at the World Health Organisation's maps that inaccurately depict the boundaries of the country in the map used by the organisation's web portals and asked director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus to immediately replace them with fresh maps, people familiar with the matter said.

New Delhi's strongly-worded letter to the WHO is the third in a month. The other two, on 3 and 30 December, were addressed to the WHO director general's office. These communications pointed out that videos and maps including the coronavirus dashboard did not accurately reflect India's boundaries.

Last week, India's Permanent Representative to the UN Indra Mani Pandey escalated the request to Tedros Adhanom.

"I write to express my deep displeasure at the inaccurate depiction of the boundaries of India in the maps of various web portals of WHO. In this regard, I draw your attention to our previous messages sent to WHO pointing out similar inaccuracies. I again request your immediate intervention for removal of maps inaccurately depicting the boundaries of India from various web portals of WHO and their replacement with accurate maps," Indra Mani Pandey said in his 8 January letter to Tedros accessed by Hindustan Times.

WHO maps show the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh in a different shade than the rest of India. The Shaksgam Valley spread across 5,168 sq km, which was illegally ceded by Pakistan to China in 1963, is shown as part of China. The Aksai Chin region occupied by China in 1954 is shown in light blue strips, a shade similar to the colour used to depict Chinese territory.

Publishing inaccurate maps of India is a criminal offence under Indian law, punishable with a six-month jail term and fine. In 2016, the government had proposed to raise the jail term to 7 years and give judges the power to impose a Rs.100 crore fine. But the proposal, part of a geospatial information law proposed by the government in 2016, wasn't pursued by the government.

A senior government official said WHO's use of distorted maps for its widely-publicised and closely-watched Covid-19 tracker is very unfortunate. "The government will follow up with WHO and all relevant authorities to get the correct maps to be used," he said.

The official added that he was confident the WHO chief, who was accused by the US of siding with China to play down the coronavirus disease that was first reported in China's Wuhan city, would not let politics stand in the way of fixing inaccuracies in the map.

The World Health Assembly had, primarily under pressure from the United States, decided in May last year to send a team of experts to China to probe the origins of the disease. The 10-member team of experts was able to land in China on Thursday, seven months after the WHO director-general had committed to the probe. The experts will, however, have to spend two weeks in quarantine before President Xi Jinping's government will allow them to step out of their hotels to start their mission.

Beijing allowed the visit days after Tedros publicly said he was disappointed with the delay, an unusual public complaint by the head of the WHO.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 19 -- India is right in supporting an investigation. WHO reform should be next

The Australian draft resolution at the World Health Assembly calling for an investigation into the sources of the virus is necessary, and India has rightly supported it. China's decision to treat this as an unfriendly act has given the resolution a political hue. It has also drawn attention to China's absurd refusal to not allow the World Health Organization (WHO) or any international scientific team to study ground zero of the outbreak. Given the destruction the virus has wrought, Beijing could only have improved its battered image by allowing an investigation. The United States, which sees Covid-19 through the prism of great power rivalry, did not join in because China was not directly mentioned.

Having a global scientific investigation into the origins of a pandemic should have been a routine affair. That it has now become a geopolitical battleground is a sign that the international health system, particularly WHO, needs reform. Though a United Nations agency, it was unusual in being funded and directed by non-governmental organisations. This is why it proved so inept at navigating global politics or rejecting the unreasonable demands of Beijing. Member-states should lay the ground for a larger debate on how WHO should be overhauled. The world can't afford another pandemic, and this should be the overriding thought of all countries, including China.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

After no Covid-19 deaths in a week, Telangana records 3 in one day

After a brief lull, Telangana witnessed a sudden spike in the Covid-19 cases, including three deaths, on Thursday night. The state was expecting that it would become coronavirus-free by the first week of May. Read more

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury's requests for a phone call with Piyush Goyal pending for 4 days is about migrants

Senior Congress leader from West Bengal Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury has written to the railways minister Piyush Goyal on May 1, 2020, with a request to make time for a telephonic conversation regarding the return of migrant labourers from West Bengal who are stranded in different states due to the ongoing nationwide lockdown. Read more

As Pune slums emerge as Covid-19 hotspots, political activists urge for tweak in strategy

Pune Municipal Corporation authorities have said that notwithstanding the poor response from slum dwellers to shifting to the nearly 70 temporary shelters created in civic schools, numerous steps have been taken to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the city's slums. Read more

WHO wants invite to China's probe into virus origins

The World Health Organization said Friday it hoped China would invite it to take part in its investigations into the animal origins of the novel coronavirus. Read more

India lose top spot in ICC Test rankings for first time since October 2016

The Virat Kohli-led Indian cricket team was dethroned from the top spot in the ICC Test rankings for the first time in close to four years after cricket parent's body announced the latest rankings on Friday. India had yielded the top spot for since October 2016. Read more

Telangana TSCHE extends deadline to apply for EAMCET 2020, other CETs

Telangana State Council of Higher Education (TSCHE) has further pushed the deadline to apply for all the Common Entrance Tests (CET) that were scheduled to be conducted this year. Read more

Love in the time of coronavirus: Crumbling modern relationships and how familiarity breeds contempt

To be "Quarantined in love", would surmise almost every true-blue romantic's fantasy, a long honeymoon masquerading as a harsh decree. Read more

Xiaomi phones record your web and phone use, claim researchers

Gabi Cirlig called his new Xiaomi phone "a backdoor with phone functionality". And he wasn't really joking. Cirlig was speaking to Forbes after discovering that "his Redmi Note 8 smartphone was watching much of what he was doing on the phone". Read more

Mrs Serial Killer movie review: Jacqueline Fernandez's Netflix film is a torturous experience; one of the worst films of 2020

Much before Mrs Serial Killer even begins killing, you'd wish she just abandon going after her target and focus on you instead. You'd be willing to come quietly, without putting up any struggle at all. Read more

Cops attacked in Gujarat's Godhra, health worker attacked in MP's Tikamgarh

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 2 -- There is an increase in the number of Canadians viewing India's growing economic power as an opportunity, while more and more of them now see China's rise in the domain as a threat. These are among the findings of a national opinion poll conducted by the Vancouver-headquartered non-profit Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada (APF Canada).

The organisation that strives to be a bridge between Canada and the Asia-Pacific region has been tracking Canadian attitudes towards the economic rise of India and China since 2004.

"Between 2018 and 2020, the change in perceptions for China and India has followed opposing paths, something we have not observed before. While 72% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of India is more of an opportunity than a threat, a modest increase since 2018 (71%), only 35% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of China is more as an opportunity than a threat, down from 60% in 2018," the results of the annual survey revealed.

This is the also the first time that the survey has shown the majority of respondents seeing China's economic power as a threat, at 57%.

Again, the perception towards India is headed towards a positive direction with just 18% seeing its economic growth as a threat, which the APF Canada described as "an all-time low".

Canadians' general feeling towards India has also remained stable. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means "very warm, favourable", India scores 5.7.

"Over the past decade, the governments of India and Canada have been making efforts to build a mutually beneficial relationship, which can only prosper further if the Canadian public also holds a positive view," the report noted. "On the flip side, Canadians' feelings towards China, which had been remarkably stable for the past decade until 2018, dropped from 4.9 to 3.6 in 2020."

The survey said there was support for Canada entering into a free trade agreement (FTA) with India, though that was not the case with regard to China. Just about one-third voiced support for an FTA with China, which 59%.

"It marks the lowest support for an FTA with China since we started polling Canadians on the subject in 2012," the report stated.

One of reasons behind the growing animosity of Canadians' towards China is the Covid-19 pandemic. Two-third of Canadians disagreed with the statement that the Chinese government "acted responsibly" at the beginning of the outbreak in Wuhan.

The vast majority, at 68%, "feel that Canada should support an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 virus".

Human rights abuses and the arrest and detention of two Canadians by the Chinese government are also feeding into the escalating negativity.

"The majority of Canadians (83%) feel that Canada should stand up to China as Canadian national values such as the rule of law, human rights, and democracy are on the line," the report pointed out, while "67% think Canada should work alongside the US and other allies to pressure China, and about 67% also believe Canada should take a more aggressive approach towards China" to liberate the two imprisoned there.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 5 -- There are many ways in which one can write about an evolving event such as the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic, which is unique in some non-virological and non-epidemiological ways as well.

It is the first pandemic of the Internet Age (SARS broke when the Internet was still in its infancy, and vaccine technology, patently previous generation). As such it is also the first pandemic of the Information Age, which comes with its own Mr Hyde, misinformation.

One is the classic news-you-can-use approach. After all, the coronavirus disease affects pretty much everyone; avoiding it requires the use of masks, social distancing, staying away from crowded indoor facilities (including air-conditioned malls and offices), and repeated washing of hands. At least in the initial months, it also included the wearing of gloves and the furious cleaning of surfaces although it is now clear that catching an infection from a surface is rare; the virus, after all, is airborne, although most of the infection appears to be aerosol based, from close contact with an infected person whose respiratory droplets carry the virus.

That - the potential airborne nature of the SARS-CoV-2 virus as prudent scientists term it - offers a natural segue into the second approach, the real-time scientific commentary. It took a long time for public health agencies to admit the (potential) airborne nature of the virus that causes Covid-19; there was significant debate before the universal relevance and benefits of masks were acknowledged; and many false dawns with therapies (remember HCQ, and Remdesivir, and plasma therapy). Because Covid-19 affects us all, and because there is a sudden surge of interest in viruses, infection curves, therapies, and vaccines (accompanied by a huge increase in the volume of non-peer-reviewed research being published), a new category of experts has emerged. Some trained, some untrained, they have sought to make sense of it all - in real-time. I'd like to think of the column I wrote for this newspaper for 10 months (238 instalments in all) as an effort in this direction.

The third, because Covid-19 is a public health crisis that has resulted in an economic crisis, is an approach that critiques the governmental response to both.

All are interesting ways to write about something that has changed everything. It has, at last count, infected 115,049,044 and killed 2,551,767 (Figures for March 2 on worldometers.info/coronavirus/). Many more are likely to have been infected without ever knowing about it. In addition to lives, it has taken a toll on livelihoods. It has affected social interactions, work, play, education, even the simple act of popping down to the corner store to pick up milk and eggs.

But there is a fourth way to write about it as well. This is to contextualise and place our emerging and growing knowledge of the virus, the toll it takes on human bodies, and therapies that treat the disease and vaccines that prevent it within the larger knowledge framework of viruses, viral diseases, and treatments and vaccines. The best books of this kind actually do one better: they use what we have recently learnt about this virus and this disease to improve the framework itself. After all, it is only natural that our knowledge of zoonotic diseases in general, and beta coronaviruses in particular, even the human immune system increases as we learn more about the SARS-COV-2 virus; how it attacks the human body; and the immune system's response to it.

Anirban Mahapatra's Covid-19: Separating Fact from Fiction is one such (and thus far, the only such). Mahapatra, a microbiologist, and I have both been on Twitter for over a decade I think, and following each other for almost as long. I do not remember why I started following him, but it's likely I did so after he posted what is called a threshold concept. These are an established concept in education dating back to the early 21st century (although they have always been there in some form) and refer to insights that once understood, change the way we perceive a subject. The best education, I have come to learn, has to do with teaching threshold concepts (and it is something very few schools or teachers do or even know how to). Threshold concepts are elementary in the true Holmesian sense - obvious once someone has done the hard work of pointing them out. And Mahapatra has that ability.

It's evident across the book, even when it comes to things that are, at least in hindsight, basic.

Such as when Mahapatra is writing about the structure of the virus.

"One of the central themes of biology, at the level of molecules and atoms, is that structure is related to function. How a large molecule or a biological machine is shaped determines what it does and how well it does its job. If its shape is distorted it might not function well at all. And structures that do a job well are maintained across generations and different species," he writes.

And a little further down: "The relationship between structure and function is such an obvious and elegant unifying concept that it should be in school biology books. Except it isn't. I wish someone had told me when I was up at night memorizing minutiae for exams in school. In biology size does matter. And so does shape."

It is these bits that elevate Covid-19: Separating Fact from Fiction from a book about the coronavirus pandemic to one about understanding the current pandemic in the context of the science of viruses and viral pandemics. Mahapatra's writing complements this clear-minded approach. It is crisp to the fault of being brief, and he is punctilious about distinguishing between facts and theories. This is a book where the author tells the reader what he knows, and, importantly, what he doesn't. The names of the chapters themselves reflect Mahapatra's economy with words: each is a single word (Origins, says one; Immunity, says another; Aftermath, says a third).

I am not convinced this is a book meant for lay audiences, though; but it is perfect for scientifically-inclined amateurs who want to know more about the virus, the disease, and vaccines. There are enough of them around.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 19 -- US President Joe Biden will announce on Friday a total contribution of $4 billion to the Covax facility, a programme backed by the World Health Organization (WHO) to ensure equitable distribution of Covid-19 vaccines around the world that his predecessor Donald Trump had spurned over his feud with the global health body.

India is the largest beneficiary of Covax, clinching a deal earlier this month to receive 97.1 million of the 2 billion doses to be distributed under the programme, according to an agreement announced earlier in February.

Covax is a collaboration involving the WHO, the Gavi vaccine alliance, and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI).

Biden will announce the new contribution during a virtual meeting of the G7, according to a senior administration official.

The first tranche of $2 billion will go to Gavi, the White House said in a note. The remaining $2 billion will be released over 2021 and 2022. The first lot of $500 million will be paid after initial donor pledges are fulfilled and first vaccine doses have been delivered.

"In close cooperation with Gavi, this additional $2 billion in funding will serve to expand Covax's reach," the White House note said. "We also call on our G7 and other partners to work alongside Gavi, to bring in billions more in resources to support global Covid-19 vaccination, and to target urgent vaccine manufacturing, supply, and delivery needs."

Former US president Donald Trump had kept the United States out of this programme as he had fought with the WHO for what he had called partisan support of China's misleading initial claims and statements about the origins of the coronavirus.

Trump had terminated US funding for the WHO - as its biggest contributor - in the middle of the deadliest pandemic to hit the world in more than 100 years.

It turned out to be a part of a pattern that defined his legacy - the US left Unesco, the Paris Agreement on climate, the Iran nuclear deal, and UN human rights council during his tenure.

On his first day in office, Biden announced that the US will rejoin the Paris Agreement and the WHO.

He has since vowed to return the US to the world stage and reclaim its leadership role that was forsaken by Trump as he had sought to pursue an America-first agenda.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The closure of the Suez Canal, one of the world's most critical water bodies, due to a large container vessel, the MV Ever Given, running aground on March 23 while in transit, has caused enormous disruption to global shipping. Sustained efforts by the Suez Canal Authority (SCA) and the Egyptian government to dislodge the vessel and refloat it have been less than successful.

More than 300 ships waiting to cross the Suez that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Seahave piled up on either side of the canal. On an average, 50 ships transit the Suez every day and, as per SCA, in 2020, nearly 19,000 vessels with a net tonnage of 1.17 billion tonnes transited the canal, which is the second-highest load in the history of the Suez. The value of goods shipped through the canal is estimated to be $9.5 billion daily - the MV Ever Given, for example, was laden with cargo worth $1 billion. Annually, this is about 8% of global trade and the canal generated $5.3 billion in revenue for the Egyptian exchequer in 2017.

The origins of the Suez Canal go back to the ancient period and the first waterway was dug during the reign of Senausert III Pharaoh of Egypt (1874 BC). However, this rudimentary canal was abandoned due to silting and reopened several times in the intervening centuries. The modern Suez was built in the mid-19th century through efforts by the French and opened for navigation on November 17, 1869. This was a tectonic development for global maritime connectivity and impacted colonial history in a definitive manner. The rise of the British Empire was enabled considerably by this canal. Since its inauguration, the Suez has been closed five times - the longest period being the eight years from 1967 to 1975 during the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The current closure will be very expensive for global trade - the shipping industry and insurance companies - and it is estimated that the loss per hour is almost $400 million. Some positive movement is being reported, and it is hoped that the Suez will soon be open for transit. In the event that the MV Ever Given remains wedged across the breadth of the canal for a longer period, the negative impact on the intricate and delicately balanced global supply-chain and oil prices will impose additional costs on the customer globally.

This aspect points to the fragility of global trade. While the worldwide logistic management chain has acquired a high degree of efficiency by way of manufacturing goods to tight schedules and keeping inventory/warehouse/shipping costs to the bare minimum, even while ensuring timely delivery to the customer, an unforeseen accident such as the Suez closure can lead to a cascading downstream disruption of trade with attendant economic consequences. This is bleak news in a Covid-19-scarred world.

The Suez along, with the Panama (that links the Pacific and Atlantic oceans), are the two most critical canals in the global maritime domain along with the Volga-Don and the Grand Canal (China). Each canal has its own navigational challenges and protocols, and in most cases, local pilots are deployed for every ship to ensure safe passage. Tug boats are used to enable the safe passage through restricted waters, and as the history of the Suez demonstrates, the kind of canal closure related to the MV Ever Given is an exception.

While the exact cause for the current accident is yet to be ascertained, preliminary reports suggest that very strong wind conditions that occur often in the region may have exacerbated the complex transit of a large vessel. In shallow waters, when a heavy vessel displaces water, it is not replaced immediately as would be the case in deeper waters and a partial vacuum occurs near the propeller. Steering behaviour can then become sluggish and this is compounded by what mariners refer to as "smelling the ground" when a ship in a channel nears a shoal and then lurches from one side to the other, making it difficult to navigate.

Whatever the final verdict about why the MV Ever Given ran aground, it would be fair to surmise that the causes would be a mix of material failure, human error and unanticipated local conditions. Given the scale of the consequences - both fiscal and supply-chain disruption - the need to objectively review existing procedures and protocols specific to the Suez merits the highest priority.

Incidentally, the crew on board the stricken MV Ever Given are all Indians and while the resilience of merchant ships and maximum profit orientation of the shipping industry are under scrutiny, the welfare of the seafarer in these times merits policy review. Working conditions at sea for the crew are very exacting and this is an issue that warrants empathetic attention even as global attention is focused on ensuring that the Suez Canal is navigable again.

Commodore (retired) C Uday Bhaskar is director, Society for Policy Studies

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 30 -- The two overriding emotions that India is witnessing these days, thanks to the coronavirus-induced crisis, are fear and happiness. The first stems from the panic that the virus has caused and the harsh impact it has had on the poor and the economy. At the same time, there is a degree of relief at the impact on the environment; air and water bodies are cleaner now, and snow-clad mountains are visible from cities situated in the foothills.

But are these a cause for celebration? Many commentators point out that these developments are only a short-lived reality. When the lockdown is over, it will be business as usual, and we won't slow down to remember this magical interlude.

The last two months, however, have made us intensely aware of the linkages that exist between the destruction of the ecosystem and the systematic plunder of the natural environment to the coronavirus crisis. These observations are not new, but now they are gaining traction because we are collectively facing a crisis. It is known that zoonotic diseases emerge due to anthropogenic activities, linked to unsustainable economic practices of plundering diverse ecosystems through deforestation, mining, and illegal trade in wildlife. The coronavirus disease (Covid-19), like Avian influenza, Ebola, Nipah, and Zika, has origins in excessive human influence on natural environments. The recent exhortation by the acting executive secretary of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, to ban wildlife markets is testimony to this.

A return to business as usual will be suicidal. A balance must now be achieved in how humans and other living beings, as well as natural ecosystems, survive, if not thrive, in each other's company. The concept of "One Health" for humans, animals, and ecosystems can work as a guide to nations.

Originating from the discussions on biodiversity and the health of ecosystems, "One Health" is defined by the World Health Organization as "an approach to designing and implementing programmes, policies, legislation, and research in which multiple sectors communicate and work together to achieve better public health outcomes". The areas of work in which a 'One Health' approach is particularly relevant, the WHO says, is "food safety, the control of zoonoses (diseases that can spread between animals and humans...) and combating antibiotic resistance." We believe that "One Health" should become a key pillar of India's environmental policy.

A recent European Commission report highlights the links between the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) and the climate crisis. The report noted: "Experts suggest that degraded habitats coupled with a warming climate may encourage higher risks of disease transmission, as pathogens spread more easily to livestock and humans. Therefore, it is important - now more than ever before - to address the multiple and often interacting threats to ecosystems and wildlife to buffer against the risk of future pandemics, as well as preserve and enhance their role as carbon sinks and in climate adaptation."

Realigning the focus of environmental policy with the "One Health" concept will be transformational. It will prioritise the resilience of ecosystems as well as the relationships of humans and other living beings to their ecosystems, rather than focus on solutions like pollution control.

Such transformative change also requires new kinds of partnerships and alliances between actors within the government, civil society, and the private sector. To draw up a plan of action, the involvement of environmentalists, conservationists, and medical doctors will be a must. The ministries of environment, forests, climate change, and health and family welfare would have to work to develop and implement this transformative agenda.

There are some elements of this plan in the Government of India's programmes, but these have to be more emphatically articulated and implemented. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought with it untold misery. But it's given us an unexpected gift - the potential to press the reset button of the planet. We might celebrate the moment by taking photographs of peacocks on our terraces, but we shouldn't lose the opportunity of a large-scale overhaul of our environmental policies.

Bharati Chaturvedi is founder and director, Chintan Environmental Research and Action Group.

The article has been co-authored by Ashish Chaturvedi, director, Climate Change, GIZ, India

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 4 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Lockdown 3.0: Stringent curbs continue at Noida-Delhi border

Stringent restrictions continued to be in place at the Delhi-Gautam Budh Nagar (GBN) border on Monday, the day lockdown 3.0 began in India with area-specific relaxations.GBN district magistrate (DM) Suhas Lalinakere Yathiraj tweeted the dos and don'ts of interstate travel on Sunday. Read more.

India lodges 'strong protest' over Pakistan SC's poll order on 'Gilgit-Baltistan'

India has lodged a strong protest with Islamabad against Pakistan Supreme Court's order allowing general elections in the so-called "Gilgit-Baltistan" region and asked it to immediately vacate all areas under its illegal occupation. Read more.

Nearly 12,000 Covid-19 patients recover in India, daily testing capacity rises fivefold

The number of coronavirus cases in India has breached the 42,000-mark. On Monday, the Ministry of Health updated the country's Covid-19 tally at 42,553. 2,553 new infections and 72 deaths were reported in the last 24 hours in India. Read more.

US has very 'conclusive' report on Covid-19's China origins, says Trump

President Donald Trump promised a "conclusive" report from the U.S. government on the Chinese origins of the coronavirus outbreak, adding that he has little doubt that Beijing misled the world about the scale and risk of the disease before it became a global pandemic. Read more.

'Would've given my life for him': Gautam Gambhir narrates Australia series story to credit India legend

That former India opener Gautam Gambhir refers legendary India spinner Anil Kumble as the best captain he has played under, is not a secret anymore. Read more.

Silver Lake-Reliance Jio deal: 5 key things you need to know

US-based private equity firm Silver Lake will invest Rs 5,655.75 crore in Jio platforms, said Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and Jio Platforms Limited on Monday. Read more.

Anushka Sharma, Kareena Kapoor, Katrina Kaif: Throwback to the best metallic trends

One of the most dazzling trends of 2019, metallic tones have been on the style radar for a while now and not only for its celebrity-like glamorous appeal but also for its texture and dramatic appeal. Read more.

Ratan Tata takes on fake news again, says didn't write quote attributed to him

Ratan Tata has once again taken on fakes news by busting a news article falsely attributed to him. In a tweet posted last evening, the Chairman Emeritus of Tata Sons took to Twitter to share a clip of the article and denied saying or writing the quotes attributed to him. "I'm afraid this too, has not been said by me," he wrote in his tweet. Read more.

Does covid-19 affect children differently, how airports will be different: Top 5 from HT

Hindustan Times' National Political Editor, Sunetra Choudhury brings you the top 5 stories you need to know. In today's episode, Sunetra talks about the number of Covid-19 cases in India, impact of lockdown on India's economy, effect of covid-19 on children, how airports will be different and more. Watch here.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Nov. 17 -- Ten days ago we had no Covid-19 vaccines. Now we have two, the latest from Moderna (after the one from Pfizer/BioNTech). Sure, the first statement may be a bit of an exaggeration - there were 12 vaccines in late stage trials, some with more than an even chance of succeeding and what we were witnessing is just that. The two that have cleared the first hurdle - an adequate success rate in an interim analysis of early results - are both messenger RNA or mRNA vaccines, which use a genetic messenger code to instruct the body's own cells to make a protein found on the shell of the SARS-CoV 2 virus that causes Covid-19, thereby provoking an immune reaction, resulting in protection from the virus.

There's every chance that another candidate, perhaps the one being developed by Johnson & Johnson or AstraZeneca/Oxford could join the ones from Pfizer and Moderna before the end of the year (to end 2020 with three successful vaccines would be something). And there is every chance that both will be approved for use and available, at least to those whose needs are the highest, before the end of the year. Wider commercial availability will follow next year, perhaps by early spring.

Also Read| Covid-19: What you need to know today

Pfizer will make 50 million doses available this year (once approved) and Moderna, 20 million. Both are two-dose vaccines which means 25 million and 10 million people, respectively, can be vaccinated. Next year, Pfizer plans to boost production up to 1.3 billion units, and Moderna up to between 500 million and a billion. That should be enough to vaccinate around 15% of the world's population, which is a start. The other successful vaccines will add to the number. It's entirely possible that if two more vaccines are successful, around 40% of the world's population could get a vaccine next year. But that's on paper, because supply won't just be a function of availability - it will be driven by pre-existing deals between countries and vaccine makers. The US, for instance, has deals with both Pfizer and Moderna. The UK has a deal with Pfizer and five other vaccine makers, in all accounting for 350 million doses. Its population is 66 million, so even if some vaccines entail multiple doses, its population is covered. The country was scrambling to strike a deal with Moderna before the company announced the interim analysis of the preliminary results of its Phase 3 clinical trials. And the EU has deals with both Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech.

Pharma analytics company Airfinity said in September that rich countries accounted for at least 50% of the 5.3 billion doses for which deals had been struck at the time. That number is likely to increase. Indeed, the announcements by Pfizer and Moderna are both likely to result in some frenzied deal-striking - and they should. A vaccine is the best investment a country can make at this point in time. The origins of the ongoing global economic crisis are not really economic, several experts have said (correctly) that a vaccine is the best stimulus/cure for an ailing economy.

Now comes the tough part of managing the acquisition, logistics, and administration of the vaccine -- and there too Moderna had some good news; its vaccine lasts longer in the refrigerator than previously believed (it still needs to be frozen), and even lasts 12 hours at room temperature.

Also Read: Moderna says its Covid-19 vaccine is nearly 95% effective

But what of the science behind the results announced by Moderna on Monday and Pfizer/BioNTech last week? Both involved waiting for a certain number of test subjects (some were given the vaccine and others a placebo) to get infected -- and then see who got what. In Pfizer's case, based on 94 people who got infected, and in Moderna's case, based on 95, the vaccines were found to be over 90% and 94.5% effective. While there is safety data to be reviewed, and the studies themselves (both clinical trials cover tens of thousands of subjects) will have to run their course, it is unlikely that these results will change.

I believe this is a tipping point in the fight against the virus -- it reduces, by a significant amount, the uncertainty surrounding a vaccine, and offers a tentative timeline on when one could be available commercially.

Government and public health responses may have faltered in the face of Covid-19, but the pace and progress of the scientific response to the pandemic has been revolutionary and unprecedented. It is, like many other things that have come before, another triumph of human ingenuity.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, June 16 -- It is a season that should have marked a happy occasion for Formula One, 2020 being its 70th anniversary, a time to recall its origins when Italy's Giuseppe 'Nino' Farina went from pole to flag at Silverstone in the first ever race in 1950. The Covid-19 pandemic though has put such celebrations on hold, throwing the season into uncertainty.

F1 CEO Chase Carey recently said there is a danger of the season not happening at all if the situation didn't improve.

Seven of the 22 races have already been cancelled, including the Monaco Grand Prix-it will be the first time since 1954 that the race won't wind through the narrow streets of the principality. Azerbaijan, Japan and Singapore joined the list last Friday while many others have been postponed or unlikely to happen.

The return of European top-flight football though has given hope. With the Bundesliga, Serie A and La Liga resuming behind closed doors and Premier League scheduled to restart on Wednesday, professional sport appears to dig deep into its resources and organisational capabilities for a revival.

F1 too is now preparing an initial list of eight races-all in Europe. The season is expected to finally start with the Austrian Grand Prix in Spielberg on July 5 followed by the Styrian GP-named after the Austrian state where the venue is-a week later. Both the closed-doors races will be held at the Red Bull Ring circuit.

Hungary will stage a race in July before the season moves to England with Silverstone hosting two races-British GP and 70th Anniversary GP-on August 2 and 9. It will be followed by races in Spain, Belgium and Italy. Like European football, all races will miss the buzz of the fans, especially at a venue like Silverstone that sees an overall weekend attendance of 350,000.

Eyeing russia

Though not finalised yet taking the health issues into consideration, F1 then intends to move to Russia, Asia (Vietnam and China) and the Americas (Canada, United States, Mexico and Brazil) to host postponed races. The organisers aim to end with races in Bahrain and Abu Dhabi in late December or early January.

That plan will heavily depend on air travel and quarantine restrictions easing, countries opening their borders and other logistical factors. It could see more European races, to achieve F1's target of 15-18 races this season. That would still be a world of improvement for race drivers stuck to virtual racing.

"We have made significant progress with existing and new promoters on the revised calendar and have been particularly encouraged by the interest that has been shown by new venues in hosting a Formula 1 race during the 2020 season," an F1 statement said on Friday.

New Venues

There are reports that old venues like Hockenheim (Germany) and Imola (Italy) are close to sealing deals to host races. Imola, which last held a race in 2006 when Michael Schumacher won, have renewed their FIA Grade 1 licence, needed to host a race. Venues like Portimao (Portugal) and Ferrari-owned Mugello (Italy), which are yet to stage F1, are also in contention with more double-headers like Austria and Britain also not being ruled out.

"There is a contingency to have an extended European season with another one or two races if needed," F1 motorsports chief Ross Brawn told F1.com last week. "There are a number of good European tracks where we could add another one or two races to make sure we have a comprehensive season."

Sticking to Europe is logistically and economically convenient as most F1 teams are based there. Also, with several European countries lifting curbs and border restrictions, visas won't be an issue as the Schengen Area covers 26 countries.

GO EAST

The real expansion of F1 into a global sport only happened in the last 20-25 years as a result of former F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone's 'go east' policy. Asian races introduced under him like Singapore, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi (all night races) have become permanent, even at the cost of traditional races like Germany and France. Other races in Malaysia, India and South Korea have stopped.

In F1's inaugural season, six of the seven races were held in Europe. It began to move out gradually-South America in 1953, Africa in 1958 and Asia in 1976.

Even in 1999, Europe hosted 11 of the 16 races-a share of 68.75 %. But in 2019, Europe only held 10 of 21 GPs, less than 48 percent-also indicating the spread of global wealth.

Asia hosted only one race (Japan) until 1999 when Malaysia was introduced. The number touched five last year-without adding transcontinental Azerbaijan-before Vietnam was included from this year.

The Covid-19 pandemic though has at least temporarily halted the 'look east' approach with four out of the seven races cancelled this year being outside Europe and more likely to follow.

GETTING STARTED

Following a long shutdown, F1 teams are slowly opening their shutters. Reigning champions Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes have started preparations, testing their 2018 car ahead of next month's season opener.

"I didn't feel like I've ever left the water, so that's a positive," Hamilton said, having driven a F1 car after more than 100 days. "Every time you take a big break you always wonder whether you can still drive. So, it's a good feeling to know of course I can, I'm ready, I feel fit."

Racing Point, Ferrari and Renault have scheduled testing in the coming weeks.

NEW NORMAL

The pandemic has forced organisers to introduce new non-racing rules to protect F1 personnel like no podium celebrations, pre-race driver parades or assembling for the national anthems.

"The practices we have had in the past just can't be done," Brawn said. "The podium procedure can't happen, but we're looking at doing something on the grid after the race. We can't present the trophies, as you can't have someone in close proximity presenting a trophy, (but) we have plans and procedures. We're looking at how we can present it on TV."

Teams will be kept in 'bubbles', staying in isolation with no contact with the surrounding community.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 2 -- There is an increase in the number of Canadians viewing India's growing economic power as an opportunity, while more and more of them now see China's rise in the domain as a threat. These are among the findings of a national opinion poll conducted by the Vancouver-headquartered non-profit Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada (APF Canada).

The organisation that strives to be a bridge between Canada and the Asia-Pacific region has been tracking Canadian attitudes towards the economic rise of India and China since 2004.

"Between 2018 and 2020, the change in perceptions for China and India has followed opposing paths, something we have not observed before. While 72% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of India is more of an opportunity than a threat, a modest increase since 2018 (71%), only 35% of Canadians agree that the growing economic power of China is more as an opportunity than a threat, down from 60% in 2018," the results of the annual survey revealed.

This is the also the first time that the survey has shown the majority of respondents seeing China's economic power as a threat, at 57%.

Again, the perception towards India is headed towards a positive direction with just 18% seeing its economic growth as a threat, which the APF Canada described as "an all-time low".

Canadians' general feeling towards India has also remained stable. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 means "very warm, favourable", India scores 5.7.

"Over the past decade, the governments of India and Canada have been making efforts to build a mutually beneficial relationship, which can only prosper further if the Canadian public also holds a positive view," the report noted. "On the flip side, Canadians' feelings towards China, which had been remarkably stable for the past decade until 2018, dropped from 4.9 to 3.6 in 2020."

The survey said there was support for Canada entering into a free trade agreement (FTA) with India, though that was not the case with regard to China. Just about one-third voiced support for an FTA with China, which 59%.

"It marks the lowest support for an FTA with China since we started polling Canadians on the subject in 2012," the report stated.

One of reasons behind the growing animosity of Canadians' towards China is the Covid-19 pandemic. Two-third of Canadians disagreed with the statement that the Chinese government "acted responsibly" at the beginning of the outbreak in Wuhan.

The vast majority, at 68%, "feel that Canada should support an independent inquiry into the origins of the Covid-19 virus".

Human rights abuses and the arrest and detention of two Canadians by the Chinese government are also feeding into the escalating negativity.

"The majority of Canadians (83%) feel that Canada should stand up to China as Canadian national values such as the rule of law, human rights, and democracy are on the line," the report pointed out, while "67% think Canada should work alongside the US and other allies to pressure China, and about 67% also believe Canada should take a more aggressive approach towards China" to liberate the two imprisoned there.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 1 -- With 1,755 cases recorded over 24-hours, India's tally of cases has touched 35,365 mark with 1,152 deaths. More than 3.3 million people continue to be infected by Covid-19.

India has extended its lockdown by two weeks starting from May 4. The government has allowed considerable relaxations in green zones (districts where there has been no cases in the last 21 days) and orange zones (districts where no cases have been reported for than two weeks). Red zones (districts where cases continue to be reported ) will only allow essential services.

A Bloomberg report predicted that the pandemic way extend well beyond 2022 as economies across the world struggle to mitigate losses. WHO hopes that China will join investigations to search origins of Covid-19.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Aug. 11 -- An India-Nepal body that oversees the implementation of development projects funded by New Delhi is set to meet in Kathmandu next week, the first high-level contact between the two sides since ties were hit by a border row that erupted last year.

The joint oversight mechanism, which was launched in 2016 and reviews progress in bilateral projects, is scheduled to hold its next meeting on August 17, people familiar with developments said on condition of anonymity.

Two of the people cited above said the meeting between Indian envoy Vinay Mohan Kwatra and Nepal's foreign secretary Shanker Das Bairagi, who jointly chair the mechanism, is being seen as a positive development after the border row took relations to a new low.

"The mechanism will only focus on the implementation of India-funded projects in Nepal. However, it could help break the logjam in relations," said a person.

During its seventh meeting in July last year, the mechanism reviewed the implementation of projects such cross-border rail links, petroleum pipelines, roads, bridges, integrated border check posts, energy, irrigation, and post-earthquake reconstruction.

The border row erupted late last year after Nepal objected to the inclusion of Kalapani region, which is claimed by Kathmandu, in a new map of the union territory of Ladakh that was issued by India. The row was exacerbated in May, when India opened a new road to Lipulekh region on the border with Tibet, as this area too is claimed by Nepal.

Nepal responded by issuing a new map that showed Kalapani, Lipulekh and Limpiyadhura, which are all controlled by India, as part of Nepalese territory. Kathmandu also said New Delhi has not responded to several requests for talks on the border issue, though India said a meeting couldn't be arranged because of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Nepal's foreign minister Pradeep Gyawali told The Kathmandu Post on Tuesay: "We don't have alternatives to talks...We can't hold our entire ties hostage to the differences over the boundary issue."

Gyawali said Nepal is confident its partnership with India will move in a positive direction. "For the time being, the boundary issues can be isolated...Differences over one issue should not overshadow our entire bilateral relations...We believe in constructive engagement, and the upcoming meeting is just one positive step towards that end," he added.

In recent weeks, the two countries have also engaged in a war of words over the origins of historic figures such as Lord Ram and Gautam Buddha.

Nepal on Sunday responded to external affairs minister S Jaishankar's remarks that Gautam Buddha was one of the two greatest Indians for people around the world by saying historical and archaeological evidence shows the founder of Buddhism was born in Nepalese territory.

Last month, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli sparked a controversy with his remarks that the "real" Ayodhya is in Nepal and that Lord Ram was Nepalese. He also said Nepal had "become a victim of cultural encroachment" and its history was manipulated.

Following protests in India, the Nepal government clarified Oli's remarks were "not linked to any political subject" and there was "no intention...to hurt the feeling and sentiment of anyone".

Nischal Pandey, director of the Kathmandu-based Centre for South Asian Studies, was quoted by the Nepalese media as saying: "A weekly war of words between Indian and Nepali officials and subsequent issuance of clarifications does not bode well for bilateral ties."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Beijing, July 9 -- China on Wednesday criticised the US move to withdraw from the World Health Organization while agreeing to allow a WHO team to visit the country to trace the origins of the coronavirus pandemic. The US decision will have grave implications for developing countries, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, said.

The United Nations said the US will leave the WHO on July 6, 2021.

On the visit of the WHO team to China, Zhao said, "We came to the basic consensus with the WHO that virus tracing is a scientific issue, which should be carried out under international research and cooperation by scientists."

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi,, Sept. 23 -- At least seven Opposition parties boycotted proceedings in both Houses, Rajya Sabha deputy chairman Harivansh and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar said they would go on a fast, and the government hurriedly pushed through key bills on an action-packed Tuesday - with the possibility of the monsoon session being cut short and ending on Wednesday.

The eight members of Parliament (MPs) suspended for the commotion during the controversial passage of farm reform bills in the Rajya Sabha, spent Monday night protesting outside Parliament, rebuffed a conciliatory gesture by Harivansh (who went to meet them with tea in the morning), but ended their vigil after Opposition parties decided to boycott the Lok Sabha for the remainder of the session.

The Rajya Sabha, where the ruling National Democratic Alliance (NDA) does not have a majority, passed at least seven bills in just three-and-a-half hours in the absence of Opposition voices, making Tuesday's session one of the most productive in its history.

The Lok Sabha, where the NDA has a clear majority, took up three important labour reform bills, and cleared them, with the Congress and some other opposition parties boycotting the day's proceedings to protest the happenings in the Upper House.

The Lok Sabha will meet around 6pm on Wednesday and is likely to cut short the session, people familiar with the matter said on condition of anonymity. The Rajya Sabha's business advisory committee met without the Opposition's participation on Tuesday evening. The Upper House, which will convene at 9am, is set to adjourn sine die after taking up remaining bills on Wednesday, the people added.

The monsoon session of Parliament, which began on September 14, was supposed to end on October 1. HT reported on Sunday that the session may end as early as on September 23 after many parties agreed to cut it short amid a rising number of Covid-19 cases linked to the Parliament House complex; 32 Parliamentarians, including two ministers, and more than 100 officials have tested positive for Covid-19 in a testing drive in Parliament ever since the session began.

The Congress, Nationalist Congress Party, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Trinamool Congress, CPI (M), Aam Aadmi Party, Telangana Rashtra Samithi, and Samajwadi Party all boycotted the session citing the suspension of the MPs, and the way the farm bills were pushed through, without a division or voting.

The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) too walked out of the two Houses with its members saying they were not part of the Opposition but have done so on their own, alleging that the government was only trying to "bluff" the farmers.

"We will not end our boycott till the government brings another bill making it illegal for private players to buy food grains from farmers below the MSP, all state agencies comply by the MSP and the procurement price is fixed as per the Swaminathan panel's recommendations," Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad told reporters outside the Parliament building.

He also said the revocation of suspension of the Opposition members was not a demand but a request.

Azad said the House should run in coordination between the government and the Opposition. "But there should not be coordination between chair and government," he said, referring to Rajya Sabha deputy chairperson Harivansh pushing through the two contentious farm bills on Sunday while allegedly ignoring Opposition voices.

"President Ram Nath Kovind should not give assent to the bills as proper procedure was not followed in their passage in the Rajya Sabha," he added.

In its reply, the government said it was not keeping the suspended MPs away from the House but they should express regret over their behaviour.

"Let them apologise, we will consider withdrawing the suspension," Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad told reporters.

On Monday, Trinamool Congress floor leader Derek O'Brien and his colleague Dola Sen; Aam Aadmi Party's Sanjay Singh; Congress's Rajeev Satav, Syed Nasir Hussain and Ripun Borah; and KK Ragesh and Elamaram Kareem of the CPI(M) were suspended for seven days each for "disorderly conduct".

Vice-president and Rajya Sabha chairman M Venkaiah Naidu on Monday rejected a notice for a no-confidence motion against Harivansh as it was not in proper format and did not give a 14-day notice period.

Among the seven bills passed by the Upper House were The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2020, The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and The Taxation and Other Laws (Relaxation and Amendment of Certain Provisions) Bill, 2020.

The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, approved by the Lower House on September 15, seeks to remove cereals, pulses, oilseeds, edible oils, onion and potatoes from the list of essential commodities, replacing an ordinance promulgated in June. It is the third bill in the government's farm liberalisation plan.

The Lok Sabha, too, witnessed uproarious scenes with the Opposition demanding that the government should roll back the farms bills and withdraw the suspension of the eight Rajya Sabha members.

"Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha are like twin brothers...if one is in pain, the other has to be concerned. Our issue is related to the farm bills; we want them be taken back," Adhir Ranjan Choudhary, the Congress's leader of the House, said.

Parliamentary affairs minister Pralhad Joshi said it is unfortunate that the proceedings of the Rajya Sabha were discussed in the Lok Sabha. "Whatever happens in one House, it has never been discussed in another House. It is unfortunate that this thing is being discussed now."

Harivansh, meanwhile, wrote a letter - addressed to the President and Vice-President - invoking his humble origins in Bihar and went on a day-long fast on Tuesday to protest "humiliating" conduct towards him by some MPs.

"In the name of democracy, members of the House indulged in violent behaviour. There was an effort to intimidate the person in the chair. All norms of the Upper House were disregarded. The rule book was torn and thrown over me...," he wrote.

Congress member Satav, one of those suspended members, said: "We are equally pained and hurt over the way the deputy chairman conducted the proceedings in the House on Sunday. Seeking a division or amendments are our Parliamentary rights that were denied to us by him..."

NCP chief Pawar, too, said he was observing a day-long fast to protest the suspension of the eight members of the Upper House.

Addressing a press conference in Mumbai, Pawar, a Rajya Sabha member, also bemoaned the conduct of Harivansh and the government's decision of "bulldozing" the Opposition in the House.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 8 -- China on Wednesday criticised the Trump administration-led US' move of withdrawal from the World Health Organisation (WHO), while agreeing to allow a team from the top health agency to visit the country to trace the origins of the coronavirus, which first emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

The US move will have grave implications for developing countries, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said, and added that the Trump administration's move undermines the international anti-epidemic efforts. He also urged the international community to step up support for the WHO.

WHO, Zhao said, is the most authoritative and professional international institution in the field of global public health security.

Also read | India may see 2.87 lakh Covid-19 cases a day by winter 2021: MIT study

The UN formally announced Tuesday the exit of US from WHO on July 6, 2021 after receiving notification of the decision by President Donald Trump. However, the pullout won't take effect until next year. That means it could be reversed by a new administration or if circumstances change.

In a series of allegations, Trump has repeatedly accused the agency of becoming a puppet for China during the emergence of the coronavirus, which was first detected in China and spread to trigger a global pandemic.

The US is WHO's largest donor, responsible for providing it with more than $450 million per year, but owes about $200 million in current and past dues. The financial obligations must be met by the US before a withdrawal can be finalised, news agency Associated Press reported.

On the visit of the WHO team to China, Zhao said the decision was taken after consulting officials from the agency.

The WHO DG, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said Tuesday that a team of WHO experts will visit China this weekend and work with Chinese counterparts to identify the zoonotic (animal to human) source of the pandemic.

Also read: Over 6 months into Covid-19 crisis, 5 mysteries that still shroud coronavirus

"We came to the basic consensus with the WHO that virus tracing is a scientific issue, which should be carried out under international research and cooperation by scientists," Zhao said.

Experts from China and the WHO will draw up the working scope and tasks of an international expert group led by the WHO, Zhao said.

The WHO, according to Zhao, believes virus tracing is an ongoing process that may involve many countries and regions, and the organisation will conduct similar visits to other countries and regions as necessary.

The WHO believed that virus tracing is an ongoing process that may involve many countries and regions, and the organisation will conduct similar visits to other countries and regions as necessary, Zhao said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- Coronavirus pandemic continues to challenge economic revival across the world. New Delhi reopened but people stayed away from coming into shops and businesses. Netherlands will reopen its restaurants and cinemas from June 1 with reduced guests and social distancing. US and Canada have extended a ban on borders with each other and Mexico until June 22 as all three nations resume business activities.

WHO has agreed to comprehensively evaluate the origins of Covid-19 after EU and African nations brought in a resolution. Doctors in Italy said their intensive care units are facing less pressure as infection rates fell. India's Covid-19 cases crossed the 1,00,000-mark with 3,303 deaths and 1,01,139 cases. The country registered its steepest one-day spike with 5,611 fresh cases.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 23 -- Maharashtra cyber department on Tuesday issued a warning about Chinese cyber attackers planning a large scale phishing attack and stated that over 40,000 suspected attacks on sites related to information, infrastructure and banking were witnessed in the last 4-5 days. The advisory comes close on the heels of a similar warning issued by India's official cybersecurity agency in the backdrop of recent India-China border clashes that have led to worsening of relations between the two countries.

"In last 4-5 days, resources on cyberspace of India especially related to information, infrastructure & banking have been under attack from China. At least 40,300 such cyber attacks were attempted, most of them can be traced to Chengdu area of China," Maharashtra Cyber Department Special IG, Y Yadav was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

A report published on June 18 quoting intelligence officials had claimed that China had opened another front against India with sustained DDOS (distributed denial of service) attacks on Indian information websites and the country's financial payments system.

Also Read: China ordered attacks on Indian troops in Galwan Valley

The attacks attempted to flood a network with artificially created internet traffic and targeted a variety of sites including government websites and the banking system including ATMs.

The report claimed most of these attacks were traced back to the central Chinese city of Chengdu-a city known as the hub of hackers and also the headquarters of the Chinese Army's Unit 61398, which is PLA's covert cyberwarfare section.

These attacks were reported on Tuesday last and continued through Wednesday, however, they were unsuccessful.

It is said that several hackers in Chengdu work under the patronage of government agencies to camouflage their operation for official deniability.

Indian agencies had warned that Chinese cyber attackers could also carry out a massive phishing attack in the guise of a free Covid-19 test.

Australia, too, recently suspected a Chinese hand in a massive cyber attack on several of its strategic sites targeting administration, industries, essential services, critical infrastructure and political organizations among others.

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison had hinted at China's role by describing the attacks as "malicious and sophisticated" and carried out by "state-based cyber actor". He further added that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Australian experts explicitly named China for the attacks. Australia has been vociferously supporting the demand for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and has also backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization in the aftermath of its initial handling of the crisis.

China had retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef.

The recent warning is the latest in a series of such alerts issued including the one released last Friday which cited the threat of a cyber attack by North Korea-based cyber criminals.

As preventive measures, all the central security forces have been asked to direct their employees against opening or clicking on attachments in unsolicited e-mail, SMS or messages through social media.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 19 -- Is China using the world's preoccupation with the Covid-19 crisis to enlarge its position on several border disputes and target rivals that could have a say in shaping the post-pandemic global order?

That's a question now being debated by experts and analysts following a string of actions by China over the past few weeks and months.

India-China border standoff:

The most urgent of the crises is the tense weeks-old face-off between Indian and Chinese border troops in the Ladakh sector of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) that has sparked at least three clashes since early May, the latest being the violent brawl of June 15 that left 20 Indian soldiers dead.

India has accused China of taking "pre-meditated and planned action" that reflected an intent to change the status quo on the LAC.

Reasons advanced for China's actions have ranged from anger over India's beefing up of infrastructure along the strategic Darbuk-Shyok-Daulat Beg Oldie (DSDBO) road and India's decision last August to scrap Jammu and Kashmir's special status and create the union territory of Ladakh, which Beijing has indicated had an impact on its territorial claims in the region. Experts have also pointed to China's desire to protect its considerable investments in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a key part of which is located in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Australia cyber attack:

The Australian government said on Friday it was dealing with a massive cyber attack targeting all levels of the administration, industry, education, essential services, critical infrastructure and political organisations. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said a malicious and sophisticated "state-based cyber actor" was behind the attack, adding that "there are not a large number of state-based actors that can engage in this type of activity".

Though Morrison didn't name any country, Australian experts and observers pointed the finger of blame at China. Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told CNN there was a "95% chance that it is China who is responsible for this attack".

Australia has been vocal in recent months about an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic and backed India's calls for reforms of the World Health Organization (WHO) for its initial handling of the crisis. China retaliated with tariffs on Australian exports, including barley and beef. India and Australia have also spoken about working together to shape the post-Covid world order.

South China Sea:

There has been no let-up in China's activities to bolster its presence in the South China Sea, where it is embroiled in maritime boundary disputes with several countries, despite the Covid-19 pandemic. A Vietnamese vessel was rammed by a Chinese ship near Paracel Islands on June 10, months after another Vietnamese boat was sunk by China's coast guard in the same area. Numerous Chinese vessels have been spotted near Thitu Island, controlled by the Philippines but claimed by China.

Earlier this month, Filipino authorities launched work on critical infrastructure on Thitu, located just 24 km from an artificial island created by China and equipped with radars and missiles. Over the past two months, an exploration vessel operated by Malaysia's state-run oil company Petronas has been harassed in the South China Sea by Chinese vessels.

Of these three countries, Vietnam has often turned to India to back its position in the South China Sea. Last year, Chinese vessels repeatedly operated in areas close to the waters where state-owned ONGC Videsh is engaged in oil and gas production.

Senkaku Islands:

On Thursday, China set a new record of sorts by sending its vessels into waters off the Senkaku Islands for 66 consecutive days. The islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing, and Chinese vessels have been spotted in Japan's "contiguous zone" every day since April 14. The contiguous zone is the area beyond the territorial sea and extending up to 24 nautical miles from the baseline that a country can claim. Technically, the presence of the Chinese vessels is not an intrusion but Japan regards it as a provocation.

Japan's chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told the media on Wednesday the Senkaku islands are "unquestionably our territory historically and under international law" and that a protest had been lodged with China over the presence of the vessels. "We think it is extremely serious that these activities continue," he said.

Both Japan and India are part of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue or Quad, which was upgraded to the level of foreign ministers last September.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Jan. 26 -- On the occasion on India's 72nd Republic Day, search engine Goggle is celebrating the country's unity in diversity and the tryst of tradition with development in its doodle, which has been illustrated by Onkar Fondekar, a Mumbai-based artist.

The doddle with saffron and green being its predominant colour comprises figures representing different culture, profession. An elephant with a mahout on him, a cricketer, a film director with his eyes on the camera, a sitar player, a Bharatnatyam dancer, a dholak player, a man dressed in Rajasthani attire clicking selfie are the several elements of the doodle, while buildings displaying India's traditional architecture styles are in the background.

Amid the Covid-19 pandemic, India will be celebrating its 72nd Republic Day commemorating the day when its constitution came into effect.

Onkar Fondekar said his inspiration behind the doodle was the people of India, its culture, traditions, history and architecture.

"I felt fortunate and happy that I got the opportunity to portray India-my country-on a global platform like Google Doodle. At the same time, I knew there were so many things, so much diversity and such a wide canvas I could illustrate," he said.

"While Republic Day only dates back to 1949, many elements of the subcontinent's culture have been evolving for centuries. With origins that stretch back hundreds of years, musical instruments such as the dholak (a two-headed hand drum) and the sitar (a long-necked stringed instrument), both featured in the Doodle artwork, are just a few examples of India's rich heritage," Google wrote.

"From its distinctive architectural styles to the Bollywood film industry, India's cultural impact is felt across the world, and today, there is much to celebrate," it said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 25 -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi wants the G-20 conference tomorrow to turn the battle against the deadly Sars-CoV-2 pathogen into a global fight where participant countries pool in their medical knowledge and resources to block the spread of contagion, people familiar with the developments said.

Rather than be confined to the 15-member UN Security Council currently headed by China, the G-20 is a representative body of 46 countries (if the European Union is divided into individual entities) with a large number of them battered by the rampaging infection. The expected G-20 call will be for member nations to ramp up their medical infrastructure capacities to handle the worst-case scenario and pool scientific effort towards prevention and treatment of the virus.

Although PM Modi announced the historic 21-day nationwide lockdown on Tuesday evening, he had taken the first decisive step towards it by stopping long-distance trains on the north-south corridor on March 18.

The decision was clearly designed to contain the virus that causes Covid-19 to big metros such as Mumbai and Pune, where the medical infrastructure was better. The effort was to minimise the possibility of immigrants from states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh spreading the disease to their remote villages that have virtually non-existent medical facilities.

The Janta curfew on March 22 was a test run to calibrate the Indian response to combat the virus and plan for the degree of enforcement required for the worst-case scenario. At the same time, PM Modi was keeping a very close watch on the ramping of medical capacities such as manufacture of ventilators, masks, hazmat suits and preparation of isolation wards.

PM Modi had thrown the "wait and watch" option out of the window early in the day as it would be impossible to contain the disease if it moved into the community transmission stage. The assessment was that the lockdown was the best option, particularly given how the virus had multiplied in geometric progression in countries such as Italy, France, Spain and the US.

The prime minister fronted the bitter pill of lockdown given his huge following in the country.

With hardly any vaccine for Covid-19 on the horizon in the next two to four months, India hopes to contain the virus spread till April 15. The dry April heat in the Indian sub-continent would help slow down the virus. But it could continue to be spread by droplets. It is still early to figure how the weather plays out, particularly since the western disturbances are highly active with intermittent rains and have lowered the temperature of Gangetic plains.

India's approach on Covid-19 has contrasted sharply with the one adopted by the US' Donald Trump that has been needling China over its origin in Wuhan. Instead, India has kept all its lines open to talk to all countries to ensure that medical help is available in case the worst-case scenario plays out. The fact is that China, where the virus first surfaced in November 2019, has utilised the past three months to really ramp up its medical capacities and adopted unconventional methods to contain the spread of Covid-19. In fact, both the countries have decided to beef up bilateral efforts to contain the disease.

Even though the virus has led to a forced shutdown of the world economy's most prominent economies, the first priority has been to save lives with the economy taking the second place. This is the only option.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 14 -- China has restricted the publication of research papers on the origin of the coronavirus pandemic, CNN reported. It has referred to two notices published by Chinese universities where such restrictions have been mentioned.

The notices quoted by CNN say that the universities have asked teachers to strictly manage the papers related to virus tracing. They also talk about adding an extra layer of vetting by a scientific research team.

The pages carrying the notices have now been deleted, the CNN further reported.

A Chinese reseacher quoted by the CNN said that it is a "coordinated effort" from the Chinese government "to control the narrative, and paint it as if the outbreak did not originate in China". The researcher's identity has not been revealed.

One of the universities quoted by CNN is the Fudan University in Shanghai. The other university is China University of Geoscience in Wuhan, reported CNN.

China is, meanwhile, fighting hard to stop a second wave of coronavirus infections.

Though the northeast border remains China's priority, state media reported late on Monday that more than 100 people had been arrested in March for illegally entering China through its southwestern border in Yunnan province.

Russia has become China's largest source of imported cases, with a total of 409 infections originating in the northern neighbour. Chinese people there should stay put and not return home, the state-owned Global Times said in an editorial Tuesday.

China's northeastern border province of Heilongjiang saw 79 new cases of imported coronavirus cases on Monday, all Chinese citizens travelling home from Russia, state media said. Mainland China reported 89 new cases.

Heilongjiang's provincial authority said on Tuesday that it had established a hotline to reward citizens as much as 5,000 yuan ($710) for handing over or reporting illegal immigrants.

China has reported 82,249 coronavirus cases and 3,341 deaths. It reported no new deaths on Tuesday.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 21 -- India's battle to effectively contain the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) continued on Friday as the number of infections doubled in just four days to 236, even as experts reiterated that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

On Friday, India reported 63 fresh cases, taking the tally up from 173 a day earlier. Several states across the country have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission, a point when a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Experts said that a sudden and sharp spike in cases could hinder efforts to prevent the outbreak from taking hold if more aggressive and random testing is not carried out across India. Some even believe that community transmission has already begun silently and that it can be tackled only if many more people are tested at random.

As of Friday morning, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had conducted 14,376 tests - one of the lowest diagnostic rates in the world. India currently has the capacity to test 10,000 samples per day.

South Korea, which has been able to slow the advance of the disease despite reporting about 8,500 cases, has tested about 274,000 people since February. Though the US has tested 82,000 people, Covid-19 cases have raced to alarming levels in the country, leading to widespread criticism of its authorities for intractable delays in making tests available.

On Friday, Delhi reported five fresh cases of the disease, which originated in China's Wuhan last December and has killed at least 10,000 people. The national capital has so far reported 17 confirmed cases, which include one foreigner. With 52 cases, Maharashtra remains the worst affected state, triggering calls for a complete lockdown to halt the advance of the disease.

While Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal ordered that all malls, except grocery stores and pharmacies, be shut down immediately, Maharashtra put in place similar measures by announcing that all non-essential businesses in Mumbai and across the state were shutting down from midnight through the end of March.

Public health experts warned that despite the intensifying efforts across states, the disease could spiral out of control if Indians showed callous disregard to guidelines and precautions in the fight against Covid-19.

Among the fresh cases reported on Friday was singer Kanika Kapoor, whose announcement of having contracted the disease sent alarm bells ringing in several quarters -- from Parliament house to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje, her MP son Dushyant Singh, and parliamentarians Derek O'Brien and Anupriya Patel began self-quarantines after coming into direct or indirect contact with Kapoor.

Uttar Pradesh health minister Jai Pratap Singh underwent a test for Covid-19 as it emerged that he was at a party thrown by the celebrity singer after her return from London recently. Three BJP MLAs who met him on Thursday also went into self-isolation.

Reacting to a question on Kapoor's movements across Lucknow and Kanpur, health ministry joint secretary Lav Aggarwal said contact tracing was the immediate protocol that was initiated and all action for containment of the disease began at the same time.

He urged people to follow Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call to observe the "Janta Curfew" and stay at home on March 22 from 7am to 9pm, while emphasising that social distancing was primary to curb the spread of COVID-19 infection. "One day's cooperation will help break the chain of transmission," he added.

"The Centre has asked the states to take strict action as per the appropriate law against people who are not following the social distancing directive. The state governments have the inherent power under the Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act to take action against anyone who does not follow the government directive and risks lives of people," he added.

In his first address to the nation on the crisis, the Prime Minister on Thursday appealed to citizens to display commitment and called for a "people's curfew" on Sunday, March 22, where citizens would stay home as both a symbolic message of India's determination and a test-case to prepare for future challenges.

In line with the announcement, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said on its Twitter handle: "DMRC has decided to keep its services closed (on Sunday). The move is aimed at encouraging the public to stay indoors and maintain social distancing, which is essential in the fight against COVID-19."

No passenger train, mail express train or intercity train will operate till 10pm on Sunday following the PM's call. Operations of suburban rail services in all cities will also reduce to a "bare minimum".

India also expanded universal screening at airports for all passengers coming from Australia, the US and UK. "In view of local transmission of the disease, and increase in number of cases and deaths being reported in Australia, UK and USA, it has now been decided to expand the universal screening for all passengers coming from these places, and risk profiling them for either quarantine or isolation based on risk assessment," a document prepared by the health ministry said.

The Covid-19 pandemic has killed more than 10,000 people, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, and the World Health Organization said the disease is now infecting people at a faster pace. It took three months for the first 100,000 cases, but only 12 days for the next 100,000.

Italy is set to reinforce and extend the near-total lockdown after fatalities surpassed those in China, which again reported no new cases in the outbreak's initial hub. Britain will set out a package to help save millions of jobs and Germany is considering emergency spending measures.

California announced a statewide stay-in-place order, the most stringent US effort yet to curb the spread of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, April 14 -- 'Corona, Corona, Coronaaaaa'. Imagine Abhijeet Bhattacharya crooning this song as we wait for the lockdown to end. Well, he did not, but someone sure did and got famous for it, too. From puppies singing online to living room concerts by celebrities, music is coming to the aid of all who are stuck in isolation because of the Covid-19 pandemic. And some have taken it a notch up to lend a corona twist to a classic song! With changes in the lyrics, ranging from mild to rather loud, corona parodies are tickling funny bones across the world.

What could be better than dogs in a video? Dogs singing a coronavirus parody! Canandian comedian Chantal Desjardins posted a video of her little 'pandemic' pup Cooper, singing a version of Gloria Gaynor's iconic song I Will Survive but with a Covid twist. "At first I was afraid, I was petrified," Cooper sings. "I didn't get why mom was suddenly always inside. There's no more barking at the mailman, what's a dog supposed to do for fun?" The Pets Will Thrive song went viral and has been shared almost 40,000 times with over 15 million views. Desjardins says, "I was sitting in self-isolation with my fiance and our new puppy, Cooper, when I thought to myself... he sure is cute. Why not make him sing? I had no idea it would go viral. I was just trying to make people smile during these difficult times.''

Actor Johnny Lever's daughter, comedienne Jamie Lever has recreated Dhanush's popular Kolaveri Di number into Why This Corona Disease?. Through the song, she traces the origin of the disease from China's Wuhan and ends with an emphasis on washing hands and wearing masks.

Jamie says her intent was to give people something entertaining and informative at this time. Her comic set ups have always included music elements, so recording the song was no different. "My friend Rohan Malode, who is part of my group that jams together regularly, rang and asked me if we can do a song about Covid-19 and I agreed. I chose Kolaveri because it was the first song that explained to the industry what going viral meant. I wrote the lyrics the same night, and the next day, we got together and shot this song. I was very excited about it and was amazed to see that it spread like wildfire within minutes," she says.

Talent flows in this family. Her father Johnny Lever has also released his own corona parody of the classic Chhodo Kal Ki Baatein, which has also gone viral on Instagram.

The Ministry of Railways also threw its towel in the game as it released an anthem titled Corona Won't Have a Chance, Bro to spread awareness about the virus. The two-minute-long video, set to the tune of hit number I Am A Disco Dancer, was released by the Railway Ministry on their official Twitter handle.

Even the police have joined in on the parody bandwagon. Goa Police PSI, Diogo Gracias, made a corona parody of the Konkani Song, Mog Tuzo Kithlo Ashelom, where he asks locals to not to go out of their homes. Chhattisgarh cop Abhinav Upadhyay also made news by performing a rendition of Shor movie's Ek Pyaar Ka Nagma Hai; tweaking the song to turn it into a guide against coronavirus.

Upadhyay sing: "Ghar main hi rehna hai. Bahar nahi jaana hai. Khud ki raksha karte hue auro ko bachana hai. Sanitiser lagana hai, haath dhoke hi jaana hai, milke ab humko, corona ko harana hai (We need to stay home. We shouldn't go out. We must save others as well as ourselves. We have to use a sanitizer and wash hands. Together, we have to beat coronavirus)." His viral clip crooning this has appreciated by Bollywood filmmaker-music composer Vishal Bhardwaj on the microblogging site, among many others.

Hollywood isn't immune to the parody bug either. Several YouTubers have realised the Bee Gees' iconic Stayin' Alive could be turned into Stayin' Inside. One of the best versions has been sung by Brent McCollough and friends with the video raking in 1.16 million views and counting.

American singer-songwriter Chris Mann used all the free time on his hands to do some popular coronavirus parodies, including the iconic song Hello by Adele (Hello / How are you? / Do your fingers hurt from scrolling through / The cat memes on your iPhone?), which soon hit 5 million views.

While locked up inside, watch 'em all and enjoy!

Author tweets @bhagat_mallika

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 20 -- When will the coronavirus pandemic peak in India? That's the question confronting India after China, for the first time in two-and-half months, reported on Thursday that it had detected no local infections the previous day, indicating perhaps that the pandemic has peaked in the country of its origin. To be sure, China faces the risk of a second wave of infections as the government eases restrictions put in place to contain the outbreak and people gradually resume normal lives.

India, according to the government, is still in the local transmission phase of the pandemic wherein the disease is restricted to people who have come in contact with infected foreigners or returning Indians who have been abroad and caught it in the places they travelled to.

There has been no community transmission and the hope is that it will hit the peak in the next two weeks and start to gradually taper; even so, it will linger on as an endemic virus, which could challenge the health-care system by resurging in the future. The less optimistic scenario is that India has to batten down for a long fight.

On whether the disease has peaked in China, in whose Wuhan city it originated at the end of 2019, scientists are divided. The optimistic view is that the infections have already peaked in China; a less rosy scenario is that it will only do so in May with 550-600 million people in the world's most populated country infected by the virus.

An analysis by David Cyranoski of the science journal Nature quoted Zhong Nanshan, a Chinese physician leading a committee on the outbreak, as saying on February 11 that the coronavirus would peak in China by the end of February.

Zhong, who is famous for discovering the virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Sars), said the situation had improved because of interventions such as travel restrictions. But other research suggests infections may rise again with the lifting of the restrictions.

People in Chinese cities started returning to work last week which could lead to new chains of transmission according to Hiroshi Nishiura, an epidemiologist at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan. Infections could peak between late March and late May, he said, and estimated that between 550 million and 650 million people across China are at risk of being infected, roughly 40% of the country's population.

Gabriel Leung, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, says the community has no immunity to Sars-CoV-2 and hence it will sweep through.

Epidemiologists fear that India is in for the long haul with a brief peaking in places where cases have been recorded and then spreading across the country.

"We have data only from China, Italy, Spain and Germany. In the beginning infection spread was slow in these countries. There was a slight increase in cases when infected travellers came in contact with local people. In Italy, cases jumped from a few hundreds to several thousands of cases within about a fortnight. That was the jump from local to community transmission. Whether there is community transmission in India, there is no evidence yet. But we have to take it with a pinch of salt because we are not doing widespread testing," said Amit Singh, associate professor, Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science.

"We have to go into surveillance mode to understand that. In South Korea they went into the community and did extensive testing. But do we have enough testing kits to do that right now? Do we have reagents to do such large-scale testing. We are such a dense country and for a certain section, people live so close to each other. We have to prepare aggressively to contain this before it becomes uncontainable," warned Singh.

Dr T Jacob John, veteran virologist, emeritus professor at the Christian Medical College, Vellore and former head of the Indian Council for Medical Research's Centre for Advanced Research in Virology, echoes the concern.

"This is a new virus, so prediction may not be correct. I can tell you how microbes behave. It's a respiratory transmitted virus which catches with social contact. So we anticipate that it will spread widely which means it could range from 10% to even 40% of the population. We should expect the worst-case scenario and be happy later that it didn't turn out to be so. With time, the rising curve will be steeper."

"Don't expect a tsunami but expect an avalanche. We should make use of every single day right now," he cautioned. "I was expecting [that] from February 1, we would have a systematic building up of ICUs [intensive care units], ventilators, protective gear infrastructure and training of doctors. I was expecting a unified policy statement but we haven't heard that from the Centre."

Another public health expert, who is associated with a prominent research organisation, said on condition of anonymity: "Everything depends on how well we are able to contain community transmission. You have read so much,seen so much on social media about the flattening of the curve. So we have to see how much we can flatten that curve with interventions like social distancing."

"We are not like a small European country. Chikungunya lingered almost for a year. In some parts it spread only in the next season. The H1N1 [swine flu] outbreak became endemic after two to three seasons but the tail lingered. So this virus too may become endemic. But some habits have to change permanently like personal hygiene, washing hands, no spitting etc."

Severe cases of respiratory infection need to be tracked and documented now to ascertain community transmission, the expert suggested.

"...are we testing suspected cases? How many of them are there? Do we know if there is an increase in severe acute respiratory infections (SARI). If those numbers are going up there may be community transmission already. Our surveillance has to be strengthened and admissions with SARI will have to be notified," he added.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Dec. 29 -- A tumultuous 2020 that upended how we lived our lives appears to be ending on a happier note with several countries beginning vaccination against coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in December. The news of the Sars-CoV2 variant in the UK that spreads faster is a dampener but virologists say so far it is not known to cause more severe disease and is unlikely to impact the effectiveness of existing vaccines, diagnostic tests, or treatments.

"There is no need to change the existing treatment protocol in view of mutations emerging in the strain. Further, since Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has always advocated use of two or more gene assays for testing Sars-CoV-2, it is unlikely to miss infected cases using the current testing strategy," concluded experts at the meeting of the National Task Force on Covid-19 on Saturday under co-chairs of Dr Vinod Paul, member Niti Aayog, and Dr Balram Bhargava, director general, ICMR.

India plans to begin vaccinating 300 million health workers, frontline workers and vulnerable populations as early as January next year, but vaccines do not signal the end of public health precautions for the vaccinated.

Reducing exposure to the virus by wearing masks, observing social distancing and frequently washing hands will remain the mainstay of social behaviour in 2021 and beyond, till everyone has been vaccinated against the disease that sickened at least 80 million and killed 1.75 million globally since the start of the pandemic in China last year.

Though not yet approved in India, all three approved vaccines- Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and AstraZeneca-Oxford - are given in two doses four weeks apart and it takes six to eight weeks after the initial dose to achieve the desired immunity for protection. So, those vaccinated will have to continue using behaviours that reduce their risk of exposure to the virus.

It's still unknown how much protection Covid-19 vaccines provide in real-life conditions and for how long this protection lasts. What is known is that everyone can get vaccinated only by 2024. Since the herd immunity threshold for Covid-19 has not been established, we still cannot say how much of the world's population will have to be vaccinated to stop the spread of infection to those who have not been vaccinated.

The effectiveness of the vaccine will also depend on whether it is stored and transported at optimal temperature. it will also depend on health of the recipients since the "warp speed" of development limited human trials data to mostly to healthy adults and those with stable pre-existing diseases.

Again, Covid-19 vaccines have only been tested for their ability to prevent infection and not for prevention of transmission. Most vaccines prevent infection and stop its spread, but some, like the annual flu vaccines, protect those vaccinated from severe disease but don't always stop them from infecting unvaccinated people.

Vaccines train the body's immune cells to the virus to prevent infection but how effective these immune cells are in crossing the mucous barrier to destroy the viruses resting in the nose is still unknown. If viruses in the nose remain viable, those vaccinated can shed them while speaking or sneezing to infect unvaccinated people in close contact.

Vaccines apart, a major upside of 2020 has been the demonstration of unparalleled heroism and resilience amid monumental adversity. Everyone did their bit. Health and frontline workers worked overtime in unsafe conditions to save lives, people stayed locked up at home for months to slow the spread of disease, children gave up school and play, jobless migrants trudged home for days and weeks to escape hunger, and scientists, industry, global agencies and nations forged unprecedented partnerships and worked overtime to make it possible to bring new treatments and vaccines to people within nine months.

As a result, the year that began on a sick note following the World Health Organization's Country Office (WHO) in China discovering a statement about a mysterious "viral pneumonia" of unknown origin on the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission website on December 31, 2019, is ending with hope for a return to normalcy in the not-so-distant future.

The current wave in India appears to be waning, with the seven-day daily average for new infections staying below 25,000, down from a single day peak of 97,399 on September 10. Add to this results of antibodies surveys that indicate around 200-300 million have some degree of immunity against Sas-CoV2 and we have a momentum that can help get our derailed lives and economy on track by next summer. But this can happen only if we continue to take precautions and ensure the year-end holidays don't turn into superspreading events.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, July 31 -- No large country in the world has been able to contain the disease to one restricted geography the way China has.

According to worldometers.info, it has seen 84,165 cases of the coronavirus disease thus far with only 4,634 deaths. It has only 574 active cases of the disease (all data is till late evening of July 29). Merely by looking at the numbers it is difficult to imagine that the disease which has infected more than 17 million people worldwide, killing close to 670,000 (including over 4.4 million cases and 150,000 deaths in the US, and close to 1.6 million cases and almost 35,000 deaths in India) actually originated in Wuhan, China, from where it travelled, through people, all over the world. Sure there has been a minor flurry of cases in Beijing, but the numbers are far too small to suggest any sort of outbreak.

One theory is that the Chinese have completely buried all inconvenient information related to the disease and its fallout within the country. This is true at least in part; Beijing has steadfastly sidestepped calls for a scientific investigation into the origin of the virus. But there is nothing to suggest that it has engaged in a massive cover-up to hide outbreaks in other parts of the country.

Which is why its Covid-19 numbers are a mystery. This column has pointed out that the pandemic has followed roughly the same trajectory in most countries. It has also pointed out that its trajectory has been similar in large countries such as the US, Brazil, and India, with concentrated outbreaks in a few areas that gradually spread to other areas, which then started seeing similar outbreaks. China is the world's most populous country and the third largest country by geographical area. The US is the fourth largest, Brazil the fifth, and India the seventh (India is the second most populous country in the world, the US the third, and Brazil the sixth).

A recent paper in Science may have the answer. According to the paper, by Benjamin Cowling and other researchers, mostly at the University of Hong Kong, China's ability to stop Covid-19 in its tracks may have to do with its ability to manage the serial interval. In epidemiology, the serial interval is the gap between the onset of symptoms in Person A, and Person B, who is infected by Person A. The researchers' main finding is the title of the paper: "Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions".

The researchers found that the serial interval in Wuhan came down from 7.8 days to 2.6 days between early January and early February. They hypothesise that this was made possible by China's aggressive contact tracing, quarantine, and isolation protocols, which meant that all infections arising from one infected individual happened in a short period of time (in this case, 2.6 days), thereby ensuring that infected people, because they were isolated, could not infect any more people later in the infection cycle. The result, according to the researchers, was fewer cases. The sooner an infected person was isolated, the researchers found, the shorter was the serial interval. Their paper also explains that the serial interval is related to other epidemiological parameters, such as the attack rate of a virus (the proportion of people exposed to the virus over a period of time) and the reproduction rate or R naught, the number of people who will be infected by one infected person.

At this point, what Cowling and Co have proposed is a theory (backed by data and research), albeit a very plausible one.

It is also one that emphasizes the only way to deal with the coronavirus disease in the absence of a vaccine or a cure - test, trace, and isolate. And it is proof that better tracing and prompt (and stringent) isolation can lead to flatter infection curves.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- As the number of coronavirus infection in India more than doubled in the last four days to cross 250 while the number of infections across the world rose to over 2,65,000. US President Donald Trump declared coroavirus a major disaster in the state of New York.

Italy recorded the highest toll in a single day on Friday with 627 deaths that took the number of casualties in the country to 4,032. It is so the largest daily rise in absolute terms since the cornavirus hit the country about a month ago.

In Washington, the White House said the United States has reached mutual agreements with Canada and Mexico to restrict non-essential travel across America's northern and southern borders.

In India, 63 fresh cases were reported Friday prompting experts to reiterate that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread of coronavirus could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

Many states have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission which is more dangerous because a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Meanwhile, the Lucknow police have lodged an FIR against Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor for allegedly not complying with directives to safeguard against the spread of coronavirus disease after her return from London earlier this month.

Follow coronavirus updates here.

She tested Covid-19 positive on Friday and left a chain of politicians who have either put themselves on self-isolation or earmarked for monitoring by the administration.

Here is a look at the trends in India and the world.

India trends:

--India reports 63 new cases on Friday highest jump since infections began here

--Singer Kanika Kapoor's contacts being traced. Members of Parliament including Derek O' Brien, Anupriya Patel and Varun Gandhi who were in touch with fellow MP Dushyant Singh are in quarantine. Dushyant Singh and his mother Vasundhara Raje Scindia who had attended Kanika Kapoor's birthday, had earlier quarantined themselves.

--Many hospitals cancel elective surgeries and set aside beds

--Delhi closes malls, markets for 3 days

--Covid 19 infected Italian who was discharged from hospital after testing negative dies of cardiac arrest in Jaipur

--India expands testing protocol to include more people and has intensified contact tracing

---Vegetable prices surge due to talks of mandi closure

--Delhi man who tested positive in Tamil Nadu could be first case of community transmission in India

--The Nifty 50 saw its best one-day gain in more than six months, but ended the week more than 12% lower. Both Nifty and Sensex logged their worst week since 2008

Global trends:

--Covid 19 deaths cross 10,000

--New Zealand reports first local outbreak

--Italy deaths cross 4000, New York and California in lockdown

--Clampdown begins in London with theatres, pubs shutting down

--Data from Wuhan awaited if they are recording any fresh local infection cases. They didn't record any local new infection for 24 hours on Thursday-Friday

--The new coronavirus has infected far more people in US than those who have been tested, analysis by Columbia University researchers show

--Cases in New York state top 7,800

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 22 -- The US ordered China to shut its consulate general in Houston city, Beijing said on Wednesday, adding that it was an "unprecedented escalation" in Washington's recent actions against China and warned of "legitimate and necessary" response against the decision. This dramatic development is sure to further sour the rapidly deteriorating bilateral ties with the two countries already at loggerheads over South China Sea disputes, the Hong Kong security bill, US arms sales to Taiwan, the condition of minorities in Xinjiang, and the origin of the coronavirus besides an ongoing trade war.

Earlier on Wednesday, Hu Xijin, the editor of the Communist Party's Global Times newspaper said Washington had given 72 hours to Beijing - that is by July 24 - to close down the Houston consulate.

Also read: Relationship with India important, monitoring LAC very closely - US defense secretary

Hu's tweet came hours after Houston police and firefighters descended on the consulate following witness reports that papers were being burned outside in open containers, the Houston Chronicle and two local TV stations reported, citing local police.

In Beijing, the Chinese foreign ministry lashed out at the Donald Trump administration for passing the order.

"It is a political provocation unilaterally launched by the US side, which seriously violates international law, basic norms governing international relations and the bilateral consular agreement between China and the US."

Speaking at the regular ministry briefing, Wang said, "China strongly condemns such an outrageous and unjustified move which will sabotage China-US relations. We urge the US to immediately withdraw its erroneous decision, otherwise, China will make legitimate and necessary reactions".

"The unilateral closure of China's consulate general in Houston within a short period of time is an unprecedented escalation of its recent actions against China," Wang said and listed allegations of Washington harassing its diplomats and students in the US.

"For some time, the US government has been shifting the blame to China with stigmatisation and unwarranted attacks against China's social system, harassing Chinese diplomatic and consular staff in the US, intimidating and interrogating Chinese students and confiscating their personal electrical devices, even detaining them without cause," Wang said.

The spokesperson said China had shown goodwill to US diplomats in China and had promoted Sino-US ties through its envoys in the US.

"On the contrary, the US put restrictions on Chinese diplomats in June and last October respectively with no valid reason. [The US] has seized and opened mail and official supplies," Wang said.

Due to the deliberate smearing and hatred-inciting moves from the US, Chinese delegations in the US have recently received bomb threats and death threats. Responding to a separate question at the press conference, spokesperson Wang asked the US to immediately stop making accusations against it about cybercrimes, in response to Washington's indictment of two Chinese nationals for hacking Covid-19 vaccine-related data and defence secrets.

Wang said ".the consulate was operating normally" but sidestepped questions about US media reports in Houston on Tuesday night that documents were being burned in a courtyard at the consulate.

Earlier on Wednesday, US media reported that Houston police and fire officials responded to reports that documents were being burned in the courtyard of the Consulate General of China in Houston on Tuesday night, citing the Houston Police Department (PD).

Houston PD said they began receiving reports just after 8 pm that documents were being burned at 3417 Montrose Boulevard where the consulate is located, click2houston.com reported.

The Chinese Consulate in Houston was opened in 1979 - the first in the year the US and China established diplomatic relations.

The consulate website says the office covers eight southern US states - including Texas and Florida - and has nearly one million people in the area registered at the consulate.

There are five Chinese consulates in the US while the embassy is in Washington.

The US has its embassy in Beijing and consulates in Chengdu, Shanghai, Shenyang, Guangzhou, Wuhan and Hong Kong.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The coronavirus pandemic has infected around 600,000 people across the globe and claimed more than 24,000 lives worldwide, the World Health Organisation states.

From China, the virus spread quickly to the rest of the world, finding a new epicentre in Europe and the United States. For the first time for any country, US Covid-19 figures crossed 100,000 surpassing China's record of over 81,000 Covid-19 cases.

Here are key Covid-19 developments from across the globe.

1. The United States continues to lead with 101,657 cases followed by Italy, China and Spain.

2. Covid-19 has already plunged the global economy into recession, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said on Friday.

3. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, UK health secretary Matt Hancock and chief medical officer Chris Whitty test positive.

4. Death toll in Italy surged by 919 to a total of 9,134. It's the highest number of deaths in a day.

5. If the rate of growth in Covid-19 cases continues, the New York City area will suffer a more severe outbreak than those experienced in Wuhan, China or the Lombardy region of Italy, says a New York Times analysis. Death toll in New York jumped to 519, 40 per cent of US.

6. A New York hospital has started sharing on ventilators, putting two patients on each.

7. US President Donald Trump signed into law an unprecedented $2 trillion rescue plan Friday to salvage an economy crippled by coronavirus.

8. US President Donald Trump also used for the first time war-time powers under the Defense Production Act, under increasing pressure from state governors, to force a private company, General Motors, to ramp up production of ventilators needed to treat severely ill Covid-19 patients.

9. The US, France, Germany and other countries are engaged in hectic efforts to evacuate close to 14,000 of their nationals stranded in India following the suspension of commercial flights around the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

10. Chinese President Xi Jinping on Friday called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 3 -- It would not have come as a surprise to most people when a national survey last week showed an staggering 93% of Indians expressing confidence in Prime Minster Narendra Modi's leadership in tackling the coronavirus crisis. In fact, other surveys had shown public's confidence having steadily grown, from 77% at the beginning of the national lockdown over a month ago, to 83% earlier this month.

This was evident to anyone with an ear to the ground, such as the millions of volunteers who have been reaching out to assist those in need, or those who are in touch with many of them to coordinate aid. That confidence was also echoed by the vast majority of domestic and international public health experts monitoring India. Their sentiments were backed by solid evidence of the nation having done remarkably well in managing the pandemic.

Nevertheless, for a group of the usual suspects among international media, and some of their fellow travellers in India, all this might have been happening in a different galaxy. So deeply do they seem vested in purveying bad news about India, that they appeared oblivious to the overwhelming evidence that India was a stunningly positive outlier.

In the early stages, this school of reportage and commentary predicted catastrophe for India. They kept emphasising that since first world nations with superior healthcare systems were in big trouble, India was doomed. Some headlines include "Callousness of India's Covid response"; "A vulnerable population braces for a pandemic"; "The consequences (in India) will be especially grim"; and even "Mr Modi is in big trouble."

Next, as the days went by, they cast doubts on the relatively few infections by hyping the "low level of testing." Never mind that their cynicism -which should have been corroborated by a severe shortage of hospital beds and ventilators, and a sharp rise in respiratory-related deaths- was contradicted by reality. As testing was ramped up dramatically to the hundreds of thousands, and it became clear that far fewer Indians were turning up positive per 100 (IS THIS 1,000?) tests than in Europe and the United States (US), that bogey has mostly been quietly tucked away.

Thereafter, their acknowledgment that India was doing relatively well has been fleeting, and the tone grudging. Some sounded wistful, almost as if hoping that the good news about India were untrue, or if it were, that it would soon be overcome by negative developments. To be sure, the road ahead for India's fight against the virus will be long and arduous. But while it is not the global media's job to exude undue optimism about India, neither should it be to downplay real achievements and ooze negativism.

Finally, when the doom and gloom failed to materialise, these purveyors of a rigidly-blinkered narrative on India turned to their favourite charge: Islamophobia. They pounced on the developments surrounding the Tablighi Jamaat, and the public's disapproval of its members' behaviour, to accuse the Modi government and most Indian media of polarising the situation.

Of course, the reports that made this claim invariably omitted mentioning that the government's rules -such as the closure of places of worship- were equally applicable to all religions. Or that the PM's repeated appeals to unite people, including asserting that this virus "does not see race, religion, caste...we are in this together" was exactly the opposite of their allegation. And ironically, even those in the Indian media who went out of their way to be politically correct, more often preferring to use the euphemism "single source" rather than name the Tablighi Jamaat, were nevertheless accused just the same.

Such jaundiced views about India have gradually become commonplace among far-left, modern liberals within and without the country. Another aspect that stands out among this group is an excessive empathy for China that defies reason and which has eroded their credibility.

That was visible in the hotly-contested debate about the name of this virus. Although originally termed the "Wuhan virus" and later whitewashed into "SARS-CoV-2," the moment US President Donald Trump called it a "Chinese virus," all hell broke loose. Calling it that has, somewhat oddly, been termed racist by these commentators. More to the point, as the American talk show host and classical liberal -and no fan of Trump- Bill Maher pointed out, all past epidemics have been named after the place of their origin. These include German measles, Japanese encephalitis, Spanish flu, Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and others.

The reason this should be of interest in India is that none of this cohort objected a few years ago when an antibiotic-resistant bacterial strain was named the "New Delhi metallo beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1), because it was possibly first acquired here. This sort of hypocrisy only reinforces the perception of an entrenched bias against India among these circles.

As India grapples with the next phase of this pandemic, both in containing it as well as reviving the economy, it will also have to contend with more such determinedly pessimistic portrayals. It would be more appropriate for us to strive for a more balanced global narrative on India.

Baijayant "Jay" Panda is vice president, BJP

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 20 -- A study published five years ago had warned of viruses similar to that responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome circulating among the Chinese bat population that may pose a serious future threat.

The study was co-authored by Shi Zhengli, a virologist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, and published in the scientific journal Nature.Last month, Shi published a study linking the origin of the Covid-19 virus to bats. The study published in Nature concluded that 2019-nCoV was 96% identical at the genome level to a bat coronavirus.

The 2015 study had focused on SHC014-CoV, another coronavirus strain which was found to be circulating among the Chinese horseshoe bat populations, but highlighted that recent metagenomic (study of genetic material) studies had identified sequences closely related to the SARS-like viruses in bats which could spill over into outbreaks.

Many scientists and virologists working on animal-to-human transmission of viruses saw the Covid-19 pandemic coming.

For instance, Peter Daszak, a disease ecologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a US-based research organisation, wrote in The New York Times that in a World Health Organization meeting in 2018, experts coined the term "disease X," a virus emerging in animals which would be transmitted to humans and would spread as easily as the flu but with a higher mortality-very similar to Covid-19.

A 2017 study on the diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China found a total of 73 coronaviruses in a sample of 1,067 bats from 21 species in China. Another assessment of why bat viruses are so deadly, conducted by the University of California-Berkeley in February after Covid -9 started spreading, suggested bat cells have a strong immune response, constantly primed to respond to viruses.

High virulence and infectivity wreak havoc when these viruses infect animals with tamer immune systems like humans, the study published in Science Daily concluded. Bats' ability to fly allows them to pick up pathogens over a vast area.

Several other scientific studies have suggested that land-use change or wild habitat loss are leading to more contact between bats and recipient hosts. "Disrupting bat habitat appears to stress the animals and makes them shed even more virus in their saliva, urine and feces that can infect other animals," said the Science Daily study.

Researchers working on the ground say the interplay between these factors make virus spillover and an outbreak situation even more likely.

"The relationship between habitat loss and virus spillover from bats is not that simple. There are many areas where we live in close proximity with bats, but there is no spillover. The exceptional thing about bats is that they have the ability to tolerate high viral load without getting sick themselves. In general though, interfaces between bats and people provide opportunities for spillover. We need to study and better understand which particular viruses spill over and cause outbreaks," said Uma Ramakrishnan, associate professor and senior fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Rohit Chakravarty, a wildlife biologist at the Indian Bat Conservation Unit, said certain human behaviours made people more vulnerable to Covid-19 like spillovers. "Habitat loss and bushmeat consumption bring humans in closer contact with wildlife. Large commercial wildlife markets that exist in China and Southeast Asia bring humans in contact with live animals that are kept in unsanitary conditions, thereby compounding the risk of disease transmission," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday it was premature to launch an investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic, hours after more than 100 countries including India and ally Russia backed an international probe into the outbreak which emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at the regular ministry briefing on Monday that the vast majority of countries in the world believe the pandemic is not yet over.

China has been pushing back international demand for a probe, saying that the US and Australia, which has been in the forefront in demanding a probe, were politicising the issue and could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The resolution, drafted by the European Union, has been put up to the World Health Assembly (WHA), the annual meeting of the WHO. The foreign ministry statement came hours before the UN's global health agency's two-day virtual meet begins on Monday.

The resolution does not single out China or any other country but calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the (WHO)-coordinated international health response to Covid-19."

"Initiate, at the earliest appropriate moment, and in consultation with Member States, 1 a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, 2 as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19," the draft resolution said.

Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said on Monday Australia wants the resolution to stipulate that the inquiry be "impartial, independent and comprehensive."

In a separate statement, the Chinese foreign ministry announced that President Xi Jinping will address the World Health Assembly's opening ceremony via videolink later on Monday. President Xi had not been listed as a speaker in the schedule circulated by the WHO earlier. The foreign ministry said President Xi had been invited to speak by WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

After emerging in China, the virus had rapidly spread around world, killing more than 315,000 people and infecting at least 4.7 million.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- As the number of coronavirus infection in Indian doubled in the last four days to cross 200 while the number of infections across the world rose to over 2,65,000. US President Donald Trump declared coroavirus a major disaster in the state of New York.

Italy recorded the highest toll in a single day on Friday with 627 deaths that took the number of casualties in the country to 4,032. It is so the largest daily rise in absolute terms since the cornavirus hit the country about a month ago.

In Washington, the White House said the United States has reached mutual agreements with Canada and Mexico to restrict non-essential travel across America's northern and southern borders.

In India, 63 fresh cases were reported Friday prompting experts to reiterate that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread of coronavirus could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

Many states have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission which is more dangerous because a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Meanwhile, the Lucknow police have lodged an FIR against Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor for allegedly not complying with directives to safeguard against the spread of coronavirus disease after her return from London earlier this month.

Follow coronavirus updates here.

She tested Covid-19 positive on Friday and left a chain of politicians who have either put themselves on self-isolation or earmarked for monitoring by the administration.

Here is a look at the trends in India and the world.

India trends:

--India reports 63 new cases on Friday highest jump since infections began here

--Singer Kanika Kapoor's contacts being traced. Members of Parliament including Derek O' Brien, Anupriya Patel and Varun Gandhi who were in touch with fellow MP Dushyant Singh are in quarantine. Dushyant Singh and his mother Vasundhara Raje Scindia who had attended Kanika Kapoor's birthday, had earlier quarantined themselves.

--Many hospitals cancel elective surgeries and set aside beds

--Delhi closes malls, markets for 3 days

--Covid 19 infected Italian who was discharged from hospital after testing negative dies of cardiac arrest in Jaipur

--India expands testing protocol to include more people and has intensified contact tracing

---Vegetable prices surge due to talks of mandi closure

--Delhi man who tested positive in Tamil Nadu could be first case of community transmission in India

--The Nifty 50 saw its best one-day gain in more than six months, but ended the week more than 12% lower. Both Nifty and Sensex logged their worst week since 2008

Global trends:

--Covid 19 deaths cross 10,000

--New Zealand reports first local outbreak

--Italy deaths cross 4000, New York and California in lockdown

--Clampdown begins in London with theatres, pubs shutting down

--Data from Wuhan awaited if they are recording any fresh local infection cases. They didn't record any local new infection for 24 hours on Thursday-Friday

--The new coronavirus has infected far more people in US than those who have been tested, analysis by Columbia University researchers show

--Cases in New York state top 7,800

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 20 -- President Donald Trump on Wednesday further ratcheted up his attacks on China saying its "incompetence" caused the Covid-19 pandemic, which he described as "mass worldwide killing".

The American president and his Republican allies have increasingly targeted China in a bid to shift the blame for the high number of infections and fatalities in the United States and the economic downturn triggered by the mitigation efforts with an eye on the November general elections.

Referring to a statement issued by "some wacko in China" the president wrote in a tweet "it was the 'incompetence of China', and nothing else, that did this mass Worldwide killing".

The president has called for an independent investigation in the origin of the epidemic in Wuhan in China last December and Beijing's attempts to conceal the true extent of the epidemic, with the complicity of the World Health Organization. He has separately accused the WHO and its director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus personally of "missteps" of their own, including abetting China's cover-up.

With all 50 United States set to reopen partially President Trump stirred fresh controversy Tuesday saying he considered it a "badge of honor" that the United States had the highest number of infections in the world at 1.5 million, arguing it was a testimony to increased testing.

Critics pounced on the president, arguing, he was taking credit for the highest number of infections.

"So when we have a lot of cases, I don't look at that as a bad thing; I look at that as -- in a certain respect, as being a good thing because it means our testing is much better," he had said, "I view it as a badge of honor. Really, it's a badge of honor."

There were 1.52 million confirmed Covid-19 cases in the United States till Wednesday morning and 91,983 fatalities, up by 20,260 and 1,574 in past 24 hours respectively. The total number of tests administered thus far was 12.6 million, according to the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The high number of infections is a reflection of higher testing, as the president has argued in his defence, but critics have largely attributed them, and the high fatalities, to his administration delayed and botched initial response to the outbreak, which allowed the virus to spread rapidly unchallenged.

President Trump has touted testing figures in recent days to counter criticism that the United States is not testing enough, specially with states reopening steadily. Public health officials have sought more testing to ensure lifting of curbs on public life did not lead to a resurgence as it has in countries.

Connecticut became Wednesday the 50th American state to join the national reopening, allowing restaurants, malls and some outdoor activities to resume. As in a number of other states, rest of the economy and public life will be reopened in phases depending, determined by declining incidence of infections.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- The suicide of a man, who was admitted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital after flying in from Sydney, even as test results to ascertain whether he had the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) were awaited, is a wake-up call. There has been commentary on safety measures required to deal with the outbreak and the individual, social and institutional actions required. But not enough attention has been paid to the toll the disease - and the messaging around it - is taking on mental health.

Covid-19 is new. Rarely, if ever, in recent history have human beings across the world - be in Boston or Bengaluru, Wuhan or Doha, Rome or Seoul - experienced a common set of concerns, driven by a single factor. From its roots to its symptoms, from its treatment protocol to a possible cure, uncertainty is rife. This uncertainty is causing fear, anxiety, panic among people - about themselves, about their loved ones, about their future. This is coupled with a sense of shame among those who are either suspected or have the infection, because of the stigmatisation of Covid-19 patients. Yes, there are people who could have been more careful; yes, there has been a streak of irresponsibility in those should have followed treatment protocols. But it must be emphasised that a patient who gets infected is not guilty, but is actually a victim. Targeting individuals or families with traces of the case is wrong. Unacceptable racial attacks - be it against Chinese-origin Americans in the United States or against people from the Northeast in India - is only adding to this sense of vulnerability. Misinformation is not helping.

The government must weave in the mental health dimension in the way it approaches Covid-19. There has to be sustained counselling and therapy for patients and suspected cases. There has to be better messaging, which battles the sense of shame associated with Covid-19 and emphasises that social distancing is a temporary measure and patients are not criminals. There has to be kindness and empathy in the way families, neighbours, and communities engage with each other. Only a humane response can help deal with the deeply vulnerable human condition of these times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UNSC, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic.

The G20 communique said the pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label it as the "Wuhan virus". "The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics," said a person aware of the discussions.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 5 -- Coronavirus originated from China's Wuhan last year. As it began to step away from mainland China, the deadly contagion left behind over 80,000 patients and killed more than 3,000 people in the country.

As of today, nearly 1.2 million people are affected by the virus and a whopping 60,000 have been killed. The virus is estimated to account for a record number of patients and deaths in the United States. European nations like Italy, Spain, France and Germany are already reeling.

Global bodies like the World Health Organization hailed South Korea for its strategy to contain the virus spread. Another administration which has done laudable work in mitigating the crisis within its territory is Taiwan.

Taiwan, although so close to mainland China (just 81 miles off coast), has managed to keep the ugly head of Covid-19 from rising within its territory.

According to a report, as the news of coronavirus' emergence surfaced in Wuhan last year, officials at Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) acted quickly.

Stanford expert Jason Wang, who is an associate professor of pediatrics at Stanford Medicine, says the outcome is a result of Taiwan using "new technology and a robust pandemic prevention plan put into place at the 2003 SARS outbreak".

Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) was set up after the SARS pandemic and became part of its mechanism to tackle large outbreaks.

While world economies were mulling over what actions to take and when, Taiwan was already responding with a Covid-19 strategy in place. Owing to its proximity to mainland China, it was supposed to be one of the worst-hit regions by coronavirus.

Taiwan quickly moved to put travel curbs in place, checking its ports and introducing stringent punishments for violators of quarantine orders. Aggressive testing also helped Taiwan deal with the pandemic efficiently.

Taiwanese authorities came into action as soon as the WHO was notified of a pneumonia of unknown cause in the Chinese city of Wuhan in December.

In the first week of January itself, Taiwanese authorities issued a notification for individuals who had travelled to or from Wuhan in the past 14 days and reported fever or symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection.

Those displaying symptoms were quarantined, tested for over 20 viruses.

"Taiwan leveraged its national health insurance database and integrated it with its immigration and customs database to begin the creation of big data for analytics; it generated real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and clinical symptoms to aid case identification. It also used new technology, including QR code scanning and online reporting of travel history and health symptoms to classify travelers' infectious risks based on flight origin and travel history in the past 14 days," Wang says in a paper published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The administration prepared a list of 124 action items to devise a strategy against coronavirus.

After nearly three months into the Covid-19 crisis, Taiwan has reported less than 400 coronavirus cases and witnessed 5 deaths as per the data by Johns Hopkins University.

The lessons that world economies can learn from Taiwan's Covid-19 plan are enormous. Taiwan's strategy finds its foundation in early recognition of the crisis.

With "daily briefings to the public, and simple health messaging, the government was able to reassure the public by delivering timely, accurate, and transparent information regarding the evolving epidemic," Wang writes in her paper.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, July 31 -- No large country in the world has been able to contain the disease to one restricted geography the way China has.

According to worldometers.info, it has seen 84,165 cases of the coronavirus disease thus far with only 4,634 deaths. It has only 574 active cases of the disease (all data is till late evening of July 29). Merely by looking at the numbers it is difficult to imagine that the disease which has infected more than 17 million people worldwide, killing close to 670,000 (including over 4.4 million cases and 150,000 deaths in the US, and close to 1.6 million cases and almost 35,000 deaths in India) actually originated in Wuhan, China, from where it travelled, through people, all over the world. Sure there has been a minor flurry of cases in Beijing, but the numbers are far too small to suggest any sort of outbreak.

Click here for full Covid-19 coverage

One theory is that the Chinese have completely buried all inconvenient information related to the disease and its fallout within the country. This is true at least in part; Beijing has steadfastly sidestepped calls for a scientific investigation into the origin of the virus. But there is nothing to suggest that it has engaged in a massive cover-up to hide outbreaks in other parts of the country.

Which is why its Covid-19 numbers are a mystery. This column has pointed out that the pandemic has followed roughly the same trajectory in most countries. It has also pointed out that its trajectory has been similar in large countries such as the US, Brazil, and India, with concentrated outbreaks in a few areas that gradually spread to other areas, which then started seeing similar outbreaks. China is the world's most populous country and the third largest country by geographical area. The US is the fourth largest, Brazil the fifth, and India the seventh (India is the second most populous country in the world, the US the third, and Brazil the sixth).

A recent paper in Science may have the answer. According to the paper, by Benjamin Cowling and other researchers, mostly at the University of Hong Kong, China's ability to stop Covid-19 in its tracks may have to do with its ability to manage the serial interval. In epidemiology, the serial interval is the gap between the onset of symptoms in Person A, and Person B, who is infected by Person A. The researchers' main finding is the title of the paper: "Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions".

The researchers found that the serial interval in Wuhan came down from 7.8 days to 2.6 days between early January and early February. They hypothesise that this was made possible by China's aggressive contact tracing, quarantine, and isolation protocols, which meant that all infections arising from one infected individual happened in a short period of time (in this case, 2.6 days), thereby ensuring that infected people, because they were isolated, could not infect any more people later in the infection cycle. The result, according to the researchers, was fewer cases. The sooner an infected person was isolated, the researchers found, the shorter was the serial interval. Their paper also explains that the serial interval is related to other epidemiological parameters, such as the attack rate of a virus (the proportion of people exposed to the virus over a period of time) and the reproduction rate or R naught, the number of people who will be infected by one infected person.

At this point, what Cowling and Co have proposed is a theory (backed by data and research), albeit a very plausible one.

It is also one that emphasizes the only way to deal with the coronavirus disease in the absence of a vaccine or a cure - test, trace, and isolate. And it is proof that better tracing and prompt (and stringent) isolation can lead to flatter infection curves.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The first images of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease from India have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, by real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 28 -- The coronavirus pandemic has infected around 600,000 people across the globe and claimed more than 24,000 lives worldwide, the World Health Organisation states.

From China, the virus spread quickly to the rest of the world, finding a new epicentre in Europe and the United States. For the first time for any country, US Covid-19 figures crossed 100,000 surpassing China's record of over 81,000 Covid-19 cases.

Here are key Covid-19 developments from across the globe.

1. The United States continues to lead with 101,657 cases followed by Italy, China and Spain.

2. Covid-19 has already plunged the global economy into recession, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said on Friday.

3. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, UK health secretary Matt Hancock and chief medical officer Chris Whitty test positive.

4. Death toll in Italy surged by 919 to a total of 9,134. It's the highest number of deaths in a day.

5. If the rate of growth in Covid-19 cases continues, the New York City area will suffer a more severe outbreak than those experienced in Wuhan, China or the Lombardy region of Italy, says a New York Times analysis. Death toll in New York jumped to 519, 40 per cent of US.

6. A New York hospital has started sharing on ventilators, putting two patients on each.

7. US President Donald Trump signed into law an unprecedented $2 trillion rescue plan Friday to salvage an economy crippled by coronavirus.

8. US President Donald Trump also used for the first time war-time powers under the Defense Production Act, under increasing pressure from state governors, to force a private company, General Motors, to ramp up production of ventilators needed to treat severely ill Covid-19 patients.

9. The US, France, Germany and other countries are engaged in hectic efforts to evacuate close to 14,000 of their nationals stranded in India following the suspension of commercial flights around the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

10. Chinese President Xi Jinping on Friday called on counterpart Donald Trump to take "substantive actions" to improve bilateral ties on Friday as the two countries worst hit by the rampaging Covid-19 pandemic continued to trade barbs on, among other things, the origin of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- The European Union-drafted resolution to seek a probe into the origin of the coronavirus disease that has killed over 300,000 people and the WHO's response has gained the support of over 100 countries including India, according to documents filed ahead of the World Health Organisation's (WHO) biggest annual event on Monday.

The World Health Assembly, the WHO's key policy making body, is meeting Monday afternoon, 3.30 pm IST. This is the first time that the meeting is being held via video conference. The conference will be wrapped up in two days for now and resume once the world gets a grip on the virus that has infected millions of people.

The resolution seeks a probe into the source of the virus, now called Sars-CoV-2, and the route of its introduction to the human population. Coronavirus, the disease that the pathogen causes, was first detected in China's Wuhan city.

But Beijing, which has been accused of trying to conceal the disease in the early days of its detection last year, occasionally insists that it could have originated elsewhere. More than one Chinese foreign ministry official has pointed to the United States.

Australia, who had played a lead role in building support for the resolution that targets China, has welcomed the growing support for the probe, according to news agency Reuters. Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said the resolution is "an important part of the conversation we started".

Australia has also borne the brunt of Beijing's anger for this role. Chinese authorities have threatened to impose heavy duties on barley imports and already suspended beef imports from four Australian suppliers.

Chinese foreign ministry has denied that the decision was linked to Australia's push for the Covid origin inquiry that it has described as "highly irresponsible" and could "disrupt international cooperation in fighting the pandemic".

Australia, backed by the United States, however, stayed the course and kept up its efforts.

An updated document on the WHO's website indicates that support for the resolution has been growing.

Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the 54-nation Africa Group have also signed off on the resolution that not only puts China's role but also that of the WHO leadership under scrutiny. In particular, WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

The draft resolution asks the WHO chief to start an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response including an evaluation of the effectiveness of the mechanisms at WHO's disposal.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 19 -- President Donald Trump on Saturday said China should face "consequences" if it was found to have been "knowingly responsible" for the novel coronavirus outbreak.

"It could have been stopped in China before it started and it wasn't, and the whole world is suffering because of it," Trump said at the daily briefing by the White House task force on coronavirus.

"If it was a mistake, a mistake is a mistake," he added. "But if they were knowingly responsible, yeah, I mean, then sure there should be consequences."

Follow latest updates on coronavirus here

President Trump began pointing to China as the origin of the pandemic first by identifying the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus", which fuelled anti-Asian sentiments already coursing through the country. Other US officials chose to call it the "Wuhan virus", after the city where the epidemic is believed to have started.

Some US officials and Republican lawmakers attacked China alleging it was concealing the true magnitude of it outbreak; they cited intelligence reports .

As the American president came under mounting criticism for his administration's delayed and botched response to the epidemic, he went after the World Health Organization, accusing it of helping China conceal the magnitude or its outbreak and mismanaging its own response to the crisis.

China has since revised its numbers upwards, by 50% in Wuhan.

The coronavirus pandemic had killed 159,510 people around the world till Saturday evening and infected 2,317,759. The United States has been the worst hit 38,664 fatalities and 732197 reported cases; going up by 3,847 and 31,905 over the past 24 hours respectively.

President Trump has previously said China numbers are "larger" than America's and that it has the "most" in the world. But he has presented no evidence to back that claim.

Also read: Early measures reason for fewer cases in India, says WHO regional director

"Does anybody really believe this number?" Trump said Saturday, referring to China's reported mortality rate of 0.33 per 100,000 people, on a chart presented at the briefing by Deborah birx, coordinator of the task force.

Birx said that she had included China on the chart to show how "unrealistic"those numbers are. The US mortality rate is 11.24 per 100,000, in comparison, which is much higher in comparison to China's reported numbers, but much lower than some of the other countries such as Belgium, which led the world with 45.2 fatalities per 100,000, followed by Spain with 42.81, and Italy with 37.64.

Click here for complete coronavirus coverage

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 28 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cases in December 2019.

The images of the virus from Covid-19 cases from Kerala show Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronaviruses have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images will help study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help us understand how the virus moved from animals to humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on development of drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly. Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ul sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 4 -- It would not have come as a surprise to most people when a recent national survey showed a staggering 93% of Indians expressing confidence in Prime Minister Narendra Modi's leadership in tackling the coronavirus pandemic. In fact, other surveys had shown the public's confidence has steadily grown, from 77% at the beginning of the national lockdown over a month ago to 83% at the end of April.

This was evident to anyone with an ear to the ground, such as the millions of volunteers who have been reaching out to assist those in need, or those who are in touch with many of them to coordinate aid. That confidence was also echoed by the vast majority of domestic and international public health experts monitoring India. Their sentiments were backed by solid evidence of the nation having done remarkably well in managing the pandemic.

Nevertheless, for a group of the usual suspects among international media, and some of their fellow travellers in India, all this might have been happening in a different galaxy. So deeply do they seem vested in purveying bad news about India that they appeared oblivious to the overwhelming evidence that India was a stunningly positive outlier.

In the early stages, this school of reportage and commentary predicted catastrophe for India. They kept emphasising that since first world nations with superior health care systems were in big trouble, India was doomed. Some headlines include: "Callousness of India's Covid response"; "A vulnerable population braces for a pandemic"; "The consequences (in India) will be especially grim"; and even "Mr Modi is in big trouble."

Next, as days went by, they cast doubts on the relatively few infections by hyping the "low level of testing". Never mind that their cynicism - which should have been corroborated by a severe shortage of hospital beds and ventilators, and a sharp rise in respiratory-related deaths - was contradicted by reality. As testing was ramped up dramatically to the hundreds of thousands, and it became clear that far fewer Indians were turning up positive than in Europe and the United States (US), that bogey has mostly been quietly tucked away.

Thereafter, their acknowledgement that India was doing relatively well has been fleeting, and the tone grudging. Some sounded wistful, almost as if hoping that the good news about India were untrue, or if it were, that it would soon be overcome by negative developments. To be sure, the road ahead for India's fight against the virus will be long and arduous. But while it is not the global media's job to exude undue optimism about India, neither should it be to downplay achievements and ooze negativism.

Finally, when the doom and gloom failed to materialise, these purveyors of a rigidly-blinkered narrative on India turned to their favourite charge: Islamophobia. They pounced on the developments surrounding the Tablighi Jamaat, and the public's disapproval of its members' behaviour, to accuse the Modi government and most Indian media of polarising the situation.

Of course, the reports that made this claim invariably omitted mentioning that the government's rules - such as the closure of places of worship - were equally applicable to all religions. Or that the PM's repeated appeals to unite people, including asserting that this virus "does not see race, religion, caste...we are in this together" was exactly the opposite of their allegation. And ironically, even those in the Indian media who went out of their way to be politically correct, more often preferring to use the euphemism "single source" rather than name the Tablighi Jamaat, were nevertheless accused just the same.

Such jaundiced views about India have gradually become commonplace among far-Left, modern liberals within and outside the country. Another aspect that stands out among this group is an excessive empathy for China that defies reason and that has eroded their credibility.

That was visible in the hotly-contested debate about the name of this virus. Although originally termed the "Wuhan virus" and later whitewashed into "SARS-CoV-2," the moment US President Donald Trump called it a "Chinese virus," all hell broke loose. Calling it that has, somewhat oddly, been termed racist by these commentators. More to the point, as the American talk show host and classical liberal - and no fan of Trump - Bill Maher pointed out, all past epidemics have been named after the place of their origin. These include German measles, Japanese encephalitis, Spanish flu, Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome and others.

The reason this should be of interest in India is that none of this cohort objected a few years ago when an antibiotic-resistant bacterial strain was named the "New Delhi metallo beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1)", because it was possibly first acquired here. This sort of hypocrisy only reinforces the perception of an entrenched bias against India among these circles.

As India grapples with the next phase of this pandemic, both in containing it as well as reviving the economy, it will also have to contend with more such determinedly pessimistic portrayals. It would be more appropriate for us to strive for a more balanced global narrative on India.

Baijayant 'Jay' Panda is vice-president, BJP

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 3 -- Here are today's top news, analysis and opinion at 9 AM. Know all about the latest news and other news updates from Hindustan Times.

Over 500 new Covid-19 cases in a day in India; total number crosses 2,500

The number of people infected with coronavirus disease Covid-19 in the country rose by more than 500 to cross 2,500 - 2,507 to be precise - on Thursday, according to the health ministry. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

Administrators and health care professionals shaping India's response to the pandemic would do well to study what is happening in New York City - what it got right and, more importantly, what it didn't. Read more

Coronavirus: How world reached a million cases in 93 days

At exactly 12pm IST on December 31, a 280-word report from news agency AFP made its way to newsrooms around the world. Citing local media, the report said a mystery virus was causing "viral pneumonia of unknown origin" in the city of Wuhan, where 27 people had been infected till then. Read more

'We won't need to talk while batting': Virat Kohli names 2 batsmen he loves batting with in Instagram live with Kevin Pietersen

Fitness is the top-most criteria for Virat Kohli the cricketer. It was therefore, not at all a surprise when he revealed that he enjoys batting with those who can run fast between the wickets. Read more

Social Distancing Guide: 5 ways to avoid getting bored in your relationship during lockdown

During the current lockdown scenario amidst the coronavirus crisis, it's easy to get into a rut and forget about having fun once you've been in a relationship for some time. Read more

Disney+ Hotstar launched in India: 5 Things you should know about it

Disney has finally launched its video streaming service, Disney+ in India. The service was launched in the country as Disney+ Hotstar and it brings the best content from the two video streaming platforms to the Indian users. Read more

Anushka Sharma interrupts Virat Kohli's live chat with Kevin Pietersen: 'Chalo chalo dinner time'

Actor Anushka Sharma and cricketer husband Virat Kohli may be under lockdown but she is making sure they stick to their time table. On Thursday, Virat joined former England batsman Kevin Pietersen in an Instagram Live video session where both the cricketers discussed a range of topics. However, Anushka made sure Virat ended his chat in time for dinner. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 26 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

It was noted that the world community was still trying to forge a coordinated response three months after the crisis began, though the virtual summit had shown that the world community could come together, the people said.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UN Security Council, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic. The WHO too has faced some criticism for not acting more decisively on the crisis.

The G20 communique said the unprecedented pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

"We will share timely and transparent information; exchange epidemiological and clinical data; share materials necessary for research and development; and strengthen health systems globally, including through supporting the full implementation of the WHO International Health Regulations (IHR 2005)," it said.

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label Covid-19 as the "Wuhan virus".

"The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics. There is a need to empower it so that it can take the lead, and to boost its capacity to provide early warnings, help states develop protocols and to forge common solutions to future crises," said a person.

The people said further discussions of the G20 members were underway to frame an "action paper" with specific steps to be taken to counter the pandemic and its fallout.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 7 -- President Xi Jinping has warned against complacency in the ongoing fight to curb the coronavirus outbreak in the country even as China on Thursday classified all its counties as "low-risk" for the Covid-19 disease.

The decision to lower the risk level was taken as no domestic cases were reported in the Chinese mainland for four consecutive days as of Wednesday, and no new deaths for 22 consecutive days, national health commission (NHC) spokesperson, Mi Feng said on Thursday.

The Chinese mainland reported two new imported Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, bringing the total number of imported cases to 1,680, Mi added.

Coronavirus outbreak: Full coverage

China now has a total of 82885 confirmed cases of the disease and 4633 deaths from it.

Xi, however, warned officials from "relaxing" in their fight against it despite the dramatic fall in numbers at a meeting of the Communist Party of China's Standing Committee, the top decision-making body in the country, on Wednesday.

"Xi stressed that authorities can afford zero complacency in their work on all fronts to consolidate the outcomes of epidemic containment, and must not undo all the efforts that have been made," state media quoted him as saying at the meeting.

Xi said the spread of the ".virus overseas has not been effectively curbed yet and cluster cases were reported in a few areas in China, posing considerable uncertainty to the epidemic control".

The epidemic prevention and control measures in Hubei, the Chinese province worst-hit by the coronavirus, should not be relaxed, Xi said.

Meanwhile, China's diplomatic spat with the US continued on Thursday with the Chinese foreign ministry accusing US secretary of state Mike Pompeo of telling one lie to cover up another in his continued attacks against Beijing over the pandemic.

Speaking at the regular ministry briefing on Thursday, spokesperson Hua Chunying said Beijing has been transparent about the Covid-19 outbreak that emerged in Hubei province's capital Wuhan late last year and that the US politicians were making baseless accusations against China

Washington has accused Beijing of covering up the outbreak and mishandling it.

Hua added that China supported the efforts of the WHO to investigate the origin of the pandemic.

"We are always open to cooperate with the WHO on matters, including on the question of origin," she said.

"While scientists have not come to a conclusion, why is Secretary Pompeo drawing the hasty conclusion that the virus came from a Wuhan lab? Where is his proof? Show us the proof. If he cannot show any evidence, then he may still be in the process of making up this evidence," she said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 27 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, by real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, April 5 -- Coronavirus originated from China's Wuhan last year. As it began to step away from mainland China, the deadly contagion left behind over 80,000 patients and killed more than 3,000 people in the country.

As of today, nearly 1.2 million people are affected by the virus and a whopping 60,000 have been killed. The virus is estimated to account for a record number of patients and deaths in the United States. European nations like Italy, Spain, France and Germany are already reeling.

Global bodies like the World Health Organization hailed South Korea for its strategy to contain the virus spread. Another administration which has done laudable work in mitigating the crisis within its territory is Taiwan.

Taiwan, although so close to mainland China (just 81 miles off coast), has managed to keep the ugly head of Covid-19 from rising within its territory.

According to a report, as the news of coronavirus' emergence surfaced in Wuhan last year, officials at Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) acted quickly.

Stanford expert Jason Wang, who is an associate professor of pediatrics at Stanford Medicine, says the outcome is a result of Taiwan using "new technology and a robust pandemic prevention plan put into place at the 2003 SARS outbreak".

Taiwan's National Health Command Center (NHCC) was set up after the SARS pandemic and became part of its mechanism to tackle large outbreaks.

While world economies were mulling over what actions to take and when, Taiwan was already responding with a Covid-19 strategy in place. Owing to its proximity to mainland China, it was supposed to be one of the worst-hit regions by coronavirus.

Taiwan quickly moved to put travel curbs in place, checking its ports and introducing stringent punishments for violators of quarantine orders. Aggressive testing also helped Taiwan deal with the pandemic efficiently.

Taiwanese authorities came into action as soon as the WHO was notified of a pneumonia of unknown cause in the Chinese city of Wuhan in December.

In the first week of January itself, Taiwanese authorities issued a notification for individuals who had travelled to or from Wuhan in the past 14 days and reported fever or symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection.

Those displaying symptoms were quarantined, tested for over 20 viruses.

"Taiwan leveraged its national health insurance database and integrated it with its immigration and customs database to begin the creation of big data for analytics; it generated real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and clinical symptoms to aid case identification. It also used new technology, including QR code scanning and online reporting of travel history and health symptoms to classify travelers' infectious risks based on flight origin and travel history in the past 14 days," Wang says in a paper published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The administration prepared a list of 124 action items to devise a strategy against coronavirus.

After nearly three months into the Covid-19 crisis, Taiwan has reported less than 400 coronavirus cases and witnessed 5 deaths as per the data by Johns Hopkins University.

The lessons that world economies can learn from Taiwan's Covid-19 plan are enormous. Taiwan's strategy finds its foundation in early recognition of the crisis.

With "daily briefings to the public, and simple health messaging, the government was able to reassure the public by delivering timely, accurate, and transparent information regarding the evolving epidemic," Wang writes in her paper.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 14 -- As the deadly coronavirus has spread worldwide, it has carried with it xenophobia - and Asian communities around the world are finding themselves subject to suspicion and fear.

A man decided to do something about it, and came up with a novel campaign. Massimiliano Martigli Jiang, an Italian-Chinese, stood blindfolded and with a mask in Italy's Florence with a message board which read "I am not a virus, I am a human being, free me from prejudice".

Jiang lives in Florence and was touched by the responses he got. Many people hugged Jian, and some even removed the blindfold. He uploaded a video of the people's reaction on his Facebook page and Instagram.

"This video was one of those things that didn't make me sleep the day before, it put me anxiety while waiting for filming, during and all the moments later. But now. Thanks to your beautiful words, you made me cry so much!" he wrote on Facebook. The video, uploaded more than a week ago, has been widely shared in Italian media.

He also cheered the people of Wuhan, the Chinese city at the epicentre of coronavirus outbreak. "Come on Wuhan - Come on China," Jiang said in his Facebook post.

China has put Wuhan and other cities where the virus has spread, under unprecedented lockdown. The diease is now officially known as Covid-19.

There has been a spike in reports of anti-Chinese rhetoric directed at people of Asian origin, regardless of whether they have ever visited the centre of the epidemic or been in contact with the virus.

Chinese tourists have reportedly been spat at in the Italian city of Venice, a family in Turin was accused of carrying the disease, and mothers in Milan have used social media to call for children to be kept away from Chinese classmates.

In Canada, a man was filmed telling a Chinese-Canadian woman "you dropped your coronavirus" in the parking lot of a local mall.

In Malaysia, a petition to "bar Chinese people from entering our beloved country" received almost 500,000 signatures in one week.

"It's a common phenomenon," said Rob Grenfell, director of health and biosecurity for Australia's science and research agency CSIRO. "Sure it emerged in China," he said of the coronavirus, "but that's no reason to actually vilify Chinese people."

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has warned against "measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade", but this has not stopped scores of countries from introducing travel bans.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 27 -- The first images from India of the coronavirus causing the Covid-19 disease have been caught by scientists in Pune, using transmission electron microscope imaging. They were published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

The images of Sars-Cov-2, the virus that Causes Covid-19, are from the throat swab of the first laboratory-confirmed case in India on January 30, 2020. The woman, among three students studying medicine in Wuhan, was diagnosed with Covid-19 after returning home.

Covid-19 has infected at least 540,000 people and killed close to 25,000 since the first cluster of cases were detected in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.

The images of the virus from the Covid-19 cases from Kerala show that the Sars-Cov-2 virus closely resembles the Mers-Cov virus that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus in 2012, and the 2002 Sars-CoV virus that causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) coronavirus.

"Coronavirus have a crown-like appearance and these spikes on the surface give this virus family its name, as corona means crown in Latin. They have evolved to recognise a variety of receptors, including protein receptors and sugar receptors, and enter cells by first recognising a host-cell-surface receptor for viral attachment, and then fusing viral and host membranes for entry," said Dr Nirmal K Ganguly, former director general, Indian Council of Medical Research.

"These images are critical to study mutations in clinical samples and help identify the genetic origin and evolution of the virus, which will help is understand how the virus moved from animals to infect humans, how people-to-people transmission started, and whether it is still mutating, which will inform work on the development drugs and vaccines," said Dr Ganguly.

Gene sequencing of the samples from Kerala done at NIV Pune found the virus was a 99.98% match with the virus in China's Wuhan.

"One particular virus particle was very well preserved, showing features very typical of coronaviruses. This particle was 75 nm in size and showed patchy stain pooling on the surface and a distinct envelope projection ending in round peplomeric (glycoprotein spike on the viral surface). These bind only to certain receptors on the host cell," said Dr Atanu Basu, deputy director and head of electron microscopy and pathology at NIV Pune, which published the imaging.

To get the image, his group used centrifugation to remove the debris from a 500 ?l sample from the throat swab of the Kerala Covid-19 case confirmed using the highly sensitive, real-time, polymerase chain reaction.

The supernatant (clear liquid) was removed, filed at a final concentration of 1% glutaraldehyde, and adsorbed on to a carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grid. Negative staining was done with sodium phosphotungstic acid, according to the study.

The grid was then examined under 100kV accelerating voltage in a transmission electron microscope and the image was captured using a low-dose mode by a side-mounted camera.

"Seven negative-stained virus particles that looked like coronavirus-like particles were imaged in the fields scanned. These included the round shape of the virus with an average size of 70-80 nm and a cobbled surface structure having envelope projections that averaged 15+-2 nm in size," said Dr Basu.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 20 -- A study published five years ago had warned of viruses similar to that responsible for the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome circulating among the Chinese bat population that may pose a serious future threat. The study was co-authored by Shi Zhengli, a virologist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, and published in the scientific journal Nature.Last month, Shi published a study linking the origin of the Covid-19 virus to bats. The study published in Nature concluded that 2019-nCoV was 96% identical at the genome level to a bat coronavirus.

The 2015 study had focused on SHC014-CoV, another coronavirus strain which was found to be circulating among the Chinese horseshoe bat populations, but highlighted that recent metagenomic (study of genetic material) studies had identified sequences closely related to the SARS-like viruses in bats which could spill over into outbreaks.

Many scientists and virologists working on animal-to-human transmission of viruses saw the Covid-19 pandemic coming.

For instance, Peter Daszak, a disease ecologist and president of EcoHealth Alliance, a US-based research organisation, wrote in The New York Times that in a World Health Organization meeting in 2018, experts coined the term "disease X," a virus emerging in animals which would be transmitted to humans and would spread as easily as the flu but with a higher mortality-very similar to Covid-19.

A 2017 study on the diversity of coronaviruses in bats from China found a total of 73 coronaviruses in a sample of 1,067 bats from 21 species in China. Another assessment of why bat viruses are so deadly, conducted by the University of California-Berkeley in February after Covid -9 started spreading, suggested bat cells have a strong immune response, constantly primed to respond to viruses.

High virulence and infectivity wreak havoc when these viruses infect animals with tamer immune systems like humans, the study published in Science Daily concluded. Bats' ability to fly allows them to pick up pathogens over a vast area.

Several other scientific studies have suggested that land-use change or wild habitat loss are leading to more contact between bats and recipient hosts. "Disrupting bat habitat appears to stress the animals and makes them shed even more virus in their saliva, urine and feces that can infect other animals," said the Science Daily study.

Researchers working on the ground say the interplay between these factors make virus spillover and an outbreak situation even more likely.

"The relationship between habitat loss and virus spillover from bats is not that simple. There are many areas where we live in close proximity with bats, but there is no spillover. The exceptional thing about bats is that they have the ability to tolerate high viral load without getting sick themselves. In general though, interfaces between bats and people provide opportunities for spillover. We need to study and better understand which particular viruses spill over and cause outbreaks," said Uma Ramakrishnan, associate professor and senior fellow, Wellcome Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences.

Rohit Chakravarty, a wildlife biologist at the Indian Bat Conservation Unit, said certain human behaviours made people more vulnerable to Covid-19 like spillovers. "Habitat loss and bushmeat consumption bring humans in closer contact with wildlife. Large commercial wildlife markets that exist in China and Southeast Asia bring humans in contact with live animals that are kept in unsanitary conditions, thereby compounding the risk of disease transmission," he said.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 9 -- Since the first case was reported on January 31 of coronavirus disease (Covid-19), with a Kerala student from Wuhan testing positive, India has reported 41 positive cases of the viral disease so far. While information about the virus and the disease so far is limited, in India the disease pattern so far suggests mild infection.

The virus and the disease

Official name was announced for the virus and the disease it causes by the World Health Organisation (WHO). The disease is called coronavirus disease (Covid-19). The virus has been named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).

The disease pattern

The global data suggests, in about 80% of the cases the disease is mild, and 15% are severe infection, requiring oxygen, and 5% are critical infections, requiring ventilation. While the true mortality of Covid-19 will take some time to fully understand, the data so far indicate that the crude mortality ratio (the number of reported deaths divided by the reported cases) is between 3-4%. For seasonal influenza, mortality is usually well below 0.1%.

Not influenza

While both viruses cause respiratory illnesses, the speed of transmission is an important point of difference between the two viruses. Influenza has a shorter median incubation period (the time from infection to appearance of symptoms) and a shorter serial interval (the time between successive cases) than Covid-19 virus. The serial interval for Covid-19 virus is estimated to be 5-6 days, while for influenza virus, the serial interval is 3 days, meaning influenza can spread faster.

Children less affected

For Covid-19 virus, initial data indicates that children are less affected than adults and that clinical attack rates in the 0-19 age group are low. Further preliminary data from household transmission studies in China suggest that children are infected from adults, rather than vice versa.

Who are at high-risk

Those most at risk for severe influenza infection are children, pregnant women, elderly, those with underlying chronic medical conditions and those who are immunosuppressed. For Covid-19, our current understanding is that older age and underlying conditions increase the risk for severe infection.

Cure and prevention

No licensed medicine is available for Covid-19 currently; anti-HIV/AIDS medicine (Lopinavir and Ritonavir) are being given to severely ill patients under restricted use. Several clinical trials are on for drugs, and about 20 vaccines are under development.

What we still don't know about Covid-19

Origin of the virus: There is still no definitive animal source identified but preliminary research suspects the virus jumping into humans from snakes, rats or bats

Incubation period: How long does it actually take for the virus to show symptoms

Mutability: Whether or not it's prone to mutations; how fast will it mutate.

Population based behaviour: How will it behave among people of a particular race or region

Cure: There's no cure for the disease; clinical trials for many possible drugs are on and 20 vaccines are in development

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 19 -- The suicide of a young man, who was admitted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital after flying in from Sydney, even as test results to ascertain whether he had the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) were awaited, is a wake-up call. There has been commentary on safety measures required to deal with the outbreak and the individual, social and institutional actions required. But not enough attention has been paid to the toll the disease - and the messaging around it - is taking on mental health.

Covid-19 is new. Rarely, if ever, in recent history have human beings across the world - be in Boston or Bengaluru, Wuhan or Doha, Rome or Seoul - experienced a common set of concerns, driven by a single factor. From its roots to its symptoms, from its treatment protocol to a possible cure, uncertainty is rife. This uncertainty is causing fear, anxiety, panic among people - about themselves, about their loved ones, about their future. This is coupled with a sense of shame among those who are either suspected or have the infection, because of the stigmatisation of Covid-19 patients. Yes, there are people who could have been more careful; yes, there has been a streak of irresponsibility in those should have followed treatment protocols. But it must be emphasised that a patient who gets infected is not guilty, but is actually a victim. Targeting individuals or families with traces of the case is wrong. Unacceptable racial attacks - be it against Chinese-origin Americans in the United States or against people from the Northeast in India - is only adding to this sense of vulnerability. Misinformation is not helping.

The government must weave in the mental health dimension in the way it approaches Covid-19. There has to be sustained counselling and therapy for patients and suspected cases. There has to be better messaging, which battles the sense of shame associated with Covid-19 and emphasises that social distancing is a temporary measure and patients are not criminals. There has to be kindness and empathy in the way families, neighbours, and communities engage with each other. Only a humane response can help deal with the deeply vulnerable human condition of these times.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, March 26 -- The G20 states on Thursday said they would inject more than $5 trillion into the global economy to counter the social and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and to safeguard jobs and revive growth.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who joined an extraordinary virtual G20 leaders' summit, said the pandemic offered an opportunity to forge a new concept of globalisation that wasn't focused solely on an economic agenda. He also called for the reform of the WHO, which was based on "last century's models", according to people familiar with developments.

The summit, convened by G20 president Saudi Arabia following a suggestion from Modi, marked the first time the grouping's leaders met via video conference and discussed issues that were not focussed on economy and finance.

A communique issued after the meeting said the G20 will work with the World Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank and the United Nations to protect lives, safeguard jobs, preserve financial stability and revive growth, minimise disruptions to trade and global supply chains and provide aid to all countries.

"We are injecting over $5 trillion into the global economy, as part of targeted fiscal policy, economic measures, and guarantee schemes to counteract the social, economic and financial impacts of the pandemic," the G20 said.

The grouping comprising 19 of the world's largest economies and the European Union will also undertake "immediate and vigorous measures to support our economies; protect workers, businesses - especially micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises - and the sectors most affected".

The people cited above, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Modi, during his statement and interventions at the summit, said the G20 had focused on a purely economic agenda to define globalisation after mitigating the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

However, this form of globalisation had failed the world order as multilateral forums became platforms to balance competing interests instead of taking up collective interests in areas such as terrorism and climate change, Modi said, according to the people.

The Covid-19 pandemic offers an opportunity for G20 and the international community to look at a new concept of globalisation that focuses on the collective well-being of mankind and collective interests in spheres such as counter-terror or climate change and future pandemics, Modi told the summit.

Modi called for strengthening and reforming inter-governmental organisations such as WHO, which continue to be based on the last century's model and haven't adapted to deal with new challenges, the people said.

He also called for new crisis management protocols and procedures for an inter-connected global village and joint efforts to reduce the economic hardships caused by the pandemic, especially for the economically vulnerable, the people said. There should also be open sharing of the benefits of medical research and development of adaptive, responsive and affordable healthcare systems and resources that can be deployed worldwide.

"In a sense, the prime minister spoke for the small, emerging and developing nations that were without a voice at this forum and this approach represented a continuity of our domestic policy," said a person who declined to be named.

Modi pointed out that 90% of the Covid-19 infections and 88% of deaths were in G20 countries, which account for 80% of the world's GDP and 60% of the global population. He called on the G20 to frame a concrete action plan to fight the pandemic.

It was noted that the world community was still trying to forge a coordinated response three months after the crisis began, though the virtual summit had shown that the world community could come together, the people said.

The G20 summit was held against the backdrop of the failure of the UN Security Council, currently led by China, to call a single meeting focused on the pandemic. The WHO too has faced some criticism for not acting more decisively on the crisis.

The G20 communique said the unprecedented pandemic was a "powerful reminder of our interconnectedness and vulnerabilities" and combating the virus would require a "transparent, robust, coordinated, large-scale and science-based global response".

"We will share timely and transparent information; exchange epidemiological and clinical data; share materials necessary for research and development; and strengthen health systems globally, including through supporting the full implementation of the WHO International Health Regulations (IHR 2005)," it said.

The people cited above said the discussions were held in a cooperative spirit and there was no reference to the origin of the virus - a reference to efforts by countries such as the US to label Covid-19 as the "Wuhan virus".

"The WHO's mandate is fairly limited to handle issues that would let it be at the forefront of dealing with such pandemics. There is a need to empower it so that it can take the lead, and to boost its capacity to provide early warnings, help states develop protocols and to forge common solutions to future crises," said a person.

The people said further discussions of the G20 members were underway to frame an "action paper" with specific steps to be taken to counter the pandemic and its fallout.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 18 -- China on Monday it was premature to launch an investigation into the origin of the Covid-19 pandemic, hours after more than 100 countries including India and ally Russia backed an international probe into the outbreak which emerged from the central Chinese city of Wuhan late last year.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said at the regular ministry briefing on Monday that the vast majority of countries in the world believe the pandemic is not yet over.

China has been pushing back international demand for a probe, saying that the US and Australia, which has been in the forefront in demanding a probe, were politicising the issue and could hamper the fight against the pandemic.

The resolution, drafted by the European Union, has been put up to the World Health Assembly (WHA), the annual meeting of the WHO. The foreign ministry statement came hours before the UN's global health agency's two-day virtual meet begins on Monday.

The resolution does not single out China or any other country but calls for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of "the (WHO)-coordinated international health response to Covid-19."

"Initiate, at the earliest appropriate moment, and in consultation with Member States, 1 a stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, 2 as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19," the draft resolution said.

Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne said on Monday Australia wants the resolution to stipulate that the inquiry be "impartial, independent and comprehensive."

In a separate statement, the Chinese foreign ministry announced that President Xi Jinping will address the World Health Assembly's opening ceremony via videolink later on Monday. President Xi had not been listed as a speaker in the schedule circulated by the WHO earlier. The foreign ministry said President Xi had been invited to speak by WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

After emerging in China, the virus had rapidly spread around world, killing more than 315,000 people and infecting at least 4.7 million.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 2 -- As the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) spread across the world, India decided to opt for a complete nationwide lockdown. It indeed helped control the infection, but has, predictably, invited great economic cost too. The crisis in China was equally monumental. Can it teach us how to tackle the crisis?

China opted for a collaborative, data-based approach, with tech companies such as Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu, Huawei, and Meituan helping the government take timely action to prevent the spread of the virus and, at the same time, keep the economy running.

But the equally important fact is that China didn't opt for a nationwide lockdown as stringent as India did. China did completely lock Wuhan, the worst-affected city in China, but it let the less-affected regions partially open. It allowed the availability of e-commerce for all items throughout. Ride-hailing services continued to operate. Grocery stores and restaurants, too, remained open throughout the lockdown, even though transactions mostly took place online.

Tencent and Alibaba launched an app that alerted users if they were in the vicinity of an infected person. Alibaba Health launched a health care service with Tmall that delivered medicines to chronic patients within 30 minutes in 10 cities. Alibaba Health also collaborated with more than 50 top domestic and overseas pharmaceutical companies for the purpose. In merely a day, the number of chronic patients looking for medicines went up by 200%.

Big brands could survive, but the long period of lockdown threatened the existence of small businesses. Hyper-local delivery services such as Meituan, Koubei and Ele.me (similar to Dunzo and Swiggy Go) leveraged their online platforms to link consumers with offline services and on-demand delivery. By the end of February, 50,000 offline shops had migrated online, partly because the platforms reduced or waived-off fees. By mid-March, between 500,000 and one million merchants benefited from the commission reduction/waiver scheme from Meituan, Koubei, and Ele.me.

The Chinese government-endorsed digital migration and digital sales channels, which gave confidence to consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises to move online. As a result, categories such as health and wellness and digital accessories saw an upswing in sales during the lockdown. Home appliances such as rice cookers, sandwich makers, and juice makers saw a spike as more people cooked at home. Compared to their 2019 sales, Nike's and Uniqlo's sales went up by more than 25% between February 12 and March 12.

The surge in online sales allowed many companies to create temporary employment schemes, absorbing self-employed daily wage earners affected due to the lockdown.

But as new cases plateaued, companies resumed offline work gradually. Corporates, educational institutions, and other organisations were given customised mandates and processes on ways to minimise the risk as they opened up. Temperature checks and disinfectant stations were installed at all main entry-exit points in public places, offices, and mall entrances.

Workplaces instituted daily online health check-ups for their employees even on weekends. People using public transportation for intercity travel were expected to quarantine for seven-14 days, depending on the severity of the infection in their city of origin. Employees commuting between cities for work were mandated to use private transportations only.

Local services provided contactless meal delivery to employees and health care workers. Best practices around the resumption of work were communicated via live streaming, also leveraged by small offline stores to offset losses due to the shutdown. Flexible job openings helped small businesses resume work.

By now, China may have seen its worst off. But India is yet to touch its peak. To minimise the economic disruption, it must find ways to strategically open up the economy in a way that doesn't add up to infections. E-commerce, which the safest way to keep the economy running while ensuring social distancing, must be opened fully, in red, orange, and green zones. As of now, India allows only essential items over e-commerce platforms. But defining the essentiality of a commodity is a difficult exercise. Are online classes essential? Are the computers used to do so essentials? Is a malfunctioning phone charger essential, or are the prescription eyeglasses? The interconnectedness of the economy allows the sale of non-essential items produced by an economically weak person, with the profit nudging him to buy essentials, and thus, helping him contribute taxes.

Like China, can the Indian government work with tech-based retail firms such as Flipkart, Amazon, Swiggy, Dunzo, PayTM to keep the economy running? Opening up the economy is a slow process - and, if not planned well, involves risks. Keeping the economic activities suppressed for long, however, can have far greater consequences.

Divya Joseph is an MBA graduate of the China Europe International Business School (CEIBS) and works for Alibaba's Tmall Global Operations Team in Hangzhou, China. S Ramakrishna Velamuri is the Chengwei Ventures Professor of Entrepreneurship at CEIBS

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 22 -- The death toll from the coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak continued to rise in China as it reached 2345 by the end of February 21.

The total number of cases was 76288, the national health commission (NHC) officials said on Saturday, adding that the spread of novel coronavirus in Chinese mainland was showing signs of slowing down as 18 provincial-level regions reported zero new infections.

"As of 24:00 on Friday, the daily new infections in regions outside of Hubei dropped to 31, the lowest in a month," according he NHC said.

Many other regions, such as Tianjin, Chongqing, Beijing and Guangdong, reported single digit new infections, the NHC added.

The signs of the outbreak slowing down come in amid the new worry of cluster cases breaking out across the country: New infections were reported on Friday at congregated facilities, including prisons, hospitals and senior care homes.

On Friday, a prison in Rencheng, in each China's Shandong province, reported 200 new cases of novel coronavirus infection.

Another 27 were reported in Shilifeng prison in Zhejiang province, also in eastern China.

The worst-hit central Chinese province of Hubei also reported that two prisons in the province saw 230 cases and 41 cases respectively.

:Shandong, Zhejiang and Hubei have punished those accountable. It is hoped that the punishments will strengthen the alarm bell these incidents have rung. Everyone must be clear that the virus is far from being defeated. It can break our line of defense at any time," the tabloid, Global Times said.

"These transmission accidents in prisons serve as a stark reminder that institutions and venues where people gather must step up their vigilance. We must prevent any kind of formalism and make every preventive and control measure a real safety valve," it added.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has said that the WHO-led team of international experts currently in China to investigate the novel coronavirus outbreak will travel to China's central city of Wuhan, the epicenter of the epidemic, on Saturday.

At a daily briefing, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the WHO-led joint mission in China has been working in Beijing, Sichuan and Guangdong, and will travel to Wuhan on Saturday to continue its work at the epicenter of the outbreak.

He added that WHO is also working with partners to safeguard the health of the members of the team, and to take appropriate measures when they return to their countries of origin.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
Washington, May 20 -- US President Donald Trump on Wednesday ratcheted up his attacks on China, claiming that its "incompetence" caused the Covid-19 pandemic, describing the episode as a "mass worldwide killing".

The US president has increasingly targeted China in an apparent bid to shift the blame for the high number of infections and fatalities in America, and the economic downturn triggered by coronavirus-related curbs.

Referring to a statement issued by what he called "some wacko in China", Trump tweeted, "It was the 'incompetence of China', and nothing else, that did this mass worldwide killing!"

The US president has called for an independent investigation into the origin of the outbreak in Wuhan in China last December and Beijing's attempts to downplay the exact extent of the crisis with the alleged complicity of the World Health Organization.

Increased testing is a 'badge of honour'

With all 50 states of the country set to reopen partially, Trump on Tuesday said that he considered it a "badge of honour" that the US has the highest number of Covid-19 cases in the world - at about 1.5 million - arguing that it was a testimony to increased testing.

Critics, however, pounced on the remark, interpreting that Trump was taking credit for the country recording the highest number of infections.

"So when we have a lot of cases, I don't look at that as a bad thing; I look at that, in a certain respect, as being a good thing because it means our testing is much better," Trump said. "I view it as a badge of honour. Really, it's a badge of honour." The US, which recorded 1,574 deaths in the last 24 hours, has so far tested 12.6 million people.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, Feb. 14 -- Another Indian aboard a cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Japan has been infected by the coronavirus, the embassy in Tokyo said on Friday.

This takes the number of Indians infected by the highly contagious disease on board the Diamond Princess to three.

A viral outbreak that began in China has killed 1381 people and infected nearly 64,000 on Friday since it began spreading in central Wuhan city in late December. The World Health Organization (WHO) has named the illness COVID-19, referring to its origin late last year and the coronavirus that causes it.

With the latest infection, 219 people have the virus on the cruise ship isolated at a port in Japan's Yokohama. There were 3711 people on the vessel, including 138 Indian crew and passengers.

"The Embassy of India in Tokyo has contacted all three Indians nationals who had tested positive or COVID-19 and are currently receiving treatment at medical facilities. Their health conditions have been confirmed to be stable and improving," a statement said.

"Embassy is also in constant contact with relevant Japanese authorities to ensure the well being of all Indians nationals on board the ship. Japanese authorities have confirmed they are following the designated health protocols," it added.

The Japanese government on Friday began allowing elderly passengers who test negative for the new coronavirus to leave the quarantined cruise ship and finish their isolation in government-designated lodging.

It has allowed passengers aged 80 or older in poor health or confined to windowless inner cabins on the Diamond Princess to move from the ship to accommodation on land.

But only those who test negative for the virus that has so far infected more than 200 people on board the ship have the option to move.

The Diamond Princess was placed in quarantine on February 3 after a man who disembarked in Hong Kong was diagnosed with the virus. The ship has been quarantined by the Japanese authorities till February 19, 2020.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, March 21 -- India's battle to effectively contain the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) continued on Friday as the number of infections doubled in just four days to 236, even as experts reiterated that not enough people were being tested and that an undetected spread could overwhelm the country's health care infrastructure.

On Friday, India reported 63 fresh cases, taking the tally up from 173 a day earlier. Several states across the country have announced large-scale shutdowns to stop the outbreak from entering the stage of community transmission, a point when a person's infection can't be traced to its origin.

Experts said that a sudden and sharp spike in cases could hinder efforts to prevent the outbreak from taking hold if more aggressive and random testing is not carried out across India. Some even believe that community transmission has already begun silently and that it can be tackled only if many more people are tested at random.

As of Friday morning, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) had conducted 14,376 tests - one of the lowest diagnostic rates in the world. India currently has the capacity to test 10,000 samples per day.

South Korea, which has been able to slow the advance of the disease despite reporting about 8,500 cases, has tested about 274,000 people since February. Though the US has tested 82,000 people, Covid-19 cases have raced to alarming levels in the country, leading to widespread criticism of its authorities for intractable delays in making tests available.

On Friday, Delhi reported five fresh cases of the disease, which originated in China's Wuhan last December and has killed at least 10,000 people. The national capital has so far reported 17 confirmed cases, which include one foreigner. With 52 cases, Maharashtra remains the worst affected state, triggering calls for a complete lockdown to halt the advance of the disease.

While Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal ordered that all malls, except grocery stores and pharmacies, be shut down immediately, Maharashtra put in place similar measures by announcing that all non-essential businesses in Mumbai and across the state were shutting down from midnight through the end of March.

Public health experts warned that despite the intensifying efforts across states, the disease could spiral out of control if Indians showed callous disregard to guidelines and precautions in the fight against Covid-19.

Among the fresh cases reported on Friday was singer Kanika Kapoor, whose announcement of having contracted the disease sent alarm bells ringing in several quarters -- from Parliament house to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje, her MP son Dushyant Singh, and parliamentarians Derek O'Brien and Anupriya Patel began self-quarantines after coming into direct or indirect contact with Kapoor.

Uttar Pradesh health minister Jai Pratap Singh underwent a test for Covid-19 as it emerged that he was at a party thrown by the celebrity singer after her return from London recently. Three BJP MLAs who met him on Thursday also went into self-isolation.

Reacting to a question on Kapoor's movements across Lucknow and Kanpur, health ministry joint secretary Lav Aggarwal said contact tracing was the immediate protocol that was initiated and all action for containment of the disease began at the same time.

He urged people to follow Prime Minister Narendra Modi's call to observe the "Janta Curfew" and stay at home on March 22 from 7am to 9pm, while emphasising that social distancing was primary to curb the spread of COVID-19 infection. "One day's cooperation will help break the chain of transmission," he added.

"The Centre has asked the states to take strict action as per the appropriate law against people who are not following the social distancing directive. The state governments have the inherent power under the Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act to take action against anyone who does not follow the government directive and risks lives of people," he added.

In his first address to the nation on the crisis, the Prime Minister on Thursday appealed to citizens to display commitment and called for a "people's curfew" on Sunday, March 22, where citizens would stay home as both a symbolic message of India's determination and a test-case to prepare for future challenges.

In line with the announcement, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said on its Twitter handle: "DMRC has decided to keep its services closed (on Sunday). The move is aimed at encouraging the public to stay indoors and maintain social distancing, which is essential in the fight against COVID-19."

No passenger train, mail express train or intercity train will operate till 10pm on Sunday following the PM's call. Operations of suburban rail services in all cities will also reduce to a "bare minimum".

India also expanded universal screening at airports for all passengers coming from Australia, the US and UK. "In view of local transmission of the disease, and increase in number of cases and deaths being reported in Australia, UK and USA, it has now been decided to expand the universal screening for all passengers coming from these places, and risk profiling them for either quarantine or isolation based on risk assessment," a document prepared by the health ministry said.

The Covid-19 pandemic has killed more than 10,000 people, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, and the World Health Organization said the disease is now infecting people at a faster pace. It took three months for the first 100,000 cases, but only 12 days for the next 100,000.

Italy is set to reinforce and extend the near-total lockdown after fatalities surpassed those in China, which again reported no new cases in the outbreak's initial hub. Britain will set out a package to help save millions of jobs and Germany is considering emergency spending measures.

California announced a statewide stay-in-place order, the most stringent US effort yet to curb the spread of the virus.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, June 9 -- A group of experts at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have found that Covid-19 virus found its way to India via frequently visited countries in Europe, South Asia, Middle East and Oceania.

"There is a close connection between the source of the virus and the countries that are most travelled by Indians," the study stated.

The study, with lead authors Mainak Mondal, Ankita Lawarde and Kumaravel Somasundaram from the Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, was published in the scientific journal Current Science.

Also read: Delhi expected to have 5.5 lakh Covid-19 cases by July 31 - Manish Sisodia

The research noted the potential origin of Covid-19 virus in Indians to be in countries "mainly from Europe, Middle East Oceania and South Asia regions, which strongly imply the spread of the virus through most travelled countries".

The analysis revealed that most Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses (129 out of 137) show more similarity to that of specific countries.

"In cluster A, Indian samples show more similarity to the viruses found in Oceania, Kuwait and South Asian samples, while in the cluster B, Indian samples show more similarity to mainly European and few numbers of Middle East/South Asian samples," the study read.

Also read: No community transmission of Covid-19, say Centre's officials - Delhi govt

The findings indicated that majority of Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses have originated from Europe, Middle East, South Asia and Oceania regions. "A large majority of Indian viral isolates (n = 129), which were collected during March/April 2020, show more similarity with samples from Europe, Middle East, South Asia and Oceania regions," the experts noted. The remaining Indian isolates (n = 8) have grouped with other clusters which contained most samples from China and East Asia.

Thus, the study concluded the probable source of origin of Indian SARS-CoV-2 viruses to be in countries from Europe and Oceania regions besides the Middle East and South Asian regions.

In another study, experts at the Harvard Medical School believe that coronavirus might have been spreading in China as early as August 2019.

The research used satellite imagery of hospital parking lots in Wuhan - where the disease was first identified in late 2019 - and data for symptom-related queries around "cough" and "diarrhoea" on various search engines.

"In August, we identify a unique increase in searches for diarrhoea which was neither seen in previous flu seasons or mirrored in the cough search data," the research stated.

Worldwide, the number of coronavirus cases have crossed the 7 million-mark with over 4 lakh people killed by the deadly contagion. In India, the Covid-19 tally has jumped to 266,598 - fifth highest in the world after the US, Brazil, Russia and the UK.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 11 -- The government announced on Sunday the gradual resumption of passenger train services from this week even as authorities laid down guidelines for factories that are reopening with the easing of lockdown norms in certain areas. Meanwhile, a new study suggested that the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19, might have originated from a recombination of coronaviruses in bats and pangolins.

Trains to restart tomorrow, bookings open online today

The Indian Railways will resume passenger services gradually with trains to 15 destinations from May 12, the government announced on Sunday, green-lighting the operations close to two months after it stopped them as part of a strategy to slow the spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Read more

India sees biggest jump in new coronavirus cases but recoveries hit 20,000

The number of people who have so far recovered after contracting the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in the country crossed 20,000 on Sunday, with a recuperating rate of 31.2%, or about one in every three patients, even as the number of infections of Sars-CoV-2 crossed 67,000. Read more

Covid-19: What you need to know today

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is meeting chief ministers of states for the fifth time in 51 days on Monday. There's exactly a week to May 17, a date that can be called either the end of the first phase of India's graded exit from the lockdown, or the extension of the second phase of the lockdown but with the easing of some restrictions. Read more

Guidelines for factories to resume operations safely

The first week in which factories reopen after the national lockdown must be used as a trial period in which safety protocols are ensured and high production targets are not set, the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) said in detailed guidelines issued on Sunday. Read more

Ensure adherence to guidelines: Govt to states ahead of PM meet

The Centre told states on Sunday to ensure strict adherence of containment zone guidelines and clear demarcation of the areas with coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases, adding that they should not let any relaxation of the national lockdown lead to chaos, a development that came a day ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's meet with chief ministers. Read more

CBSE charts plan to hold remaining exams

The logistics seem daunting. Hundreds of thousands of students appearing for a test, the need to make sure social distancing norms are observed in these days of the coronavirus disease and students and invigilators get safely to the examination centres. Read more

Central teams chart Covid plan with states, flag gaps

The Centre has sent at least 50 health and disaster response teams to various states since March when cases of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) started rising to assist state governments in managing cases and containing the spread of infection. Read more

Migrant workers battle stigma, bias back home

Migrant workers returning from India's industrial states are battling stigma and bias in their home villages in some parts of Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha because local residents suspect that the labourers are potential carriers of the coronavirus disease, or Covid-19 . Read more

Govt sends aid to Indian Ocean states

India has despatched a warship with two medical teams and medical supplies to help authorities in the Maldives, Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros and Seychelles combat Covid-19, symbolising the importance attached by New Delhi to its maritime neighbourhood. Read more

25 Chinese items may face extension of dumping duty

India may extend anti-dumping duties and safeguards on more than two dozen Chinese goods ranging from calculators and USB drives to steel, solar cells and Vitamin E amid concern that a flood of imports would kill domestic manufacturers who will lose duty protection soon against such products , two officials aware of the development said. Read more

One man, 8 profiles and an elaborate hoax

Sameer Chaturvedi woke up on April 1 to a raft of WhatsApp messages. His college friends were discussing the paucity of ventilators to treat Covid-19. On his extended family group, relatives were blaming people who attended a religious congregation in New Delhi for the outbreak. Read more

Regulator approves first trial of lab-grown antibody drug

The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) on Sunday approved the first multi-centric trial of Tocilizumab in India after the second-line drug to treat rheumatoid arthritis emerged as a treatment option for the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Read more

ICMR develops test kit to detect Covid antibodies

The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has developed 'Covid Kavach ELISA', a test kit for detection of coronavirus disease (Covid-19) antibodies, Union health minister Harsh Vardhan announced on Sunday. Read more

Covid may have originated from recombined bat, pangolin coronaviruses

A new study has suggested that the Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, might have originated from a recombination of coronaviruses in a bat and pangolin. The findings strengthen the theory that pangolins could be the intermediate host for transmission of Sars-CoV-2 to humans. Read more

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
New Delhi, May 27 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of ~75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, ~19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of ~6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving ~1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over ~1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around ~12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate ~1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over ~400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Ram Madhav is national general secretary, Bharatiya Janata Party, and director, India Foundation

With additional data inputs from Rajat Sethi

The views expressed are personal

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of Rs 75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, Rs 19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of Rs 6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving Rs 1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over Rs 1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around Rs 12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate Rs 1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over Rs 400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
---
India, May 26 -- Eight decades after he formulated his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes remains a demigod to many liberal economists. Keynes' "trickle-up" theory is seen by them as a panacea for the migrant working class affected by the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Keynes suggested that to kickstart a stagnant economy, the government must boost demand by cutting taxes, increasing government spending and putting money in the pockets of the middle-class.

Keynes' disciples in the Opposition are criticising the finance minister (FM)'s package for not making direct money transfers into the accounts of the poor. The government has already extended substantial support to the rural poor, including migrant workers. The rabi crop has been purchased by the government at the cost of Rs 75,000 crore which has benefitted over 90 million farmers. Additionally, Rs 19,000 crore has been deposited into the bank accounts of eligible farmers under PM Kisan. A crop insurance bill of Rs 6,000 crore has been paid. Women from over 300 million poor families have been receiving Rs 1,500 over three months in their Jan Dhan accounts.

To top this, the FM announced the allocation of a little over Rs 1,00,000 crore for the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) taking the total man-days available for the rural poor to 300 crore. Estimates by economists suggest that around Rs 12,000 have gone directly into the accounts of every single poor family through these measures. All this came from the Centre, with the states doing their bit.

Yet, there is distress manifested in the large-scale flight of migrant workers from destination states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Telangana to the home states of Uttar Pradesh (UP), Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and the Northeast. There has been a lot of politics over this.

The migrant issue in such circumstances is complicated. And it isn't unique to India. Many countries in Europe such as Spain, Germany, Italy and France are struggling with issues of farm workers who migrate in the harvest season from Eastern European countries. "Host countries are torn between fear of losing harvests, fear of importing infection and a fear that predates the pandemic - that of foreigners taking jobs. Populists sense opportunity as the economic fallout solidifies political battle lines", according to a piece in The Guardian.

India's migrant population is over 130 million. Their movement en masse back to their home-states would have been an unmitigated disaster. To prevent this, the Centre turned its attention to agriculture and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Over 44% of India's workforce is dependent on agriculture. The government's decision to allocate Rs 1 lakh crore for farm-gate infrastructure development is to ensure that the workforce is engaged in productive agricultural activity. Of the rest, 70% of jobs are provided by the MSME sector. The government gave the sector high priority by arranging additional easy lending options to the tune of over Rs 400,000 crore.

Compared to the fiscal measures taken by other G20 countries, India has done better than most. According to an International Monetary Fund report, the aggregate fiscal measures as a percent of GDP are in two dimensions - spending and revenue measures; and loan, equity and guarantee measures. Germany, which topped the fiscal relief chart had announced 1% of GDP in additional spending and 6% in loan guarantees. India, with a stimulus package of 10% of GDP, is well ahead of its G20 peers.

It must be remembered that while a section of the migrants undertook their homebound journey, a large number stayed back. There are two important reasons for it. One, the appeal to employers by Prime Minister (PM) Narendra Modi to continue paying wages; and two, the government's stimulus to MSMEs and agriculture.

Migrants have been supported by states and non-governmental organisations during the lockdown. Yet, their anxiety to get back to their families and villages has pushed many to defy the lockdown and set off home. To manage this migration, a coordinated approach was needed between the Centre and the states, and between destination and origin states. Uttar Pradesh has set an example by arranging to ferry not only its own migrants, but also those bound for neighbouring Bihar, in over 1,200 buses. It alone received and transported over two million workers to their destinations.

Gujarat has quickly arranged trains for these migrants while Maharashtra has been found wanting. The role played by the Indian Railways is exemplary. It has so far transported over two million migrants to their home states. Bihar and West Bengal are two states that did not show enough interest in receiving its own migrants, leading to huge numbers being stranded in Mumbai and Delhi. Madhya Pradesh, though neither a destination nor a home, has come forward with 1,000 buses to help the migrants reach their destinations.

Leo Varadkar, former PM of Ireland, joined European Union leaders a few weeks ago supporting the movement of cross-border agriculture workers. Back home, he was critical of a Dublin fruit company for bringing in Bulgarian workers to pick strawberries. Similarly, the Opposition criticises the Centre for the migrant crisis, while the origin or destination of the migrants is in the states under its control. What we need today is collective federal action to address the migrant issue, not the political blame game we are witnessing.

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Hindustan Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com